THREE SERMONS PREACHED In LENT and SUMMER ASSIZES last, at Lancaster; and on
one of the Lords Days, In the late GUILD of PRESTON. WHEREIN The Nature of
Subjection to the Civil Magistrate is Explained, the Duty Proved, and the
Clergy Justified in pressing the same upon their Fellow Subjects.

By Thomas Gipps, Rector of Bury in Lancashire, Chaplain to the Right
Honorable the Earl of Darby, and sometimes Fellow of Trinity College in
Cambridge.

Principibus igitur nec est turpiter adulandum, nec Seditiose repugnandum.

Erasmi Paraph. in 1 Timothy 2. c. Regum timendorum in proprios greges,
Reges in ipsos Imperium est Jovis.
LONDON, Printed by H. H. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1683.

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
IT may, perhaps seem strange and presumptuous that such an obscure and
inconsiderable Man as I should obtrude at once so many Sermons upon the World,
and that too without sheltering them under the Name and Protection of some
Person of Quality and Condition, since most Authors in all Ages have thought
fit to do so, and many of the best in this Age, upon their Publication even of
one single Discourse. The truth is, though I am not so vain as to think my self
or these Papers above the reach of the Captious and Censorious, or that I stand
in less need of the Countenance of some Eminent Person to recommend me, though
I affect not to be singular, and to depart from any Laudable Custom: Yet there
being some special Reasons moving me to Write, but withal forbidding me to
prefix any Persons Name whatever, (which Reasons are not to be made Public,
but will possibly be guest at by such as know me and my present Circumstances)
I am therefore forced to expose these Discourses, sine Titulo, fine Comite,
without engaging any Man that Glories in Titles, or any Familiar Friend to be
their Godfather. It Is confessed, that as the Ear is not in these our days
satisfied with Hearing, so neither is the Eye with Reading. The Pen and the
Press has no more rest than the Tongue and the Pulpit: But if it be judged
convenient to seratch the ore, it is surely excusable to rub the other when it
itches.

The Argument I treat of has born a considerable part on the Stage of our late
Disorders, wherein many have already admirably acquitted themselves in the
Defense of the Doctrine h^rei^ treated of and upon that sc^re these Ende^vours
of mine may possi^ly be looked upon as less useful. I must therefore (...)
besides what is al^eady hinted) by way of Apology, say thus much for my self;
That I am not led unto this Undertaking, as if I conceited my self to have hit
upon any new thing, not yet taken Notice of in this inquisitive Age, or
expressed it better, and to more Advantage than others before me have done. But
besides the Honesty of my intentions in bearing Witness unto a Truth so
important in these days, there seems to be some very good Reasons justifying
this Attempt. I cannot learn that any in these Northern Parts, have of late
Years appeared in the Defense of the Government, and confirming the Doctrine of
Subjection to the Civil Magistrate: And I Observe that the People hereabouts
are not so diligent to enquire out, and furnish themselves with such Learned
Treatises, as would truly inform them of their Duty. But when one of the
Neighborhood known to them is in Print, then the Maggot bites, then Curiosity,
or Friendship, or Spite raises the whole Country, who make Hue and Cry after
the Book, and will never be quiet till they have read it. By which means many
may be brought to consider those Truths, which hitherto they have not known, or
not duly weighed, or would not otherwise have re-collected. This I take to be a
very Reasonable Vindication of my self and many others in setting forth our
Discourses, which however needless they may be accounted to those who know Men
and Books, and where to find the same Argument more fully and accurately
handled; yet those Excellent Authors Works signify as little to the generality
here, as the Learned Sermons Preached in the City do to the Edification of the
remote Country Congregations. But besides this, since things are now brought
to such a pass, that the Factious Party boast of their Numbers, and call the
Loyal to a Poll; what they want in just weight and measure, is endeavored to
be made up by telling Noses: It must be acknowledged not only Excusable, but in
some measure the Duty of every good Subject, especially of a Clergyman, upon
all Occasions to declare in behalf of the Prince, and of the Government, not
concerning himself, whether he does it in that Excellency of Wisdom as others
have. His Suffrage is nevertheless as considerable in its self, as the best. So
that though I should fail of my Principal Design (which is to bring over the
Adversaries of our present Peace and Establishment unto the Obedience of Faith
(so I may very well call Honoring and Obeying the Magistrates) which is a
Gospel-Duty) yet this Point however I shall certainly gain, that I have assured
the Higher Powers of one Vote, of my own steadiness and fidelity; and shall now
farther assure them of many more in these Northern Climates: Though I must
acknowledge there are some Ill-contriv'd Politico's among us, who fear not
confidently to affirm, that the People may call the King to Account for his
Mis-government: That is as much as to say, that they may once again Try him
before an High Court of Justice, and then Murder him. This is that Jesuitical,
Pernicious Principle, that awakened me, and pushed me on to undertake this
Enterprise. And I thought my self Obliged unto it, for Reasons (as is said
before) not here to be discovered. Now, though the Clergy have learnt to sit
down patiently under some little wrongs, or rather mistakes, as I would call
them, in Tenderness and Honor to the best of Princes, (ex. gr. What Man of
common sense can give account, why we, contrary to our Privilege in Magna
Charta unrepeal'd (as I am told) being looked in, I know not how, to pay Taxes
without the consent of the Convocation, should yet be excluded from Voting for
Representatives in Parliament? As if we had not as much Wisdom and Integrity as
the scum of the People, or the best of the Commonalty have, which I hope will
in due time be taken into Consideration.) These Punctilio's, I say, we easily
and quietly let pass: But to be reviled (as we are) for urging the Doctrine of
Subjection, of fearing the King, and not meddling with those that are given to
Change, is most injurious and insufferable. Surely we may pretend to this, as
of Common Right belonging to us, being equally concerned with the rest of our
Fellow Subjects in the welfare of the Nation. But much more, since it is one
part of our Ministerial Office, to persuade 1 Cor. 7. 20.
Men that they abide in the same Calling wherein they are called. We are indeed
often told, that this is not to Preach Jesus Christ, and him Crucified; whereas
I make no Question, but that he who Teaches any Christian Duty, does the work
of an Evangelist, Preaches Jesus Christ, and him Crucified. Time was, when they
only Exodus 32. 2.
were taken for Soul-saving Preachers, who (as Aaron persuaded the Israelites to
break off the Golden Earrings, which were in the Ears of their Wives, of their
Sons, and of their Daughters) had a dextrous way of wheadling their Disciples
to fling their Silver Thimbles and Bodkins into the Fire of our Civil
Contentions: From whence came out two Molten Calves; Slavery* dressed up in the
Habit of Liberty and Property; and Hypocrisy, lurking under the Disguise of
Conscience and Religion. Unto these two Idols were the People forced to fall
down and Worship. It was the same time, when they only were esteemed
Gospel-Teachers, who went to Market for the Subject of their Sabboth-Sermons
(as the Dissenters most Judaically, but Ignorantly call the Lords Day,) who
took their Texts out of the Diurnals, and by the help of some Passages of Holy
Scripture mis-applyed and Profanely abused, brought forth just such another
Monster, as Mahomet did out of the Law and the Gospel, scil. A Bloody and
Tyrannical Government, and an Ill-favored Religion, which the Church of God
never before saw. In fine, they only were acknowledged the Faithful Dispensers
of the Word, who were Trumpeters of Sedition, and turned this Kingdom into War
and Blood, and Confusion, and Anarchy; a Work as Diametrically Opposite to the
Office of a Minister of Jesus Christ, and to the Nature of the Gospel, as Light
is to Darkness. But we, silly Wretches as we are, who Instruct the People unto
Modesty, and Patient Submission unto the Higher Powers (as our Lord and his
Apostles did) to rest content with that form of Government, under which they
are born and bred, must needs be represented as a sort of Men, that know not,
or will not Preach Christ, and the Faith of Christ, although we speak no other
things, than what the Law, and the Prophets, and the Scriptures of the New
Testament have said before us, and enjoined us to Preach; even such things,
which being indeed to the Dissenters a stumbling block, and to the Factious
Politician Foolishness; but I am fully persuaded, if carefully learnt, and
Conscientiously practiced, will accompany Salvation. For my own part, I desire
no fairer play, as to the Subject, though not as to the Management of these
Sermons, than that what I have here wrote may be Impartially scanned; and as it
shall be found to savor of the Gospel Spirit, let my Character and
Entertainment be accordingly; which is all (Courteous Reader) and what I may
justly expect from thee.

Thomas Gipps.

Sermon I.
Romans 13. Ver. 1. Let every Soul be subject to the Higher Powers, for there is
no Power but of God; the Powers that be are Ordained of God.
THERE is nothing under the Sun, but is liable to Alteration, the best and
purest things ordinarily in the Change degenerating into the filthyest and most
unsavory. This Observation holds good in Morals as well as Naturals; and even
the Revelations of God himself, when abused to loose and ambitious Ends, when
corrupted by the false glosses of deceitful Men, prove most destructive to the
Peace and Welfare of the World. Hence it comes to pass, that W^rs Commenced
upon the Account of Religion, and carried on under pretense of Conscience, have
evermore been the bloodyest, seldom or never ceasing, but in the utter Ruin of
one side.

2. And for the same Reason Disobedience to Authority, and Rebellion against
the Prince, when grounded on the mistaken Doctrines of the Gospel, are usually
found most Obstinate, the Plague of the Commonwealth, and an incurable Disease.

When Conscience, under a mistake, leads the Van, no Projects of Peace will
please, but what she approves of: When the Glory of God is writ upon the
Banners, no Conditions are hearkened to, but what she propounds. When the
Defense of the Gospel is taken up in Opposition to the Civil Magistrate, no
terms of Agreement will be accepted, unless every point be gained exactly
Conform to that Enthusiastical Model, to those conceited Schemes of Divine
Worship, which every Zealous Bigot lays down for the undoubted Law of the
Gospel.

Conscience is the most Formidable Invader of the Rights and Properties of the
Subject, of the Power and Sovereignty of the Supreme Magistrate: And when she
gives the Signal to Battle, the word is -- Spare neither great, nor small:
Neither Prince nor People, neither things Sacred nor Profane escape her Fury;
but all lie prostrate, and truckle to her Arbitrary Commandment. Whilst there
are any left to make Head against her, she will never put up her Sword; her
very Mercies are Cruel: She will never give over the pursuit, till glutted with
the Blood of her Adversaries, her self bursts asunder into Faction, Heresy,
and the most Irreligious Separations. When the Number of such as have been
Slaughtered in an Holy War shall be reckoned up, it will possibly be found,
that Interest, and Passion, and Revenge, and Civil Faction have slain their
Thousands, but Conscience her Ten Thousands.

How this comes to pass, is not difficult to discern. An Opinion of our own
Holiness begets in us Spiritual Pride, or rather Fleshly Wisdom and Confidence.
Obedience to God is a most Powerful Motive pushing us on unto the most
dangerous and desperate Enterprises. The Propagation of the Kingdom of Christ
oft-times makes us forget our selves, to overlook the means, and to think that
the Goodness, or Innocence of our Design is sufficient to Sanctify the
Villainy, and to Justify the undertakers. To Defend the Purity of the Gospel is
thought (as indeed it is if rightly managed) a Glorious work, it appearing to
most of us the greatest instance of gratitude we can return to God, namely, to
advance the Excellent Glory of the Divine Nature. Besides the Conversion of
Men, yea, even the compelling them by force to renounce their Errors, and to
embrace the Truths of the Gospel, seems at first blush, a Noble and Heroic
piece of Christian Charity, worthy the Zeal and Pains of every one to effect as
well in his Enemy as Friend.

Upon these general, but for the most part misapplied Principles, many Ignorant
Consciences full of Zeal and sudden flashes of Spiritual Light, like Paul in
his Journey to Damascus, are indeed struck blind with the abundance of
Revelation and Knowledge (falsely so called:) And from thence forward know not,
neither care, nor will give themselves leave to consider what course they are
taking for the compassing these great Ends; neither will suffer others to take
them by the Hand, and Conduct them to the Infallible Oracles of God, where they
may understand what it is which God would have them do, satisfying themselves
with the uprightness of their remote intentions, but winking at the Iniquity of
the means pursuant thereto: Although it is an Eternal Rule of right Reason, and
an unquestionable Maxim of our Holy Religion, That we must not do evil that
good may come.

4. Conscience in this case (which is but an irregular Passion, and may rather
be called Self-conceit, or sullen Persuasion) becomes a most daring Champion,
and that Cause is most likely to succeed wherein she is sworn of the Counsel,
or made use of in the Execution. Hence both Ambitious Princes, and Rebellious
Subjects in their Foreign Invasions, or Civil Wars still either in pretense or
Truth, have Painted Conscience and the Glory of God on their Ensigns; thinking
it sufficient to Excuse their outrages with the pretext of Godliness. Some of
you I know have read of the Holy War, carried on by the blind Zeal of
Christendom against the Saracens; some have heard of the Holy League in France;
many of you of the Spaniards Invincible Armado, Equipped at the Request of his
Holiness, for the Propagation of the Faith; most of you are sensible that there
was lately a Solemn League and Covenant set up in this Kingdom, for the Glory
of God; and we are at this day freshly Alarmed with the Report of an
Association. These Proceedings are not to be wondered at, since Religion has
ever by Experience been found first liable to be depraved by ill Men, then to
be made a stalking Horse for the carrying on the most Impious Enterprises. Our
Lord himself foretold as much, and this Mystery of Iniquity began to work in
the Children of Disobedience at the very dawning of Christianity. The first
Heretics and Schismatics that sprung up in the Church, Men that boasted of
their Knowledge of the Divine Will, as much as any among us ever did,
arrogating to themselves the Name of Gnostics (i. e.) (as the word imports)
Knowing Men, who (as they thought) were fully acquainted with the Doctrine of
God: Yet among many other freakish Opinions, denied Subjection due to the
Magistrate, and are described as such by St. Jude -- Filthy Dreamers, who
defile the Flesh, despise Ver. 8.
Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities.

James 3. 17.
5. The Christian Religion is first pure, and then peaceable, as St. James
teaches us; intimating that the Purity of it being first lost, or renounced,
nothing but Confusion and Disorder can be expected to follow; from whence it
has often come to pass, that Men of Corrupt Minds, perverse Sons of Belial have
set up Religion to countenance their Rebellion; and Christianity has been
frequently drawn in to bear a part in the most Bloody Tragedies that ever were
Acted upon the Stage of the World. Thus it has been from the beginning, and
will continue thus to be notwithstanding our Blessed Lord and his Holy Apostles
took the greatest care imaginable, both by Example and Doctrine to prevent
these Mischiefs. St. Paul, among the rest, intending in these words now read
either first (as some imagine) to overthrow that Rebellious Principle of the
Gnostics, just now mentioned, Despising Dominion, and speaking evil of
Dignities, and to prevent its further growth among the new Converts at Rome.
Or, Secondly, as Grotius conjectures to obviate that plausible Argument, which
the Jewish Christians might possibly be ready to draw from that passage of
Moses (viz.) Thou shall in any wise set him Deuteronomy. 17. 15.
King over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall choose, one from among thy Brethren
shall thou set King over thee, thou may not set a stranger over thee which
is not thy Brother; from whence they might gather, that the Emperor being not
their Brother, not of the Seed of Jacob, but a Stranger, they were not obliged
to Obey him. Or, Thirdly, as some think, to let the Roman Christians rightly
understand his Doctrine and their own Duty, namely, that what he had before in
this Epistle delivered concerning Christian Liberty, was not to be stretched so
far, as to excuse their Subjection to the Temporal Magistrate. Upon some one or
more of these Accounts the Apostle reads them their Lesson, here in the Text;
of which I shall give you the Explication, and thence fully set forth the
Nature of Subjection, which is all I aim at, at this time.

6. The Grammatical form of the words is Imperative, (...), and by Consequence
the words are Praeceptive, importing a Duty properly so called, unto which we
are indispensably Obliged, and which the Apostle more peremptorily presses in
the 5 th. Verse following, Wherefore ye must needs be subject, there is a
Necessity laid upon you all. The Romish Divines tell us that this is only
Prudential Advice, suited to the present Condition of the Christians, who were
then few and poor, and unable to make resistance; therefore was it unseasonable
for them to exasperate the Emperor, but their Interest rather and Wisdom to
sit down patiently under Persecution, waiting a more favorable time of
asserting their Civil Rights, and Liberty of Conscience, and of pulling down
that Cruel and Arbitrary Government of Nero.

This Gap was first opened by the Papists, through which, many, even
Protestants in Profession, have entered into the Field of Rebellion, choosing
rather to become Companions with those unruly Beasts in the Transgression, than
to be confined within the compass of Sobriety, and the Peaceable Principles of
the true Christian Philosophy.

But what (I pray ye) is or can be the meaning of those words, Ye must needs be
subject? Not only for Wrath, or fear of Punishment, that is indeed a Prudential
Motive fit for every reasonable Man to consider for his Worldly Interest; but
also for Conscience Ver. 5.
sake, that is without Question a Divine Evangelical one, fit for every
Christian to weigh in order to his Spiritual Interest: Conscience (I say)
toward God, not for his own sake only, but, as St. Peter implies, for the
Lords sake, in Honor and Obedience to the Law of God.

Let every Soul. No Mortal Man is exempted; neither Bishop, nor Priest, nor
Subordinate Magistrate, nor five hundred Princes of the Congregation, Men of
Renown Assembled; no, nor all the People of the Land Combined and Associated
together, can hold themselves excused.

Every Soul. This Expression is borrowed from the Jewish Writers, with whom it
is very familiar to call Man Soul, as indeed it is not an unusual Idiom in our
own Language, that being a principal part Synechdochically put for the Man
himself: So that when St. Paul says, Let every Soul, it is equivalent as if he
should have said, Let every Man, or rather, if we would render it to the full,
Let every living Man. For so much the word (...) denotes, which most commonly
in Scripture Language signifies the Life, the Animal Life, that Life which is
common to him with the brute Beasts; or else the Life relating to our Natural
and Temporal Concerns. Whence St. Paul opposes (...), 1 Cor. 2. 14, 15.
the Natural Man, to (...), to the Spiritual Man. From whence I draw this
Conclusion, that every true and sincere Disciple of Christ, although he may and
ought to preserve his Reasonable Soul, his Conscience pure and unspotted from
Actual Compliance with the sinful Commands of his Superiors (Conscience and
the Rational Soul, and Spiritual things are not in their Nature capable of
being subjected to the external Power of a Prince,) yet the (...), the Animal
Life, all Temporal Civil Affairs being by God committed to the Supreme
Magistrate, we ought in all those respects to be Subject to the Will and
Governance of the Prince.

By the Higher Powers ((...)) the Abstract, is nevertheless meant the Concrete,
the Person of the Supreme Magistrate; he to whom the Government of the
Commonwealth is entrusted, and the Execution of the Law belongs. So St. Paul
expounds himself, backing this Precept with several Reasons, ver. 3. for
Rulers, (...), ver. 4. For he is the Minister of God ((...)) he bears not the
Sword in vain: He is (...) a Revenger. All which passages clear the Apostles
meaning, that he treats not of the Supreme Authority separate from the Person
of the Prince; but the Prince himself in Possession of the Supreme Power. This
I the rather take notice of, because there are a sort of Critical, Pedantical
Politicians, that distinguish betwixt the Government and the Governor; between
the Laws of the Commonwealth and the Kings Person. Government they are for,
and willing to be Subject to it; the Law they cry up, and none more Zealous
than they for the execution of Justice: But as for the Person of the Prince,
how rudely do they treat him? How little do they Honor him? Making him a King
of Clouts rather than what indeed he is, the Minister, the Ordinance of God.
What else means so many Hedge-creepers among us, pulling down the Fences of
Obedience to the Magistrate, and the fat Bulls of Basan enclosing him in on
every side? What else means that Malicious Raillery, and those abusive Pasquils
sent forth for the wounding his Honor? And some have had the Confidence to
threaten a Writ of Quo Warranto against his Authority.

By Power (if you will admit St. Paul to expound his own meaning) is to be
understood not the Majesty of the Government, but the Majesty of the King,
whose Person is Divine (being Ordained by God) whose Honor is Sacred and
inviolate. And for a further Confirmation of this Exposition, you may please to
remember, that (...). Power is in this sense used by our Lord himself -- When
they bring you unto Synagogues, and unto Magistrates, and unto Powers, (...),
Luke 12. 11.
says St. Luke; which St. Matthew expresses more simply, Mat. 10. 18.
(...) Kings and Governors, or Emperors.

The Learned well know that Magistratus and Potestas, and Majestas are
frequently put for the Prince Vid. Seld. Tit. Hon.
himself in all sort of Writers; and nothing is more common than to call Persons
by the Abstract, denoting some Property in special manner belonging to them.
Thus we style a Notorious Malefactor, Villainy it self, Villainy in the Abstract,
which some express in a more Comical way, a Rogue in grain, (i. e.) one who
like Cloth dyed with Scarlet, has imbibed the Principles of Naughtiness as a
durable and inseparable Property. In like manner, to an Inferior Magistrate we
Address Your Worship; to a Peer of the Realm, Your Honor; to a General of an
Army, Your Excellency; to one of the Blood Royal, Your Highness; to a Prince,
Your Grace, Your Majesty. Thus Jacob, Genesis 45. 3.
speaking to Reuben (to whom by Natural Right of Descent belonged the Supreme
Power) Thou art my Firstborn, my Might, and the Beginning of my Strength, the
Excellency of Dignity, and the Excellency of Power. And to make an end of this
Observation, God himself is often called Wisdom, and Holiness, Righteousness,
and Truth it self.

Now, as it would be thought an high Act of presumption and Atheism for any Man
to distinguish betwixt the Person of God* and his Essential Attributes, (that
is) to pretend to be subject to the Wisdom, Holiness, Righteousness, and Truth
of Divine Grace and Providence; and in the mean time to Blaspheme the Person of
God: Just such another piece of Hypocrisy and empty Loyalty are they guilty
of, who profess to Obey the Law, and to submit to the Government; but Murder,
or Persecute, or Vilify the Prince, in whom the Government rests as an
Inherent Property, and the execution of the Law appertains, as his
unquestionable Right and Prerogative; by whose Wisdom and Authority Justice is
distributed to the People of the Land, as Light and Heat is by the Sun to the
whole World. But, as the Spaniards living under the scorching heat of that
Planet, are said to curse it at the approach of Summer; so is it many times
with an unthankful and wanton People, enjoying too much Ease, Peace, and
Plenty, through the abundant Grace and Goodness of a King, it is familiar with
them to fly in his Face, and lift up the heel against him, that has made them
thus Happy.

But to proceed* Let every Soul be subject, (...) it is Passive: Whence we
learn, that it is not in our own Liberty to subject our selves when, or as long
as we please, nor on what Terms and Conditions we think fit to stand, nor on
whom we pretend to devolve the Government and Succession. It Is not in our Power
to pull down one, and set up another: That Is the Prerogative of God, by whom
Kings Reign. It Is not for us Violently and Clamourously to alter the Frame of
Government already Established; but a modest and sincere Christian is to take
it as he finds it. Outward Force, yea, Obstinate Petitions, and Importunate
Addresses, when the State is in a Commotion, and the Prince under some
disadvantages, becomes not one, who is of a tender Conscience; but smells
rankly of Disobedience and Rebellion. If it had been the mind of God, and the
sense of the Apostle, to permit these things to our Deliberation, the words
rather should thus have run, (...). Let every Soul subject himself. Government
only in general would have been Ordained, but the Specification of it, and the
Choice of the Governors left to the Peoples Suffrage and Election. But he is
to be subjected because it is his Duty so to be Antecedent to his own Will and
Choice: Because it is the appointment of one, who is Higher than either King or
Subject; because it is the Ordinance of God: Of which more by and by.

If it be asked, What is the extent of our Subjection, and unto what Acts of
Obedience are we hereby Obliged? I Answer, First, Positively, to acknowledge
Ver. 2. Ver. 7.
him the Ordinance of God; to render Tribute, and Custom, and Fear, and Honor
unto him, as it follows in the Apostles Discourse after my Text; to preserve
his Person from outward Violence and secret Conspiracies, Ver. 8. Ver. 2.
to own his Rights and Prerogatives; yea, to Love and Reverence him. Or else
thus, Secondly, Negatively, not to resist him, not to Wound his Honor with
Reproaches and Back-bitings, not to give him any just Offense, not to do or say
any thing which may render him Odious to his People, or Contemptible to his
Neighbors; not to discover his Infirmities, nor to aggravate his Faults, nor
to blaze abroad his Mistakes. All which being a weakening of his Government, a
lessening of his Interest and Authority over the Hearts of his People, is no
less than Disloyalty by Consequence, and in its tendency, a Robbing him of his
Crown and Dignity.

Which of you would endure your Children, or your Servants to slander or
bespatter you with Lies, or to Publish the Secrets of your Families, or to
expose you for any weakness or ill Conduct in your Domestic Affairs? What the
Pater familias is in the Economy of the House, the same is Pater Patriae in
the Polity of the State. To uncover the Nakedness of the Father of thy Country
is inconsistent with all those foresaid Duties of Fearing and Honoring him, no
less a violation of this Duty, than that of Canaan's was. Eccles. 10. 12.
Therefore says the Preacher, Curse not the King, no, not in thy Thoughts, much
less not by open Calumny, Acts 3. 5.
or more sly detraction, for it is written, Thou shall not speak evil of the
Ruler of thy People.

I shall crave leave to go yet a little further on this Argument. It Is not
enough to pay the Tribute, when required by a formal Law; but you are bound (in
Conscience at least) to assist his and the Public Necessities at other times;
otherwise I understand not how you can be said to Reverence and Honor the
King: God and the King both no doubt love and require a cheerful Giver. Those
who in words profess to love the Prince, but will neither supply his wants, nor
suffer others so to do, are like those Charitable Christians Chap. 2. Ver. 15,
16*
St. James mentions, who, when a Brother or Sister was Naked and destitute of
daily Food, said unto him, Be thou warmed and filled, notwithstanding gave them
not those things which were needful. Those who would have themselves believed
His Majesty's Loyal Subjects, and Declare they will stand by him with their
Lives and Fortunes, Prosecuting him indeed with good wishes, but in the mean
time starving him out of his Throne: That put the question which Nabal did unto
David's Messengers -- Shall I take my Bread, and my Water, and my Flesh that I
have killed, and give it to I know 1 Samuel 25. 10. 11.
not whom, nor by what Authority, nor for what end demanded? who is David? and
who is the Son of Jesse? are not these sort of men in Scripture Language called
Wicked, Churlish, evil doers, Fools, Railers, Sons of v. 3, 14, 17* 21, 25.
Belial, such as requite evil for good, (that is) give nothing for their Peace
and Protection, which they enjoy through the Providence of the Prince: Should
five hundred at once forbid you to supply the Supreme Power, yet I must let you
know, that the will of God cannot be dispensed with by the Law of Men; that (as
our Lord replied to the Pharisees) the Kings Image and Superscription, being on
their Gold and Silver, you are to render unto Caesar the things that are
Caesar's; and in a word, that what Christian Charity, and common Humanity,
binds you to, in the relief of your Neighbor, Evangelical Loyalty, and the
Fundamental reason of Government obliges you to, in the supply of your Prince.

Hitherto we have explained the nature of the Duty, we proceed unto the Reason
of it, in the latter part of the Text. -- for there is no power but of God,
etc. I shall easily give it for Granted, that a Prince may be an Usurper, and a
Lawful King may turn Tyrant, that neither of them can be accquitted hereof at
the Tribunal of God, where they must account for both: But still upon Earth
among us men, even the Usurper is of God, and the Oppressor is the Ordinance
of God: for there is no Power whatever, though Usurpt, though Tyrannical, but
is by divine Ordination. St. Paul makes no exception unto this general rule. He
might possibly at that time of day, have alleged both Usurpation and
Oppression, against the present Powers. There was possibly sufficient reason
(if any could be) to declaim and make public Harangues against Grievances, and
the Emperors personal crimes and expensive Debaucheries; which were beyond
measure notorious; such as must needs drain the Exchequer, and whereon the
Revenue of the Commonwealth was misimploy'd. There was not wanting plausible
pleas against Monarchy it self in the Roman State, (which was a Commonwealth
from the beginning even in Romulus Pl^t. red.
time, in the opinion of a late Author) at least in behalf of the Peoples right
in choosing their own Supreme Magistrate, as no doubt it was, and had so
continued long by the Original frame of the Roman Government. But this is
certain Aristocracy or Democracy, or a mixture of both, had for many Ages been
owned and received by all ranks and degrees of men, as the true and undoubted
Government, until very lately by the Usurpation of the Caesar's, a single
person having mounted the Steed, and settled himself in the Saddle, rid and
spur-gall'd the Beast, the common People almost to death. Thus much might have
then been with truth argued, against the Emperors Government, but still for all
this the Powers then in being were of God, had a lawful, yea divine Authority
over the People, in the Judgment of St. Paul.

(...) the word here rendered Powers, properly signifies lawful Authority; such
as have a just right of exercising dominon over the People. I shall allow, if
you please, as before I intimated, that the Emperor was not strictly and in
every respect, (...) a lawful Governor, not in foro Conscientiae, not in foro
Coeli; for he had no true Natural or Civil Right to the Throne, antecedent to
his Usurpation, nor has or can any Prince have and exercise a Despotical Power
over the Subject (as did Nero) but he sins against the Law of Nature or of God.
I shall therefore allow, that he was only in those regards (...), (i. e*) one
that had got the long Sword in his hand, and by force subjected the Romans unto
his will and power, against the known Law, against the Will, and against the
Intrest of the Roman People. Yet this notwithstanding I must acquaint you, that
by the doctrine of the Scriptures, in respect of the People, after God has once
declared his allowance of him by the success, (...) a Violent and originally
Unjust Power may become (...) a Legal and Righteous Authority: unto whom the
People of the Land, at least the People of God, must of necessity be Subject,
and are bound in Conscience to yield Obedience; they having no inherent right
in them nor permission from God to question his Title, or to throw off the Yoke
of Subjection, though he attained the Empire by force, though he maintains it
by the Sword, though he administers it with Violence, Injustice and Avarice,
yet he is (...), his Authority is looked upon as derived from God, to have
received the divine stamp and approbation, so far at least as to require the
Christians humble and peaceable submission thereunto; which being a matter of
no small difficulty rightly to state, I may possibly take occasion hereafter,
more distinctly and fully to discuss.

c. 13. v. 3. 4.
It Is true, St. Paul seems as if he discoursed of some incomparable Prince,
whilst he describes him as executing Judgment and Justice, for the benefit of
the Subject, without wrong or oppression of the Innocent, for, says he --
Rulers are not a terror to good Works, but to the Evil: do that which is good
and thou shall have praise of the same. He is the Minister of God to thee for
good, he is a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil. Plato himself
were he now alive again (as they say he is lately risen, and has attempted the
reformation of our present disorders) could not give us a more noble and apt
Character of a Prince.

However, neither will this pretense serve the turn of our Common-wealths-men,
for if you will but consider those forementioned passages in Hypothesi as well
as Thesi: if you will remember who was then the higher Power at Rome when St.
Paul wrote this Epistle, namely Nero, one of the most cruel impious and
debaucht Princes, that ever swayed Scepter, you will not then think that the
Apostle here speaks strictly of some great and Heroic Prince then in being,
(for Nero was not such an one) nor that the Precept is laid down as only
obligatory, when the Prince happens to be a terror unto evil doers, and a
praise unto them that do well. We must then seek for Another sense of those
words, which I conceive is this.

The Apostle in this description, lays down one especial reason and ground of
Subjection, fetched from the benefit generally redounding to the People
thereby, and this with peculiar relation even to Nero himself, the Emperor of
Rome; though one of the worst upon record in History. He intimates that no
Prince, no not Nero himself, ('it is morally impossible, generally speaking) can
be so sou'r and rigid toward the People, but that a modest and humble minded
Subject may hope for more advantages under his Government than by tumult and
Rebellion; that as all Rulers in general, and in Thesi, so was Nero in
particular, and in Hypothesi, to be accounted a terror to wicked doers, and a
Minister of God for the good of the People: that therefore, if the Christian
Romans would but truly consult their own Interest, and would not be afraid of
his Power, nor fall under the lash of his severity, they should live quietly
and innocently, not exasperating him by any indecent words or tumultuous
behavior; and that then they might more probably expect Praise and Protection
from him, and be more likely to obtain those temporal blessings, than by
reproaching his Person, forming Conspiracies, and blowing up the Trumpet of
Sedition against him.

This I take to be the Sum of the Apostles Doctrine and Argument, as I have
explicated it, and am pretty confident agreeably to the mind of God, to the
Apostles drift in this place, and to the unanimous Opinion and Practice of the
Primitive Saints. Which that you may after this large explanation, remember and
distinctly comprehend, I shall reduce it into this short Proposition, (viz.)
That it is the duty of every man, every Christian, to love, honor, to
reverence and obey, and with their substance to support the Person of the
Supreme Magistrate, and this in Conscience toward God, as well as in order to
his own temporal Interest.

Now though this be plain and obvious, yet in these unhappy days; men are and
will be otherwise minded, their heads begin to turn round again, so tender of
their own personal Rights and Properties, that like the Sensitive Plant, do but
touch them, they Shrink, as if Wounded to death: or, as untoward Children, when
disciplined for their faults, cry out Murder, and make hideous Complaints of
Tyranny, Arbritrary Government, and Oppression. The rights of the People are of
late so swelled, their Properties so enlarged, their Liberties so extended,
that the Body Politic may not unfitly be resembled to those Crooked men, whom
in abuse we call Lords, whose Heads are almost Shrunk down into their Breasts,
and become in a manner invisible, at leastwise, whose shape by that unnatural
approach appears Monstrous and Deformed. If the Head of the Commonwealth rises
not at a due distance above the Body of the People, there is neither Form nor
Comeliness in that Government; yea, and for the most part (as in the said
similitude) the Constitution thereof proves Crazy, and the Life short.

The Supreme Magistrate is now endeavored to be coopt up, and as it were
Besieged with those foresaid Pretenses: So that he cannot turn himself round
in his own Orb, without the Offense of some peevish Libertine; nor can make one
step forward in the exercise of Government, but is accused to Trespass upon the
Property of some waspish Common-wealths-man, and to trample upon the heel of
some Freeborn Subject. So that indeed the Princes Person, his Honor, his
Liberty and Property (i. e.) his Royalties and Prerogatives are in danger to be
wrested from him by Force and Craft, and the unwearied Clamours of unreasonable
and unsatiable Men.

I should now, had I time, and were it fit for me to entrench upon the Patience
of this Honorable Audience, or to Trespass upon the Public Business of the
Country, examine the Grounds, and the pretended Reasons of all this: For
otherwise I must declare, that I am nothing terrified from this Task by the
scornful Abuses of those late Demagogues, who in their Pamphlets are pleased to
call us Ministers Sycophants, and Publicly to Indict us of Flattery, because
we Preach Obedience to the King, and as much as in us lies in our Places, and
according to our Abilities, withstand the alteration of Government. For my
self, I must declare, and I am sure no Man knows my Heart better than my self,
nor therefore can in Charity contradict me: I say then, I wish (were not the
thing impossible, and therefore in vain to wish, otherwise I could wish) that
we were once again in Paradise, in the state of Innocence and Perfection, that
there were no need of Government or Governors; at least, that we were all so
good and virtuous, as to deserve that Liberty some Men gape after; that those
especially had their Freedom, who could so use it, as not to abuse it for a
Cloak of Maliciousness. But since this is not to be expected from the far
greatest part of Mankind, since the World is, and ever will be full of
Offenses, pestered with the Excesses and Disorders of unruly Men: Since
therefore it is the Interest of all good Men that Government should be
maintained, and Governors Honored and Obeyed; since the Law was made for a
Curb to the Sinner, and not for a Punishment to the Righteous; since the Wisdom
and Goodness of God has therefore Ordained all of us unto Subjection to
Magistrates, and made it our indispensable Duty, yea, our Interest and Security
so to be: And in particular, since we Preachers of the Gospel are Commanded to
put you in mind that ye be subject to Principalities and Titus 3. 1.
Powers, and that ye Obey Magistrates. I make no more Account of these
spightful Insinuations, than I would of the Drunkards Songs, or the Atheists
Witticisms, that are so plentifully in these days exercised upon us, for no
other Reason that I know of, but because we tell them the Truth. We are indeed
by the more cunning part of the Enemies of the Government, in a cooler manner
blamed for making Princes Gods, as if they immediately came down from Heaven,
which looks like a piece of high Presumption and Sacrilege. And it is true, we
do so in some sort, God himself having vouchsafed that Title of Honor to them,
and our Lord confirmed it. Besides, St. Paul, in my Text, fetches them from
Heaven, telling us, they are of God, or from God; that they are Ordained of
God: I cannot pass by observing on the other hand, how that God* condescends
also to assume the Titles of Earthly Governors; the word King, and Prince,
Lord, and others of the like sort, being frequently attributed to him in Holy
Scripture. And whereas God by way Dan. 2. 47. Ver. 17.
of Excellence is styled King of Kings; nevertheless the Prophet Daniel scrupled
not to give the same Appellation unto Nebuchadnezzar also. So frivolous in my
Mr. Seld. Tit. Hon.
judgment is that Exception of a Learned Man against Sovereign Princes assuming
Divine Titles. They are therefore called Gods, because they resemble God in
Supreme Power. And as Man is said to have been Episcop.
Created in the Image and likeness of God, because of his Dominion over the
Creature, according to the Opinion of some Learned Men; so may the Prince be
said to bear the Image and likeness of God in a special manner, upon the
Account of his Sovereignty over the People.

In fine, there being you see so near an Affinity between God and the King,
it is not to be wondered, that we make so great a difference between the Prince
and the Subject: And in our Discourses lay upon you the same burden of
Reverence, Obedience, and Non-resistance, as St. Paul before us has done,
teaching no other Doctrine than what the Holy Ghost has warranted and Commanded
us to Teach, That ye be subject to the Higher Powers, which are of God, that
they who resist, resist the Ordinance of God: And oh! that ye would lay to
Heart that terrible Punishment, which awaits all Rebellious and Disobedient
Subjects, They Ver. 2.
that resist, shall receive to themselves Damnation.

But after all is said, the Grand Debate will be, How shall we be satisfied,
who is this Higher Power among us, and in whom that Sovereignty rests, to whom
Subjection is due? Especially in this mixed Monarchy, where not only the
greatest share of the Property, but a considerable part of the Legislative
Power is in the People? For Answer, I say, that this notwithstanding, the King
is the Higher Power, that Ordinance of God, in the Defense of whose Person and
Authority this Discourse is intended. Or do I say it only? Does not the
Municipal Law of the Land say as much? And this is I am certain (I speak it
with somewhat more than ordinary Confidence) an Universal, an Infallible way of
knowing the Supreme Power in order to our Non-resistance, according to the
Doctrine of the Gospel, (viz.) He that bears not the Sword in vain, in whom
alone the Military Power remains. He whose Person is inviolate, whose Life is
Sacred, whose Power cannot be taken from him Legally without his consent; who
is Accountable to none but God for any Misgovernment, (and these are His
Majesty's Prerogatives, even by the Political Contract, the express Statute Law
of the Realm) he is that Higher Power St. Paul speaks, and I have been
Discoursing of, if there be any such thing as an Higher Power among us. Nay, I
shall further add (though I will not positively affirm it, submitting my self
herein to better Judgments) That Prince who is not responsible to the People,
is in effect the sole Sovereign Power, if he pleases to Usurp and Exercise it:
Nor can the Subject Conscientiously resist him. For I cannot apprehend that any
resistance can be Lawful in point of Conscience, that is forbidden by the
Positive Law of the Land, which is our Case in this Nation. Though the Prince
may be culpable in the sight of God for so doing, yet the Subjects cannot be
Justified in Rebelling, when the Law has taken from them that Liberty and
Power. Common Reason and Equity, the Law of Nature, and the Original of
Government, and extreme Necessity, will by no means Justify such violent
Attempts upon the Supreme Magistrate. It is one main ground of Political
Government, to deprive the Subject from being his own Judge and Assertor of his
own Privileges. Without this Fundamental Principle, there will be only the
Name and Shadow of Government, when as really it is but mere Anarchy. If the
Subject might be permitted to fly in the Face of Authority, and to Assault him
when ever he apprehends himself injured, we should but be Populus virorum, an
Independent Herd of Licentious and ungovernable Men; not Corpus Politicum, not
a Compact Body of Citizens, United together in Peace, Order, and Subordination.
But it is commonly Argued, Is not the Prince Obliged to Govern by Law, and if
he transcends that Power, by Invading the Peoples Liberty and Property, are we
bound to Obey him? I Answer, He is Obliged, but the Obligation is between God
and his own Conscience. God only is the Revenger of the Breach of the
Coronation Oath, though the Peoples Liberty and Property, and the Laws are the
subject matter of it. Secondly, I grant, that in the Case put, we are not bound
to Obey him, but we are bound patiently to suffer, not actively to resist.
Thirdly, I am of Opinion, (but speak it still with Submission) that the King
being by all sober, understanding Men, acknowledged the King of Right, before
he gives the People that Assurance of his Governing by Law; that that Oath is
therefore a voluntary Act of Grace, unto which he is not Obliged by the
Fundamental Constitution: For if so, he could not Exercise the Supreme
Governing Power before the Oath was taken; which yet neither he nor his
Predecessors were ever thought incapable to do.

Supposing then that the Prince would not give to the People this Assurance, I
ask whether he is then Obliged to Govern strictly by the present Law? It Is my
Judgment, he is not Obliged. He ought indeed, the Law of God and Nature, and
the first Reason of Government requires him to Rule with regard to the good of
the Governed; yet that he is strictly tied unto the particular Methods of
Government, declared by the present Law of the Land, I can by no means allow.
For the good of the Governed being the first Fundamental Principle directing
him what Measures to take in the Exercise of Government, and as yet there being
no other Obligation upon him, it is left to his Conscience, Judgment, and
Discretion, before that Oath, what Course to take in answering that great End
of Government: And if any of the present un-repealed Laws shall be thought by
him repugnant to the good of the Subject, or but Comparatively not so effectual
thereunto, may he not, nay, is he not in Conscience bound to lay down to
himself some other Rules, in Order to that End? Fourthly, I might Answer, that
seeing all Men look upon themselves as freed from the punctual Observation of
Positive Laws in the Case of extreme Necessity (this equitable Liberty God
himself allows, I will have Mercy, and not Sacrifice;) and our Municipal Law
indemnifies the Subject, in many such Cases:) And seeing the Security the King
gives to his Subjects is a Voluntary Act, but the Peoples to the King may be
Exacted from them by Force, and by Law; I think there is much more Reason, that
the King in Extremity may depart from the Letter of the Law, than that the
People should: And if the People may Appeal to Reason and Equity, to the Law of
Nature, and the first Reason of Government in the Defense of their Privileges,
may not the Prince much more do the same in the Defense of his Prerogatives,
and in the Exercise of his Dominion? And shall he be indispensably Obliged by
the Letter of the Law, in Governing, not allowed to plead Nature and Equity,
the Reason and Ends of Government, and extreme Necessity? And yet the People be
at their own Liberty in Arbitrarily Obeying as they shall Judge it Reasonable
and Agreeable to the Ends of Government? Some of these foresaid Considerations
(which I must repeat, are offered as Problems only, and with Submission) or
something like them might, I imagine, be in the Mind of that Eminent Lawyer,
Sergeant Hale, one of the House of Commons in the 43 d. Year of Queen
Elizabeth, who spoke there to this Effect. I wonder (says he) that the House
stands either at the greatness or time of paying the Subsidies demanded, since
all we have are in Her Majesty's Power; she may Lawfully at her Pleasure take
it from us, she has as much Right to all our Land, as to any Revenue of the
Crown: All which (says he) I am able and ready to prove. Thus far he: But I
shall not presume to go so high, nor will it be expected from me to proceed
farther upon this tickle Subject: Only I do not find that he was called to the
Bar, nor Reprimanded as a Pander to Tyranny, as opening a Passage to Arbitrary
Government, for his plain dealing, and freedom of Speech. But this I shall say,
that this one Speech of that Gentleman exceeds all that has of late been said
or done (as far as I can learn) for the setting up an Absolute and Despotical
Sovereignty: And yet it passed then without noise, or giving any Offense, or
creating Jealousies and Fears in the Hearts of the People against the
Government.

Yet one word more: When I re-collect, how Judge Cook (the Oracle of the Law,
as some of his Admirers are pleased to call him, no Prerogative Lawyer, as all
agree) assures us, that the first Kings of this Realm had the whole Land in
Demesne, and therefore (upon the Principle now on foot, That Dominion is Founded
on Property) undoubtedly Absolute Sovereigns: I cannot but in two words
expostulate with the Underminers of our present Establishment, Where is your
Ingenuity? O ungrateful People of the Land! to treat your Princes so rudely, so
unworthily; to Vilify their Persons, to Invade their Prerogatives, and through
unwearied Clamours and Importunate Complaints, to extort from their Crown the
few remaining Flowers of the Regality: Like Vipers, to bite them, who have
Nourished you in their Bosom, and, as it were, almost pulled out their own Eyes
for your sakes. You, who have waxen fat through their Gifts and Concessions,
who are grown thick by their Indulgence and Liberality; to forsake them that
have made you, and to lift up your Heels against them that have thus dearly
treated you? Oh, Monstrous Ingratitude! Them, that have given you all the
Liberty and Property you can Legally pretend to, under whom you have enjoyed
both, as fully as Heart can wish, beyond Example of past Ages, or the present
Times in any other Commonwealth; from whom you have received all possible
Assurance of continuing so for the future; you to Defame, to Libel, to Conspire
against, to Resist, to deny Cheerful and Conscientious Subjection, and Liberal
Contributions, or rather necessary Retributions, to these Bountiful and
Gracious Princes? Oh Height of Impiety! Oh Barbarous Inhumanity! For shame wipe
off this Reproach from the Christian Name, and from the English Nation, whereof
you are Members.

Sermon II.
Titus 3. Ver. 1. Put them in Mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers,
to Obey Magistrates.
IT is the Universal Custom of Mankind to carry on their Public Triumphs with
Feasting, and among other External Rites of Mirth, to cheer their Hearts with a
more than Ordinary freedom in the use of the Creature. To do so, is the Voice
of Reason, the Lesson of Experience, a Maxim written in the Word of God it
self, and Warranted by the practice of the most Holy Men we there read of.
There is a certain sourness contracted in our Natures by business; and Absence
is apt to interrupt our Correspondence, to estrange us from one another: But
our Solemn Meetings re-collect us again, and Good Cheer sweetens the Soul,
softens the Temper, after all our Care and Travel: Hereby the Spirits being
Revived, and the Heart putting on her Festival Robes (I mean Joy and Gayety)
Mutual Love and Friendship among private Neighbors is easily renewed, the
common Interest of Societies enlarged, and by doing and receiving Offices of
kindness, the House is Swept and Cleansed from all those impurities of wrath,
bitterness, dissentions and animosities; in whose room succeed those sweet and
beautiful graces of Joy and Peace and entire Affection one toward another*
Wine (says the Ps. 104. 15.
Psalm.) makes glad the Heart of Man, and Bread strengthens Man's Heart. It is
good and comely (says Eccles. 2. 24. 3. 12, 22. 5. 18. 8. 15. 9. 9.
the Preacher) there is nothing better, than that a Man should eat and drink,
and make his Soul enjoy good in his Labor; To whom God has given Biches and
Wealth, to him has he given Power to eat thereof, to take his Portion and to
rejoice in his Labor. This is the gift of God. Then I commended Mirth (says
he) because a Man has no better thing under the Sun, than to eat, and to drink,
and be Merry. Our Lord himself took a freedom herein, which drew upon him that
spiteful Character Math. 11. 19.
that he was A Glutton and a Wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and Sinners. It
is in my Judgment an unlucky observation, of one, but has much of truth in it,
that they who are backward to bear a part in the Innocent diversions of
Feasting and Rejoicing, are for the most part Ill-natured Men, Peevish and full
of Malice, Men that watch advantages to ensnare their Neighbors, and to effect
some ill design upon them.

But whatever usefullness may be observed in Public Entertainments, yet
however this is a more Noble Romans 14. 17.
truth -- the Kingdom of God is not Meat nor Drink, but Righteousness and Peace;
So may I say that the Public Societies of Men, and Bodies Corporate, are not
Meat nor Drink, but Righteousness and Peace; that Feastings are but the
accidental, the circumstantial parts of Unity, the outward expressions of it,
not the effectual means of Producing or Continuing it. If there be not an
inward foundation of Peace laid in the Soul, our good fellowship will end in
Variance, and Strife, and Riot; and our Love dissolve as soon as our Feasting
is over; and all the substantial good designed by these Festival endearments,
will be utterly disappointed.

In these unhappy days of ours, there is one Mischievous disorder crept in
among us, whilst most of us are ready enough to join in the outward Pageantry's
of Peace and good will, in the Ceremonious Practice of love and good
fellowship; I mean Eating and Drinking, and plentifully entertaining one
another; yet our Hearts are divided, neither are we agreed in, that one
necessary and fundamental Principle of Peace, viz. Obedience, and Subjection to
the Civil Magistrate; without which it is utterly impossible to maintain a good
and lasting correspondence among our selves, in the mutual assistance and
defense of one another. Whilst therefore you are Managing the external Pomp of
your Love Feasts, it is the Preachers business and duty too (I conceive) to lay
the lasting Foundation thereof, upon your Hearts; whilst you are Drinking the
Kings Health, and Continuance of the Public Happiness under Him; it will not
be thought impertinent that we, who are invited to carry on the Religious part
of these Solemnities, should endeavor to commend unto your Conscience that
Evangelical Doctrine of being Subject to Principalities, etc. without which all
the shows of Friendship among your selves, of Loyalty to your Prince, and of
Faithfullness to the established Government, is but mere Pretense, and the
vilest Hypocrisy, and will at last discover it self in Treason to the Prince,
in Faction to the State, and in Treachery one toward another. This then shall
be my design and task at this time, to lay the Groundwork of Peace and Union
among you, (viz.) Submission to the Governors and Government.

But alas amidst the many discouragements, we the Ministers of the Gospel
labor under at this day, this is not the least, that we are become hateful,
and exposed to the fury and madness of a Stubborn People, and that chiefly,
because we will not run into the same excess of Riot as they do; but continue
Zealous in maintaining the Peace, of the Present Government, as by Law
established, against all opposition; that we still resolutly engage in that
part of the Quarrel, where our presence and assistance is most useful, where
the Enemies of the Public Peace are most numerous and Powerful. To omit what
might Justly be pleaded in our defense, as considered in our Politic
Capacities, (scil.) that we are members of the same Public Society, and our
Interests embarkt in the Ship of the Commonwealth, as well as others; that by
our Promises and Oaths we are obliged (what in us lies) with our Lives and
Fortunes, and then surely also with our Tongues and Pens to support the
Government; that our temporal happiness and well being in this World, depending
on the Peace of the Commonwealth, we should be wanting to our selves, and sin
against the Eternal Law of Nature, if we did not endeavor our own preservation
as far as the Laws of God and Man will allow us. Upon which account certainly
we might hope to pass, if not for Men of Conscience, yet of some tolerable
degree of Sense and Reason, whilst we study to keep our own Ground, to maintain
our Rights and Properties, at least we might Pass for such with those Men, who
we plainly see resolve to Protect themselves, contrary to the Law of the Land,
without any regard to Honor and Conscience and the Religion they profess; in
spite of that tie of gratitude for the Protection they have hitherto enjoyed,
and of the repeated Assurances, by Oaths and Protestations given to the
Government, for their Peaceable demeanor.

But setting aside all these considerations, when I recollect, how that in the
Person of St. Paul, there is a necessity laid upon us Ministers, and a Woe
pronounced against us all, if we Preach not the Gospel; and when I remember
among other Evangelical Precepts of Holiness, this of Subjection to the Civil
Magistrate is not the least, unto which we are frequently and most earnestly
exhorted in the Holy Scriptures; but chiefly when I observe that St. Paul, who
himself pressed this duty upon the Christians at Rome, was also careful to
instruct the whole Church of God therein, and among many other Topics and
Heads commended Romans 13. 1.
unto Titus Bishop of Crete to Preach upon, charges him in my Text to put them
in mind to be Subject, etc. and when, lastly I cannot but think and do
Confidently affirm that in the person of Titus, all the Succeeding Preachers of
the Gospel, are obliged by Virtue of that Apostolical Canon in the discharge of
their Ministerial Office to Urge upon all Christian Subjects Obedience to
Authority, for these reasons I do verily judge no Man of sense can, no one of
Conscience will blame our Forwardness and Zeal in this kind.

For which reason, I shall here resume the argument of Subjection to the Civil
Magistrate, which I lately entered upon, on another Public Occasion. In the
handling whereof I shall not need to repeat what was then said, in the Parallel
Explacation of that place in the Romans, since many of you were present at that
discourse: Neither will I give you or my self any other trouble, in the
interpretation of these Words, more than to make these two Remarks. First, That
St. Paul makes use here of three several Phrases in declaring the Nature of
Christian Subjection, (scil.) To be Subjected to Principalities, to be
Subjected to Powers, and to Obey Magistrates. Whence one of these two things
plainly follows, either supposing the Apostle to have had different meanings,
in those distinct Phrases, he must then be understood to have provided for the
Christians Obedience, or Non-resistance, not only of the Supreme Magistrate,
but also of the Subordinate: Or else supposing the Apostle fell as it were
accidentally into this variety, intending no more than Subjection to the higher
Powers only, it will however follow from the redundancy of expression, that the
Apostle was nearly concerned, and mighty careful to have the Doctrine of
Subjection effectually Imprinted upon the Hearts and Consciences of the
Cretians, as a Point of greatest moment: Therefore varying the Phrase, and
expressing his mind so Copiously (as it were dwelling upon the argument) lest
the duty should be slipped over as of small account, lest his meaning should be
mistaken, or any unpeaceable Christian should find a loop hole to creep out at,
excusing himself from that indispensable duty by some nice distinction and
subtlety.

(...) c. 1. 12.
But secondly, I again remark, that the Persons whom the Apostle directs Titus
to admonish and put in remembrance, were the Cretians, who (as most Islanders)
were of old noted as Faithless and Treacherous, apt to waver and be tossed
about with every Tempestuous Wind, and upon every slight provocation, to be
blown up into Mutiny and Rebellion. It Is the Excellent Grotius's Gloss upon the
words. Crete was always Turbulent and Seditious, Valde Seditiosa semper fuit
Creta, De eis vult moveri Cretas, quorum maxim indigebant.
and St. Paul would have them Admonished of those Faults, to which they were
Naturally addicted, and by inveterate Custom inclined: From this Observation
you may be informed, as of the reason why St. Paul charges Titus to insist upon
that point among the Cretians, so have you a fair and Justifiable Account why
we at this day so frequently take pains to press it upon our Fellow-Citizens in
this Kingdom.

These two Remarks present you with the full meaning of the words and
Satisfaction for what I have already, and shall now farther Discourse upon this
Argument; my business and intent being to Prosecute three or four difficult
Cases, that usually fall under Debate, as concerning Non-resistance.

Scil. Subjection to the Legal Prince: I shall therefore crave leave, as
briefly as I can, to resolve that doubt in the first place.

I Answer therefore in the Affirmative, that though he is an Usurper, yet still
he is the Ordinance of God, the success of his Arms being a clear Indication of
the Mind and Will of God, bearing on it the stamp of Divine Approbation, and
indispensably Obliging the People unto Patient and Peaceable Subjection. This
was (I conceive) the Case of the Christians, under the Roman Emperors; who
were Usurpers, having no Legal Right to the Sovereignty, but what they attained
by sinful Force and Violently abrogating the Ancient Government. At least I
make account that that Despotical and Arbitrary Power, which they assumed and
exercised over the People, was Unnatural, Unjust, and Usurpation; and yet God,
whose special Care it is always to provide for Public Peace, is pleased so far
to own and Countenance the Higher Powers, as not to suffer us Turbulently to
resist them, though Usurpers. Trace the History of the Church, you will not
find Holy Men scrupling this point in the least, nor curiously sifting into the
Princes Title, in every descent, and through a long series of Succession, nor
upon any pretense of Weakness in their Tittle, putting themselves in the Head
of the Populace, and encouraging to resistance. Pharaoh (as some Learned Men
think) was Exodus 9. 16.
an Usurper; For this Cause (says God) have I set thee up; that is, have
permitted thee to take upon thee the Supreme Authority, by prospering, or
suffering thy Ambition to Succeed against the Ancient known Law of Succession,
in Egypt. Yet neither Moses nor the Israelites took this Advantage against him,
nor did God himself any other ways design their Deliverance at first, than by
Ordering them in his Name Peaceably to Supplicate for leave to go into the
Wilderness to Sacrifice. All the Kings of Israel were Usurpers against the
Title of David's House; many of them against the better Title of their
immediate Predecessors. Did the Prophets or Good Men blow the Trumpet, and
Assemble the People to Oppose the Usurpers? Did not the Kings of Judah
themselves by Leagues, and Confederating with them in Wars against their Common
Enemies, sufficiently acknowledge their Providential Right unto the Kingdom?
The Prophet Jeremy is clear in this matter, -- I have made the Earth Jer. 27.
5, 6.
(says God by his Prophet to the Jews) the Men, and the Beasts that are upon the
Ground, in my great Power, and by my outstretched Arm, and have given it unto
whom it seemed meet unto me; and now I have given all these Lands into the hand
of Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon, my Servant, to serve him. The Case of the
Jews was thus. God as a Punishment had given to Nebuchadnezzar Dominion over
them; that is, had permitted him to Usurp it, having carried away Captive their
Legal Prince unto Babylon. Hereupon the Jews had submitted to his Empire, and
received Zedekiah, Jehojakim's Brother, as their Deputy Governor under
Nebuchadnezzar. These things were done not by virtue of any express Revelation
from God, but by the Rule of Common Discretion, and in Conformity to the
Providential will of God. Now, if former Oaths unto the Natural Prince
irreversibly Oblige against the present signification of Gods Providence, then
did Zedekiah and the Jews sin in thus owning and swearing Fealty to the King of
Babylon, in prejudice of Jehojakim, which is evident they did not; and their
Submission to Nebuchadnezzar was by God himself looked upon as Lawful, and
binding to the Conscience. Therefore does Jeremy in that Chapter chide the Jews
for practicing a Revolt, and the Spirit of God calls it Rebellion. 2 Chronicles. 13.
I shall confess here that Zedekiah had Sworn Allegiance to the Conqueror, that
an unlawful Oath may bind, and consequently, that this defection of Zedekiah
might be sinful by reason of the breach of his Oath; but then I must say in
Answer, First, That if it had been unlawful for Zedekiah and the Jews following
the intimations of Providence, to Swear unto Nebuchadnezzar, either the
Prophet, or the Inspired Historian would, and must have told us as much, and
Reproved the Jews for that sin: Or, Secondly, if we grant the Oath unlawful,
then it could not have Obliged them against the Antecedent and Lawful Oath
given to Jehojakim. For where there are two repugnant Oaths, it is more
reasonable that the former should bind: at least, that the lawful Oath (that
given formerly to Jehojakim) should take Place of the unlawful (that given to
Nebuchadnezzar;) so that in this instance it appears that the resistance of an
Usurper is sinful, a resistance of the Ordinance; and that we may Subject our
selves to him, when Providence compels us.

Now the Reason of this Conclusion of mine is (I think) Obvious. God is Lord
and Proprietour of the whole World. It Is he that pulls down one and sets
up another. By him Kings Reign. We are not always to expect an immediate
Revelation from Heaven for the Confirmation of his Will, or Satisfaction of our
own Conscience. He was indeed often times pleased to discover his mind to the
Israelites by his Prophets. What Prophesy and Revelation was to them, the same
is Providence unto us, a manifest and sufficient Proof of the Divine Will. All
Mankind, the most Religious and Loyal, bare witness to this Truth in their
Practice: and the best, the wisest Princes allow their Subjects this Liberty,
evermore passing bills of Amnesty Hen. 7th.
upon the Recovery of their Kingdoms. This was the Motive, which prevailed with
one of our Kings for enacting that equitable Law, whereby the People are
acquitted of Treason, when they submit to a crowned Usurper, that Ceremony (it
seems) being intended for a Legal Token of Gods Providential Will. Thus far (I
am apt to believe) the most Disloyal among us will agree with me. Wherefore
that I may not be misunderstood, it will be necessary to lay down these
following Rules and Limitations.

1. That it is the duty of every Subject to assist his Prince, to maintain the
present Government against an Usurper to the utmost of his Power; and this not
only in the beginning of Rebellion* (which should always be nipt in the Bud)
but continue so doing with the hazard of his Life and Fortune, whilst their
remains any Hopes, any Legal Methods of Defense. For I would not be mistaken,
as if I accounted it a matter of small Moment to depart from our Oaths and
Assurances given to the Government; or as if I took upon me to license People
to practice against the Peace of the State, or to herd themselves with
tumultuous and ungovernable Men. No, it will not be easy for a Loyal and
Religious Subject, to prostitute his Conscience upon every first appearance of
danger or to violate his Contracts by a ready compliance with the Usurper,
before he does or suffers, or makes any opposition in behalf of the Natural
Prince. But then only he may and is to submit, when Providence has put an end
to the dispute, and clearly decided the Controversy. And this may happen two
ways: 1. When it is become morally impossible to restore the oppressed Prince
(as appears to have been the case of the Jews, when Jehojakim was captive in
Babylon) then the hand of Providence has laid a necessity upon us to acquiesce
in the Alteration of Government. For as necessity has no Law according to the
vulgar saying, so impossibilities fall under no Law, according to the Maxim of
the Schools. This is taken for granted by all men, and even the supreme Rulers
themselves approve it, No one is or can in the Nature of the thing be obliged
to impossibilities either by God or Man: neither will the Powers in this
Extremity require Subjects out of Fondness to run themselves head long into
destruction in vain and to no purpose at all. It is an Aphorism in the Divine
Economy it self: God has thus (yea more favorably) resolved the Case between
him and us -- Math. 6. 13.
I (says he) will have Mercy and not Sacrifice. We are not strictly tied to the
observation of his Positive Precepts.

His negative Laws oblige semper and ad semper, as the Learned speak. That is
plainly thus; our Circumstances will never allow us to blaspheme God, to
murder, to steal, or to commit Adultery. Because it is Ex. 20.
said, Thou shall not, etc. The Holiness of the Divine Nature cannot, will not
in any wise dispense herein. But his Positive Commands do not oblige ad semper.
It is permitted us upon urgent Occasions, for instance, to absent our selves
from the Public Worship, to do works of Necessity and Charity, and we are not
always bound to publish our Opinions, or to profess our Faith. (tho we may not
deny it.) The Goodness and the mercy of the Divine Nature thus far indulges us
as to the performance of our Duty to him. And may we not reasonably expect the
same Measure from our Earthly Governors? It can never, I own, be lawful for us
to blaspheme their Honor, to fight against them or murder them, because it is
said, Thou shall not speak evil of the Rulers, thou shall not resist them,
(these negative Dutys oblige ad semper;) but it is not always our indispensible
Duty to fight for them. In extreme necessity then we may submit to an
Oppressor. Natural Prudence, and self-preservation will warrant and enforce us
to it. Our Religion, our Conscience and Fidelity to our Sovereign being to be
guided by the Rule of Reason and Discretion, to be concluded by the almighty
Power of Providence, we must sit down, and like reasonable men examine, whether
we are able with Luke 14. 31.
ten thousand to march into the Field, and meet our Adversary with twenty
thousand, as our Lord advises. When there is no humane probability of Success,
there God has put a stop to our Endeavors. Hitherto we are to go, and no
farther. For the Relation between the Liege Prince, and the Liege People, the
mutual Offices of Protection and Assistance, are now, tho not wholly and
eternally dissolved, yet, suspended for a while. As the Prince deprived cannot
be taxt justly, because in the Discharge of his public Trust, he does not
desperately run himself into certain ruin for the Protection of his Subjects:
So neither can he reasonably expect his People should do so in his Quarrel,
when there is no Hopes of Success. Both the one and the other are patiently to
suffer under the Disappointment. Reservare se meliori fortunoe, waiting a more
favorable conjuncture of asserting their Rights and Liberties.

Secondly when the Natural Prince and his Legal Heirs are all extinct, or lost,
then certainly the Usurper is the Divine Ordinance and ought to be recognized
as such, having the best visible Title, i. e. actual Possession of the Crown;
On whom by Providence and the Divine will the supreme Authority is devolved.
And I am well satisfied, that if this Rule is not to be followed, it is
impossible for us to submit unto any Higher Powers at this day, so many
Invasions, Usurpations and violent Changes having been made in all Governments.
Were we permitted to trace every Princes Title from the beginning downward to
this present time; and then to resist upon the Discovery of any one Flaw in the
several Alterations and Successions, we should find scarce one just, and might
upon that score resist, I verily think. But then

When I affirm we may and ought to be Subject to a Usurper, yet (if there be
but a bare Natural Possibility of our Sovereigns return) I would be understood
to speak of an unactive Submission, (as I may call it) that is, of sitting down
patiently under his Dominion as Sufferers, and as a conquered People, not
actual Promoters or Defenders of the Change. For considering our former Oaths,
it is Indecent and Treacherous so far to comply with Usurpation, as to become
active Instruments in the new Tyranny. We may not then engage in public
Offices, and places of Trust. We may not inform against, nor implead, nor judge,
nor persecute our Fellow Citizens upon the Usurpers account. We may not commend
his Government, nor write Panegyricks, nor erect Monuments to the Commendation
of his Person and Virtue. We may not enter into Engagements of Maintaining his
Authority against the just and legal Title of the excluded Prince, nor
positively abjure the Royal Family. If we proceed thus far in Subjecting our
selves, we are guilty of perjury the downright breach of our Sacred Oaths: at
least may bring our Consciences into such a Snare, that if ever Providence
turns our Captivity and Restores our Sovereign, we are reduced into this
Straight of Necessarily forswearing our selves. For to adhere to the Usurper,
to be active in his Defense, is a Violation of our first Oath, which Eternally
obliges us not to resist our natural Prince: And to be active in our Princes
Cause, is manifest perjury for the same Reason. The Sin of forswearing our
selves and unfaithfulness Will one of these Ways of a surety Cleave to us. But
if any think to avoid this Dilemma by being a Neuter, he is so grossly
mistaken, that he is perjured in both Respects, and doubly forswears himself.
He defends neither the Prince nor the Usurper: at least he resists neither, as
he has obliged himself. For the avoiding of which inconvenience it is our
Wisdom and Duty, tho to be Subject, yet not active under the Usurper. Because,

him down; who Ceases to be the Divine Ordinance, and as a rod is flung into
the Fire. Thus Jeremy after he had exhorted the Jews to be subject to
Nebuchadnezzar, Chapter 27* 7.
to his Sons and to his Sons Sons, adds -- after shall many Nations and great
Kings serve themselves of him, that is, When Providence should put the Power
and Opportunity into their Hands: The whole that has been said in Answer to
this first Question seems in my Judgment agreeable to the Principles, and in a
great measure to the Practice of that Learned Lawyer, that honest Gentleman,
that good Subject; that excellent Christian, the Lord Chief Justice Hales in
that account given of him by a late Learned Pen, and of that renowned Roman
Knight Pomponius Atticus, whose Life the said Eminent Lawyer has published,
having I suppose, singled if out for a Pattern and Copy of his own Life. Now
if what has been delivered upon this Argument be well laid together, I shall be
so far from giving any just Offense, or that I judge my self to have bound such
strong Shackles upon the Conscience, as will not be easily shook off by any,
that have any Spark of Religion and Loyalty left in them.

I proceed now to a second Query, what if the Natural Prince stretches his
Dominion beyond the Line, exercises his Power beyond the Compass and against
the Rule of the Law? To this I reply, He is still the Higher Power, the
Ordinance of God. Thou may not revile him, nor by Force resist him, nor with
danger to his Life, his Person, his Crown and Dignity, or the Public Peace
defend thy self. Thou art notwithstanding bound to pay him all Reverence, in
Patience and Humility to possess 1 Pet. 2. 13.
thy Soul. This I take to be St. Peter's Doctrine, who, when he had persuaded
Submission to the King, and Subjection to Masters, even to the froward, backs
v. 18.
his Doctrine thus -- For this is Thank-worthy, if a Tit. 2. 9.
Man for Conscience toward God indures grief, suffering wrongfully; not so
much as Answering again, (as St. Paul to Titus commands; that is, not saucily,
not reproachfully. Which also is by Peter recommended 1 Pet. 2. 23.
from the Example of Christ, -- who, when he was reviled, reviled not again. Now
because, there are among us many, that ridicule this Doctrine, and with much
Confidence explode that Principle of betaking our selves only to Prayers and
Tears, humble and modest Petitions, which the Primitive Saints, and we at this
day affirm the only Conscientious Rule, and Remedy against Injury received
from the Supreme Magistrate; It Is worth our pains to observe, how those
Apostles encourage the Christians, and by what Motives they press them unto
this patient Suffering. Says Paul -- Coloss. 3. 24, 25.
Knowing that of the Lord* ye shall receive the reward of the Inheritance. And,
he that does wrong shall receive for the wrong which he has done, that is, of
God. Again he says -- Knowing whatsoever good thing any Man Ephesians. 6. 8.
does, the same shall he receive of the Lord. Says Peter -- If when ye do well
and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable with God. For
hereunto 1 Pet. 2. 20. 21. 23.
are ye called, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an Example.
When he suffered, he did not so much as threaten, but committed himself to him
that judges righteously. Paul and Peter comforted not their Disciples with
hopes of Opportunity, some time or other to assert their just Rights and
Natural Liberty; which had been safe enough to have done in these their private
Letters; Nor do they talk of a Natural transcendent Power, to resist when they
should be able: but as became good Subjects and Preachers of righteousness,
dealt plainly with them, putting them in Remembrance, what they were to trust
unto, scil. to the righteous Judgment of God, to the future Recompense of
reward, and to the Divine Punishments to be inflicted upon their Oppressors.
They had now perfectly learnt their Lesson, not so much as to call down Fire
from Heaven to consume their Enemies, nor muster whole Legions of Angels in
their own just Defense and Preservation: much less not insist upon their
Natural Right against the Public Peace. Whence I conclude, that in Case of
Injury and Oppression, God is the only Judge, to him we are to appeal, to his
Care and Goodness is the Cause to be committed. Our Obligations of Honor,
Obedience patient Submission and peaceable Subjection cannot cease in the Mean
Time. If any should now reply, that the foresaid Passages concern the Duty of
Servants to their Masters, not of Subjects to the Higher Powers, I shall
answer, that St. Peter's Discourse and St. Paul's in Titus seems plainly intended
of both: and I farther reply, that since Christians were commanded to be
Subject, not indecently to answer their Patrons tho froward and unjust; that
since they were not allowed by Disobedience to recover their Natural Liberties,
but to abide in the Quos deprebendit Evangelica Doctrina obnoxios servituti,
aequo animo ferant, nec ideo se putent manumissos quod a tyrannide vitiorum
sint manumissi.

Ne pretexiu Religionis Christianae ordo reip. turbetur suam quisque sortem
ferat, and in ea perduret.


same Calling, wherein they were called: that is, as Erasmus glosses upon that
Place, to bear their Lot with contended minds, not to plead the Law of Nature
against the Dominion of their Masters, nor upon Pretext of Religion to disturb
the Commonwealth: if it were thus with Christian Slaves, it must be understood
thus by parity of Reason with Christian Subjects, tho they suffer unjustly,
(...), illegally. There is, I will not deny a great Difference between them and
us, the Emperors and Heads of Families being much more absolute and arbitrary,
than our Princes and Masters are at this day. And yet this will not justify
resistance, which being attended with the Breach of the Public Peace and
Order, and a Subversion of Government in its Tendency, is as irregular and
sinful in a Mixed as in an absolute Monarchy, and every whit as repugnant to the
Doctrine of the Apostles. The Exorbitances of the supreme tho limited Power can
be no plea for the Subject to rebel, when the Public Contract has expressly
forbid it. But if in contempt and spite of the Municipal Law the Subjects of a
limited Monarch may fly to the Law of Nature, their Moral transcendent Power
for the Defense of their just Rights and Properties, I see no Reason, why the
Christians under the Roman Empire might not betake themselves unto the same Law
of Nature, their natural transcendent Power, and by Force assert themselves out
of that Despotical, Unnatural, Unjust and Unsupportable Slavery they were
under. To make an End of this, It is acknowledged Especially Treatise of
Monarchy, etc.
by most of our ingenuous Adversaries, that even in mixed Monarchy as great
Deference, Obedience and Submission is done to the Person of the King, as to an
absolute Prince. And this at present I have only pleaded for.

Now, because when we back this Doctrine with the Christians Practice in the
Primitive days, we are wont to meet with Scornful Men, such as will by no means
admit the Holy Apostles and Martyrs, as the Pattern, but Reproach them for tame
Fools, as I have my self heard some Censuring those Famous Soldiers of the
Thebean Legion, I shall give you further to understand, that our Predecessors
in the Faith were not so weak, not so Stoical, not so Prodigal of their
Estates, nor weary of their Lives, but so far as the Law of God, and the
Political Government gave them leave, were as brisk in their own Defense, and
as tender of their Natural and Civil Interests as we can be. Of which I shall
offer to you a plain Demonstration ^ut of Scripture, the more fully to explain
and prove my Answer to this second Query. The Apostle Paul and Acts 16.
Silas having been Imprisoned and Whipped at Philippi, unheard, uncondemned; that
is, contrary to Law; the Magistrates, upon second and better thoughts, being
Conscious that they had exceeded their Commission, as part of amends, and to
stop their Legal Complaints, sent to have them dismissed privately. But Paul, who
could resent an Injury as well as any among us, was not so senseless and stark
Mad, to let this pass without taking Notice, but valuing his Ease, and his
Liberty, and his Roman Privileges better than so, stands upon his terms, and
requiring at least some Honorable Satisfactions, sends them this Courageous
Message -- They have beaten us openly uncondemned, Ver. 37.
being Romans, and have cast us into Prison; and now do they thrust us out
privately? Nay verily but let them come themselves and fetch us out; which the
Magistrates were forced to condescend unto, no doubt acknowledging their own
Rashness, and begging Pardon, entreated them quietly to depart. Somewhat alike
Story you will meet with in the 22 th. of the Acts, and in the 19 th. where
Paul Appealed unto Caesar. But when he stood before the High Priest, and was
commanded Acts 23. 2.
to be smitten on the Mouth, Humane Infirmity, and sudden Passion provoked him
to speak unadvisedly with his Lips, so as neglecting, or forgetting his Duty,
he burst out into these words, God shall smite Ver. 3.
thee, thou whited Wall. Here the Supreme Magistrate (for as such was the High
Priest looked upon by the Jews, though limited) proceeded not according to Law;
on which Account Paul having Reproved him unmannerly, upon the very first check
and Intimation Ver. 5.
of hi^ ^ault confessed, I wist not, Brethren, that he was the High Priest: I
did not remember, nor carefully enough consider it with my self (for Paul could
not be Ignorant who he was) I acknowledge my Error, my Passion herein. And thus
he Argues at last Ver. 5.
against himself; It is written, thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy
People. Let us (my Brethren) Expound Paul's Doctrine by his Practice. What can
be the sense of these words, Let every Soul be subject to Higher Powers -- Be
subject to Principalities -- Obey Magistrates -- Submit your selves to, and
Honor the King -- Resist not the Ordinance? Even in the present Case put of
his Acting Illegally, it is so far from being Lawful to defend our selves, or
repel Injury by Force, that it is not permitted us so much as to Reproach him by
indecent Reflections on his Person, if the Apostles Practice may pass for a
good Comment upon his own Text. And let this suffice in Answer to the Second
Question.

I should now go on to two other remaining Queries, but it being not fit for me
to entrench farther upon your Patience, I shall reserve them to the Afternoon.
And for a Conclusion, shall beg leave to look back to what in the beginning I
took some little Notice of, and in a few words expostulate with our Adversaries
about those unreasonable Clamours they raise against us, who endeavor to
inform our Congregations of the Nature, Duty, and Necessity of Subjection to
the Higher Powers.

If indeed we would become Leaders of the People, and draw them forth into the
Wilderness, the Field of Rebellion, we need not then Question at our descent
from the Pulpit, but to meet with the Praises of Men for quitting our selves so
dexterously in the behalf of the good of the People, as some Men are pleased to
call Faction. Might we Preach to the People what is grateful to their Ears and
corrupt Hearts, our Task would be easy, our Labors acceptable, and in some
measure successful. If we could, or might be so wise in our Generation, as to
suit our Discourses to the prevailing Distemper of the Times, letting our words
drop smoothly, and our Doctrine run down gently with the Stream of Popular
Humor: I am sensible we should be hugged, as Men of Temper, Peaceable and
Moderate Men, Men that meddle not with the Times or State Affairs: That is in
Truth, that say nothing; that is, nothing to purpose; that is, nothing toward
the Information and Amendment of the present Disorders among us. We might then
be an happy sort of Men, always in Favor, and evermore surrounded with
Applauses, which are the most bewitching Temptations to sinful Silence and
Moderation falsely so called. Had I ex. gr. no call to this. Public Performanc^
here, did I not verily think it both seasonable, and my indispensable Duty to
urge the Doctrine of obedience to the Higher Powers at this time, I might have
remained lurking at home quiet, not have raised the malice and hatred of this
pievish Generation against me, nor drawn upon my self the odious Character of
being a Tory, and a Sycophant. I might have been content with my private
solitude, sometimes with Democritus, Laughing at the Folly and Madness of this
unquiet World, sometimes with Heraclitus bewailing the Giddiness of the sinful
People, and daily in my Closet, with the Prophet imploring the Mercy of God
upon this miserable Nation.

But it is otherwise with me and the rest of my Brethren in the Ministry, we
are not to be afraid of the faces of men through Cowardice, nor seek their
commendation by Treachery and Compliance.

It is our work and business, which God has ordained us to, and strictly
requires at our hands, to watch over Men's Souls, as they that must give an
account, to instruct, to rebuke, and to reform their evil ways, however
dangerous it may be to us, or displeasing to them. And so much the stronger
obligation lies upon us to Preach up any Evangelical Precept, by how much the
more we see the Peoples Principles and Practices running counter to the
Doctrine of the Gospel. To affirm (as many do) that this is not to Preach
Christ and the Faith in Christ is mere Ignorance, to say no worse of it. As if
to Preach the Doctrine of Christ and the Gospel Precepts was not to Preach the
Faith in Christ. St. Luke, I am sure long since thought so. Acts 24. 24, 25.
He has told us that Felix sent for Paul and heard him concerning the Faith in
Christ. What was the Subject of the Apostles Sermon? 'Twas -- Righteousness,
Temperance and Judgment to come. So that if to reason of Righteousness, and
Temperance, be to Preach the Faith in Christ, then surely to plead for
Obedience to Authority, and patient suffering under Oppression is likewise to
Preach the Faith in Christ, I am therefore little concerned, when it is told me,
you lose this Friends kindness, that Neighbors good Opinion, you forfeit such
a Persons Favor by your indiscreet and resolute engagement on these ungrateful
Points. Alas, these are but Worldly motives, not worthy to be laid in the
Balance with a Man's Duty, the friendship James* 4. 4.
of Men being Enmity with God, and the Wisdom 1 Cor. 3. 19.
of this World Foolishness with him. The Favor of God and some few good Men,
the inward Peace and Satisfaction, that in simplicity and Godly sincerity, I
have held forth the words of Truth and Soberness; and the Recompense of Reward
promised to all the faithful dispensers of the Gospel, will infinitely outweigh
those* Vain and Momentary advantages. It is (I Will assure you) one great design
of the Gospel to settle the unstable minds of the Multitude in Civil Peace and
Patient Obedience, to compose them unto cheerfulness, and a readiness unto
every good work. And it is by consequence our Duty, and ought to be our
endeavor to Promote the same to the utmost of our Power, to put an hook in the
Nostrils of the Leviathans of our unhappy Age, to chastise such as make sport
and play the Wantons in the Disturbances of the Commonwealth. Thus much I here
freely confess, concerning the Nature and Design of the Gospel, and our Duty:
and think it so far from being an Objection against the truth of the Revelation
of Jesus Christ, or a Crime in us, that it is its singular Excellency, and ought
to be accounted our Glory and Commendation; whatever the conceited Atheists,
the profane Wits, and the busy Pamphleteers of these days say to the contrary.
For is it not reasonable thus to Judge, of the Wisdom, and Righteousness, and
Goodness of God? That he who Matthew. 6.
takes care of the Lillies of the Field, of the Sparrow on the House top, and
numbers the very Hairs of our Head; that he who regards every particular Man's
welfare, and is pleased to make known our mutual Duty one toward another in our
private Relation, should much more provide for the Honor and safety of
Principalities and Powers, of the Public Peace and the relative Offices
between the Prince and the Subject. Is not this Public, this General good of
infinite more Value to the World, and more worthy the Providential care and
gracious regard of God by Revelation? He that Quarrels the Gospel (and all
Revelation) as a Trick of State, a Politic contrivance of Priests, and Damns
the Ministers of the Gospel, as base Instruments of the Princes Tyranny,
because both it and they teach Obedience to the Sovereign Magistrate; may as
well argue against our Religion and us, because we instruct Children to Obey
their Parents, Servants to be subject to their Masters, and exhort you all to
mutual Love, Peace, Charity, Justice and Uprightness one toward another. I
maintain then, that Peace on Earth, National Peace, is one principal aim of our
Christianity, one of the Chief blessings designed us here below, by Christ's
appearance in the Flesh, and was the argument of the Heavenly Host's, Anthem at
his Birth. And oh! How beautiful on the Mountains are the feet of them that
bring good Tidings, and publish Peace? who in the Name of God charge the People
with the Kings Peace.

Ay but (say some) these Priests are always meddling with the Municipal Laws of
the Land, obtruding upon their Auditors such discourses, as would beseem the
Reverend Judges on the Bench, rather than Ministers in the Pulpit. This
exception (I confess) implies too much of Commendation, tho it carries little
of truth in it. However (since it is made use of against us) why (I beseech you)
may not we acquaint our selves and those that hear us (when the Argument leads
us to it, and since our adversaries require it) with the Law, which is in part
the measure of our Subjection to Civil Authority; as well as others Examine the
Gospel, which is the Rule of their Obedience to God, and to their Church
Governors? Or how is it possible for us, to state the question aright? Unless
we first inform the Conscience of the Law of the Land, which (as many contend)
is the only Standard of our Duty to the Prince.

But it is yet farther Objected. You are such sticklers, so restless on this
Point, that your Sycophancy is manifest, and your Harangues become Nauseous to
the Peoples Stomachs. Ay, and will be so, as long as we thwart their quarrelsom
Humor, as long as we oppose their turbulent Practices against the present
Powers. Is there not reason, a necessity for us so to do? Are there not more
Underminers of the Government, than Preachers of Submission to Authority? Are
there not more Libels sent forth to overturn the present Establishment, than
Sermons to uphold the Peace and Order of the State? Yea, are not the Enemies of
Peace more apparently guilty of Flattery? whilst they fawn on the Multitude,
Court the Populace, Cajole the People, and raise the Mobile into Discontent and
Mutiny, still keeping them in continual Motion, still Heightening their Fears,
and Alaruming them with the Prospect of remote dangers: and by these little
Arts improving their instability and suspicions of danger, (which blessed be
God, is acknowledged uncertain and at a distance) even to the present disquiet
of the Nation: Foolishly anticipating their own misery, and bereaving us all of
our present happiness, by too careful a providence of future troubles; whereas
Wisdom its self has said, that we must Matthew. 6. 34.
not take care of to morrow* and sufficient to the day is the evil thereof.

And why (forsooth) should we for discharging our Duty, be thus maliciously
slandered, as Hypocrites and Court-flatterers? Did Paul flatter Nero in his
Epistle to the Romans? It cannot be imagined. Did Peter flatter all the Princes
and Magistrates in Pontus, 1 Epist. 1,
Asia, Galatia, Cappadocia and Bithynia (to the Christians of which Provinces
he wrote, as you learn in the Preamble of that Epistle?) It cannot be supposed.
Did Paul here in the Text, put Titus upon that Unchristian, Servile, that
Unmanly art of Flattery? It cannot be thought. Or was our blessed Savior
himself a Flatterer, when he bids the Jews -- give unto Caesar; the things that
are Caesar 's? Surely none will dare to harbor so mean, so Blasphemous
thoughts of the Son of God. In fine were all the Bishops, Priests, and Holy Men
of Old, that laid down their Lives for the Faith, Parasites? Was Tertullian a
Sycophant? who Apologizing for the Christians thus boasts on their behalf -- We
Christians adore the Righteous Judgment of God, who has Ordained the Emperor to
Govern the Nations: We Christians are Enemies to none, no not to the Emperor,
who is appointed Ruler over us by God, and it is our duty to Love, Reverence,
Honor, and wish him Prosperity: We Christians in the first place Reverence and
Obey God, and next unto him the Emperor.

Is this Flattery? Was this an unfaithful Representation of the Christians
Loyalty in those Days? In no wise. To make an end of this Apology, If the
Primitive Fathers and Noble Martyrs, if the Holy Apostles, if the Blessed Jesus
were Sycophants, then, O my Soul, come not thou into their Secrets: Mine
Honor, be not thou United to their Assemblies, who whilst we are laboring for
Peace, make themselves ready for Battle. I had much rather be reckoned among
those Hypocrites, and to have my Portion with those Glorious Transgressors.
This short Defense of my self and Brethren will not (I hope) be accounted
unseasonable; nor can it be looked upon as impertinent to the Text, if it be
well considered, as no question it will be by so Judicious an Audience. If then
it be right in the sight of God, to Obey Man rather than God; to follow the
People in their Turbulency, rather than the Apostles Canon of putting them in
mind to be subject to Principality, etc. Judge ye.

Sermon III.
Titus 3. Ver. 1. Put them in Mind to be subject, etc.
IT must be confessed that all Parties among us acknowledge (in general)
Obedience due to the Supreme Magistrate; but in the mean time are so miserably
Divided in Opinion, in what Person or Persons the Supreme Power is Lodged, that
(as our Lord Prophetically describing the Heresies and Divisions of the Church,
fore-tells that one Separation would cry, lo, here is Christ; another, lo, he
is there: Even thus it fares with us at this day, as to the Higher Power.) We
are not yet agreed among our selves, to whom the Supreme Authority of the
Nation belongs, nor by Consequence know, how far Non-resistance of the Prince
in our present Constitution is Obligatory. Those who of late have wrote on this
Argument, have so unmercifully tormented the Doctrine of Subjection with
distinctions, that it is as hard to come to the knowledge of our Duty, what
Governors we are to obey, where and when, how, and in what Case, in what sense
and degree Resistance is Unlawful, as it is to find the true Doctrine of the
Gospel in the Schoolmen, or to direct the Conscience in the Practice of
Holiness out of the Jesuits Morals. This Evangelical Precept is so strangely
Wire-drawn, brought into so narrow compass, that I cannot apprehend what tie
can be laid upon the Subject, since it is impossible, but upon some pretense or
other a Factious Spirit may still allege something to Justify his Rebellion:
For most of these Disputers about the Nature of our Government, do still center
and agree upon this one Pestilent and Ruining Principle, That the People by the
Law of Nature, by the first Reason of Government, by a Moral transcendent Power
(not expressed, but necessarily employed in every Political Constitution) are
their own Judges; what their Rights and Privileges are, when Property is
Invaded, when Religion is in danger to be Subverted, when Liberty of Conscience
is Violated, and when their Civil and Spiritual Interests may forcibly be
maintained. How of late was Obedience to the Higher Powers run down with full
Cry, forced to skulk, and pass along the Streets in Masquerade? And sometimes
to Attire her self in the Harlotry and Disguise of Rebellion its self? So that
an inquisitive Man would have been puzzled to discover her, as much as Diogenes
was to find out an Honest Man, or Elijah another besides himself, that had not
bowed the Knee to Baal. The Matter is (Blessed be God) somewhat amended among
us in appearance: Yet because it is to be feared that there are still many
tainted with Factious Principles (a very little of which, like the Leaven of
the Pharisees, is able to Leaven and Corrupt the whole Lump) since many
ignorant People know not which way to turn themselves, nor whose Servants they
are, whom they ought to Obey. I shall now proceed farther on the Argument of
Non-resistance, and endeavor to resolve two other Queries relating thereunto:
The first of which is,

What if the Supreme Power sets up Idolatry? What if he become an Enemy to
Godliness, a Betrayer of the true Reformed Religion of the Nation? Still I
Reply, he is thy Natural Liege Prince, and the Ordinance of God. When the
Citizens of Delphi, upon the approach of Xerxes in his Formidable Invasion of
Greece, Consulted the Oracle, what course they should take for the preservation
of their Religion, their Sacred (...). Herod. lib. 8. cap. 36.
Relics? They received this Answer -- God is able to provide for the Security
of his own Honor and Worship. It Is not unlikely those wretched People were
more sollicitous about the (...), those Rich Presents, and Inestimable
Treasures, which had been sent to the Idol by Croesus and other Superstitious
Princes, more than for the Honor of God. And so I fear it is with most among
us, whatever Zeal they make show of for the Preservation of Religion, and the
Glory of God; the care of their Wealth and Estates is at the bottom of all,
which indeed they are not ashamed in their Discourses many times to own. But
whatever it be, and though the Oracle of the Devil seems to deny that People
Liberty of using Lawful means for the Security of their Religious Treasure (for
certainly 'twas Lawful for them to defend both against the Power and Avarice of
an Invader, either by hiding it in the Earth, or removing it into a more safe
place, which was the only Question put to the Oracle) yet certainly the
Infallible Oracles of God does not allow us to maintain his Honor by
dishonouring, and illegal Resistance of our Natural Prince: (For God himself is
able to defend it, and has taken it into his own immediate Protection, if the
Prince apostatizes.) Nor may we upon Pretense of the purity of Divine Worship
renounce our Lawful Sovereign.

That Dominion is founded in Grace is as wild a Paradox as that other of its
being founded in Property, and is so much the more dangerous, in that being the
Manufacture of Rome, and transported hither by their Spiritual Merchants, the
Jesuits, is bought up greedily by our zealous Hucksters, the true Protestant
Dissenters. So far indeed the Government is beholden to them, that they have
almost monopoliz'd the Commodity. But, my Brethren, ye have not, I hope, so
Learned Christ. I do not read, that our Lord or his Apostles give us leave, nor
Encouragement to propagate Christianity by the Sword, or to defend the Gospel
by Tumult and Railing at Superiors, or Threatening to advance another on the
Throne, whom we shall please to canonize for a Saint, contrary to the Known and
Fundamental Law of Succession. Peter, who mistaking Christ's meaning, when he
bad the Disciples to furnish themselves with Swords, briskly cut off Malchus's
Ear, but received this Check -- Matthew. 26. 52.
Put up thy Sword. It Is worth our while to take a view of our Lords Discourse
and Behavior on this Occasion. For, says he, they that take the Sword, shall
perish by v. 52. 53. 54.
the Sword. Think thou not, that I can pray to my Father, and he shall
presently give me more than twelve Legions of Angels for my Defense? But how
then shall the Scripture be fulfilled? It was not then (as some are pleased to
affirm of the Primitive Saints) for want of Power that our Lord would not
resist, but in Conscience to the Ordinance, and in Obedience to the Authority
of the Priests. Besides, Christ to make amends for the rashness of that hot
headed Disciple was pleased by a miraculous Cure of the Wound to repair that
public Injury and Breach of the Peace (for such it was, Malchus being one of
the High Priests Servants.) This (I imagine) gave such Satisfaction on all
sides, as you read not that the Crime was ever laid to Peter's Charge, nor rose
up in Judgment against our Savior. Hence it is very probable that St. Peter
afterward became a most Zealous Assertor of the Doctrine of Subjection, as you
will find in his first Epistle. The Children of Israel under Pharaohs hard
Bondage cried unto the Lord? And God undertook their Deliverance: not by
Encouraging them to resist the King, and disturb the Peace by Rebellion. But
sending Moses and Aaron to supplicate in their behalf. God himself condescended
to send Ambassadors to him, and became a peaceable Intercessor for them. And
lest Pharaoh (as he did) should look upon Moses's Message as a Sham, and his
Miracles, as the Magical Tricks of an Aspiring Spirit, how did God Evidence the
Truth thereof? With what Power and Might, and outstretched Arms did the Lord of
Hosts second his Petitions? All the Resistance they offered was but running
away, and that too by the special Appointment of God. When the Tyrant pursued
them, (tho in a warlike Posture and Able in some Measure to sell their Lives at
a dear rate, yet) they did not lift up their Hands against the Kings Army. And
when it must needs be, God contrived and wrought their Deliverance without
their active Resistance, or the Breach of the Peace, himself overthrowing
Pharaoh and his Egyptians in the Red Sea. God, who is the Author of Peace and
Order, the Ordainer of Government, seems always to have been so tender in this
Point, that he never has made use of his supreme Power and Prerogative, so as
to Commission or Justify any Subject in their Resistance of the Higher Powers,
no not when the Higher Powers have been rejected, and their Successors
appointed by God himself. The Israelites petitioned Rehoboam for redress of
Grievances, and after denial, ten Tribes revolted, but the Spirit of God has
all along termed it Rebellion. Show me (if it be possible) one single Instance
in all the Changes of Government among them, where God contrived, or
countenanc't, or the Spirit of God has commended or excused the Usurpation. But
this Point has been so learnedly handled, and so fully demonstrated by many
Excellent Pens of late, that I think it needless at Present to enlarge my self
farther on this Subject.

If it be objected that our Case is different from the Apostles and Primitive
Christians, our Religion being the Religion of the State established by Law:
(And blessed be God it is so. Let our Mouths be filled with Laughter, and our
Tongues with Joy. Let our Hearts be enlarged with Thankfulness to God, and the
King for this Unvaluable Blessing. But if for our Unworthiness and
Unfruitfulness under this Spiritual Advantage, God as a Punishment of our Sins
shall please to turn the Hearts of our Rulers, against us and the Truths we
profess) What then? May we revile them; may we by force resist them; may we
secretly conspire against them; may we murder or eject them? (God forbid.)
Religion upon pretense of being the established Law of the Land has no better
Security thereby, than those Laws by which we lay claim to our Temporal
Interests. It is then only to be considered as such, as to the Formal Nature,
tho not as to the subject Matter of it. So that look how we are to demean our
selves toward our Governors upon the Violation of our Civil Rights (of which
I discoursed in the Forenoon) the same Course we must take upon their Breach of
Trust in our Spiritual. We must by no means resist, affront, or libel them. We
must not bring railing Accusations, nor vent venomous and spiteful Words
against their Honor, Safety and Government. One Special Advantage we have as
to our Religious concerns above our Temporal, sc. the Promise of the more
immediate Care and Protection of God, whose we are, and whom we serve, which is
an Anchor of the Soul both sure and steadfast: that if the Earthly Defender of
our Faith leaves us, God himself will receive us under his Wings, and at last
crown our Sufferings, with a far more Exceeding and Eternal Weight of Glory.
But,





but not when the Officer is Legally Commissionated. Because, that would be a
Breach of the Public Peace, and a Subversion of the Government by Tumult and
Rebellions.

and defending my self, as the Law of the Land permitts me, and as the Law of
Nature, Self-preservation guides me. These things premised, I return to my
resolution of the Query propounded, i. e. That upon the infringement of our
Liberties, or encroachments upon our Civil Interests, we may in no wise
forcibly resist the Kings Legal Ministers, however Exorbitant and Arbitrary
they are in the execution of their Power. The reasons of this conclusion are as
follow:

1. Because the holy Scripture has plainly laid down our duty of Obedience and
Non-resistance of the Subordinate, as well as of the Supreme Magistrate.

Thus much I hinted in the explication of the Text, that when St. Paul with so
much variety of Phrase directs Titus to put the Cretians in mind, that they be
Subject to Principalities and Powers, and Obey Magistrates, he cannot in my
Judgment be thought to trifle so long, and by Principalities, Powers and
Magistrates, in the Plural number, only intend all that while the person of the
Emperor. He must also mean the Subordinate Ministers in Crete. Besides I
cannot conceive that the Apostle should intend to admonish them of their duty
toward the Emperor only, and to have so little regard to the Public Peace,
as to permit them upon every disgust and grievance, to move Sedition against
the Pro-praetors or Deputy Governors of that Island. But I will not insist
upon this conjectural Interpretation, however unquestionable it seems to me. 1
Pet. 2. 13* 14.
Yet St. Peter is most express herein -- Submit your selves to the King as
Supreme, and to Governors as unto them that are sent by him, i. e. unto
Subordinate Magistrates and Judges commissioned by the King. Lastly, I observe
St. Paul exhorts that Supplications 1. Tim. 2. 1. 21.
and Prayers, Intercessions and Thanksgivings be made for Kings, and for all
that are in Authority. Pray for them we must, not fight against them, which
will appear from the reason enforcing this Precept.

To this end we are commanded to Pray for them -- that we may live quiet and
peaceable lives in all Godliness and Honesty. But if we should Pray for them
and at the same time rise up against them, our Actions would contradict our
Prayers, we should undo with our hands, what we are bound to interceed for with
our Charles 5th.
Hearts and Lips; we should frustrate the design of our own Intercessions: an
Hypocrisy as impious in us, as 'twas Ridiculous in that Emperor, who detained
the Pope in Prison, and yet commanded Prayers to be made for his enlargement.
The late Writers about Subjection (the more moderate of them, who maintain the
People to have a Power of resisting only the Subordinate Ministers of the King,
his destructive Counselors and Agents) seldom or never take notice of these
passages in the word of God, as far as I have observed; especially not that of
St. Peter upon which I lay the greatest stress of my argument, and think it
unanswerable. He certainly knew best and more exactly weighed our Lords
Doctrine, who first violated this Evangelical Canon in cutting off Malchus's
Ear (the High Priests servant) and was roundly reproved by Christ for so doing.
And why St. Peter's pretended Successors and their Disciples should so far
forget themselves, as to run into the same excess, as their first Founder did,
and yet not, as he did, renounce their error, but stand obstinately in the
defense of themselves, no other reason can be given, but their blind Zeal of
propagating Religion by the Sword, since reason and argument and exemplary
Lives (which are the most powerful and the only Gospel motives to persuade)
having so long since failed them. For my own part I doubt not to affirm, that
as the King within his own Dominions is the Image and Representative of God in
the Government of the People; so are the inferior Magistrates the Image and
Representatives both of God and the King: that as the Supreme Governor is Gods
immediate Ordinance, so are they, that are sent by him, the mediate and
derivative Ordinance of God. To deal freely with you, I question not that
Obedience and Subjection in all its branches, in its utmost latitude is due to
one as well as the other: that in case of the greatest outrages committed by them
either through neglect, or mistake, or Passion, or private Interest or Revenge,
or Servile Flattery of the Princes Humor, the Subject ought not to seek
redress but by such Peaceable methods as the Law prescribes and allows: that in
the mean time he ought to abstain from Violent Defense and Active Resistance.
For so is the Will of God, that we suffer Patiently, that we Honor and
Reverence, not Revile, not Libel the Persons of the Subordinate Governors,
sent or commissioned by the King. Let no one think here to avoid the strength
of this Scripture argument, by distinguishing between the Government of an
absolute Arbitrary Prince, such were the Emperors of Old, and a mixed or
limited Government, as our's is at this day. This makes no difference, gives
the Subject no Privilege of resisting the Kings Ministers The Power of the
Subordinate Magistrate, is of the same Nature in both these Governments,
limited in the former by the will of the Emperor, in his public Edicts, and
private Instructions; limited in the latter by the known Laws of the Nation,
let the Prince be Arbitrary, or not, still his Ministers are always limited:
though they transgress and depart from their Rule, the People has in neither
case Liberty, turbulently to defend themselves, with the breach of the Public
Peace, the preservation whereof is still the Fundamental Principle and Care of
every Government, whether Absolute or Limited. For which reason the Subjects in
the Roman State were directed to appeal unto Caesar as their last refuge, and
we in this Nation unto the Kings Supreme Court of Justice as our only remedy
against injury; if they failed, or we be disappointed of our expectations, we
have nothing more to do, than patiently to submit to the Will and Providence of
God. This I take to be St. Peter's Doctrine, and am sure was St. Paul's Practice,
as is before proved; and I lay it down as the first Reason of my resolution of
the Question under debate. We must not forcibly resist the inferior
Magistrates, because it is the express Doctrine of the Scripture.



But he who by Force resists the Kings Officers, Dishonours the Kings Person,
and Stains his reputation in all those respects: by his turbulency and sturdy
resistance of the Magistrate, he does in effect tell the World, that the King
is unable or unwilling to Protect him, resolved to crush and oppress him: He
thereby suggests the Higher Power, to be either Fool or Knave, or Tyrant, or
Perjured, under which imputations it is dishonorable for him to Lie. For no man
that thinks his Prince able to defend him, will Riotously defend himself. No
one that judges him upright, but will peaceably appeal to him, none that
believes him a Man of Honor and Conscience, will question to be relieved by
him, and his Superior Courts of Justice. In a word, there can be no resistance,
no affront Offered to the Kings Ministers, but tends directly to the Dishonor
of the Kings Person. The King has the same reason to complain of those that
Violently persecute his Ministers, as God had of the Israelites, whom nothing
would satisfy but to have Samuel deposed -- They have not rejected thee, but
they have rejected 1 Samuel 8. ^.
me. Against me principally is this Rebellion and Change of Government
designed. Every Indignity cast upon the Servant, reflects upon the Master, and
as Naturally and Necessarily ascends unto the Head, the Supreme Governor of
the Body Politic, as the pains and anguish of a wounded Member arises unto the
Head of a Natural Body. He that breaks my Bones and bruises my Flesh, and yet
tells me he is tender of my Head (the Seat of Sensation) may (if he please)
Value his wit upon the distinction, but cannot satisfy me thereby for the
injury done me. And again as upon pretense of Putrefaction to lop off all the
Members one after another, is certain destruction both to the Body and the
Head, which cannot consist without the Integral parts: so they who will never
acknowledge the Prince to have any faithful Servants and Counselors, but are
still ready to cut them off so soon as they are received into his Favor and
Service, whatever kindness they make show of to him; yet forcing him to be thus
Naked and to shift for himself, leaving him as it were to wander alone on the
Mountains, as a Partridg, to sit as a Pelicane in the Wilderness, or as an Owl
in the Desert, do indeed destroy the Government, and by Necessary Consequence
murder the Kings Person also. And if Reason will not, I am sure sad Experience
has once convinced us of this Truth.

their while to hazard their Lives and Fortunes by Civil Discord.

Pax bello potior seems to be a Rule almost without Exception: But that other
ex bello pax is a Motto fit only for Traitors and Ufurpers to stamp upon their
Medals. Let any understanding Man sit down, and with himself calmly consider,
how easy it is, when once the Sacred Bonds of Civil Peace are broke) for a
foreign Enemy to invade and enslave the Nation; what Devastations are made,
what Detriment sustained in private Estates, how much Time and Expense of
Treasure is required before any tolerable Settlement can be made; how easy it is
for the Conqueror to set up a Tyrannical and Arbitrary Government, which is
ofttimes the Issue of Domestic Wars; at least, how strangely the Government is
weakened, how universally the People are debauched, how difficult it is for them
to recover both their Public and Private Losses. Where is that wise Man, and
endued with Knowledge? Let him tell me, whether it is not much better, more
Honorable and Heroic to flying over Board all his Substance, yea and suffer
himself, with Jonah to be cast into the Sea, for the Preservation of his
Fellow-citizens, rather than the Ship of the Commonwealth should sink in the
Waves of Popular Insurrections.

The Safety therefore of the Government and of the Governors, and the Good of
the Governed being thus closely twisted with the Public Peace, they who take
upon them violently to resist and engage the People in Rebellion, do by
consequence overthrow the Ends of Society, and reduce us into that Condition,
(which some Men call the State of Nature,) wherein every Man having a General
Right to every thing, but a Particular Right to nothing, we sight and devour
one another. And which is the worst of all, when we are weary of our
Dissensions, and an End is put to the Quarrel, the Issue is seldom to the
Advantage of the Subject. We may alter the Government, but for the Worse: we
may change our Masters, but not ease our Shoulders from those Grievances, we
formerly groaned under. It Is easy to foresee these Inconveniences by the Eye
of Reason; and Experience, which is the Mistress of Fools, will abundantly
convince us of them. But,

Cook and other Learned Digesters of our Laws, nor to search the Rolls in the
Tower: Yet I hope I may be allowed to take my own Book into my Hand without
Offense, and put you in Remembrance of that Declaration and Acknowledgement,
which I have more than once made. You may meet with it in that Public Act
prefixed before the Liturgy in these Words -- I do declare that it is not Lawful
upon any Pretense, whatever to take Arms against the King, and that I do abhor
that Traitorous Position of Taking up Arms by his Authority against his Person,
or against those that are Commissionated by him. So that to take up Arms, to
resist the Kings Ministers, and Officers having his Commission, is Treason; To
maintain the Legality of it is traitorous, and to be abhorred. And hence you
see that 'twas no Crime, nor Scandal in sixty two to be an Abhorrer, even in
the Judgment of the Wisdom of the whole Nation. If I should be told, that this
Declaration was intended only for the Clergy and Schoolmasters to subscribe, I
shall acknowledge that True: but must by the way observe, what Opinion our
Lawgivers then had of those who would be thought the only Preachers of Christ
and him Crucified, but it seems were suspected as the vilest Disturbers of the
Government, and most dangerous Incendiaries of the Commonwealth. And since so
great Trust is reposed in those who take upon them these Employments, since
they have Opportunity (if they will) to debauch the Understandings of their
Disciples, our Lawgivers judged it necessary to oblige them to that
Declaration, and only to admit such, of whose Fidelity to the Peace of the
Nation they were assured, and of whose endeavors of instilling no turbulent
and treasonable Principles into the Ears and Minds of the People they were
competently secure. However tho the Clergy and Schoolmasters only are obliged
unto that Acknowledgement; yet if the Taking up Arms against those that are
Commissionated by the King is to be abhorred by us, and is in its self
traitorous, then certainly no Subjects ought to resist the Kings Ministers: the
Position of its Lawfulness being Traitorous, the Execution thereof can be no
less then Treason. But that the People may Lawfully and Conscientiously commit
Treason, is a Solaecism in Government as well as Heresy in Divinity. Hence the
Fancy of the Author of that Book, entitled A Treatise of Monarchy, is
plainly confuted, who argues tho not for a Legal Power expressed in the Political
Contract, yet for a Moral, Natural Transcendent Power (employed in all
Constitutions) for the People to resist the Kings Ministers and Destructive
Instruments. To assert this Lawful upon any pretense, whatever is you see
traitorous, the enterprice is therefore Treason, strictly and expressly provided
against by the Law of the Land. So much for the Reasons of my Answer to this
Question.

And thus I have said, (as briefly, as I could) what I thought fit upon this
Argument, expecting now to be answered in the Words of the Disciples -- This is
an hard Saying, who can hear it? What? may we not defend our selves against
Manifest Injury, against Unsupportable Oppression, when all other Relief is
denied us, when there is no other Way left to avoid the Miseries of Tyranny and
Slavery? If this be our Case, who are Christians (as you have stated it,) then
farewell all our Temporal Interests, we are then the most wretched People in
the World. With what ease than may ambitious Men and corrupt Magistrates
trample on us? Where is the Law of Nature, that Great, that Royal Law of self
Preservation? In Answer hereunto, I shall readily grant, that it is an hard
Chapter, not easily read or believed, not willingly digested by Flesh and
Blood. It Is one of those high and difficult Points, which I do not expect
should take Root in the Heart of every Half-thick Christian and temporary
Believer. Either the wicked one Will catch away this Seed sown, or Persecution,
or the Cares of this Life, or the Deceitfulness of Riches, or the Love of
themselves and of this World will choke it. But I would desire Men of
Understanding and Integrity (for that such only I can hope to prevail,) to
recollect my reasons; and moreover to consider with themselves, how that there
are many other strict Precepts laid upon us by our blessed Lord, no less
difficult in themselves, and altogether as repugnant to the Law of Nature Self
preservation. How often, how peremptorily are we commanded in general to
crucify our selves to the world, and the world to us? to mortify our earthly
members, to moderate our selves in the desire and fruition even of such things
which nature prompts us to, and allows us; to vanquish our Passions, which, as
the Wise man tells us, is a more heroic achievement than to conquer a City.
Prove. 16. 32.
How frequently are we directed to lay aside those inclinations, which Nature
and the God of Nature has implanted in us, to subdue those appetites which our
natural temper inclines us to, which Interest, Self love, and Self preservation
dictates to us? What a paradox is it the Natural man, yea to many Pretenders
unto strict Holiness to hear, that by the Doctrine of God our Savior, they
must not render evil for evil, nor 1 Pet. 3. 9.
railing for railing, but contrariwise blessing? That they must not be their
own Judges, nor revenge their own Romans 12. 19.
quarrels; that being the prerogative of God, and is only communicated to our
earthly Governors? What will these men say or think, when I shall put them in
mind of that restraint God has laid on us all, how he has limited the Natural
Law of preserving our selves? When I shall repeat those excellent Sayings of
Christ and his Apostles; If thine Enemy hunger, feed him; if Ver. 20.
he thirst, give him drink. Love your Enemies, bless them Matthew. 5. 44.
that curse you, do good to them that hate you, pray for them that despitefully
use you and persecute you? What can the Troublers of our Israel answer, if I
help them to remember the prudent Caution of the Apostle, of abstaining 1 These.
5. 22.
from all appearance of evil; those admirable Passages, 1 Pet. 3. 17. 1 Cor. 6.
7. Matthew. 5. 39.
that it is better to suffer for well-doing than for evildoing: Why do you not
rather take wrong? To him that smites thee on the right cheek turn the other
also? When and where (I pray) and in what Relation are these Gospel Precepts
applicable to us, if not in our Political State? And is it not much more
reason, that we avoid appearance of evil, and offenses toward our Superiors
and Rulers, than toward one another? To suffer patiently from the Civil
Magistrate, to take wrong from the Kings Ministers rather than from our equals
and Fellow Subjects? I can never enough admire the confidence of some men, who
are not ashamed to ascribe Plat. Red.
the preservation of Gospel Holiness solely to the Dissenters amongst us;
whereas I cannot discern the Spirit of the Gospel among them at all. Where
almost will you find that Modesty, Humility, Peaceableness, Gentleness,
easiness to be Entreated, Moderaton, Obedience, Condescension (I shall for once
on this occasion call it so) unto Governors which are required in the
Scriptures, and are reckoned up as the fruits of the Spirit? I would once again
here ask, Why may not our Religion be supposed to restrain and interpret the
general Law of Nature Self preservation, in the point of Subjection and
Non-resistance of Authority, as well as in the case of private Revenge? Why
should we not be thought obliged to cut off one of our hands, or feet, Matthew.
5. 29.
and to pluck out our right eyes (those darling, useful and necessary Members)
for the sake of Public Peace, as well as to avoid Private Offenses.

It is no small argument to me of the Wisdom and Goodness of God in setting his
stamp and approbation upon the precept of Subjection; that to our own personal
Contracts he has superadded an immediate tie of Conscience in the Revelation of
his Will: That God, who best knows our Hearts, the frowardness of our Wills,
the violence of our Passions, the stubborness of our Affections, what Lovers of
our selves we naturally are, what partial Judgers of our own Rights and
Interests, has therefore thought good to enclose that Law of Nature Self
preservation, allowing it unto us in no case to the breach or hazard of the
public Peace of the Commonwealth. And if I may not defend my self against the
injuries of my private Brother and Fellow Citizen, but as the Law and the Peace
of the State permits, how shall I challenge that Liberty in a violent and
tumultuous resistance of the Civil Magistrate? God, who is a God of Order and
not of Confusion, has himself so disposed and methodiz'd the Polities and
earthly Governments of men, as that it is impossible (if we would
Conscienciously attend our duty) that Wars, and Fightings, and cutting of
Throats should in any wise be justifiable. If so, then Government is defective
and in effect dissolved; then is not Magistracy the Ordinance of God, but at
the Will of the People, and alterable at their pleasure, when ever they think
fit to quarrel at the Princes conduct, or at his Ministers pretended outrages
and encroachments. For where every one may do what is right in his own eyes,
that State which admits the Subject in any case whatever to call the Rulers to
account, to punish or to dethrone them, or to make any violent changes in the
Commonwealth, there is no Government at all among them, but Anarchy and
Confusion, and every evil work. But

To draw to a Conclusion, these Discourses (I confess) administer but cold
Comfort to the greatest part of men, who (like Beasts) live by Sense and not by
Reason, are led by an excessive Love of themselves, more than by the Will of
God, and the public good of Societies. What Security in the mean while (say
they) have we of our Liberties and Properties, of enjoying in any tolerable
measure the labor of our own hands, and of transmitting the benefit thereof to
posterity? I answer, You have all the Security this uncertain world can afford.
You have the Almighty God Psalm. 76. 12.
taking care of you, in whose hands are the Spirit of Princes, and he will
restrain them. His word and promise is engaged. His hands are not short that
they cannot save, neither are his ears heavy that they cannot hear. You have
his Almighty Power to rely on, his Unsearchable Wisdom to depend on, his
Infinite Goodness to shelter you, his Truth and Faithfulness to trust in, and
the eyes of his Providence continually watching over you. You have the
consideration of the natural frailty of your earthly Governors to comfort and
to uphold you. Though they are Gods, bearing the image of God in the Political
Government, yet are they but Psalm. 82. 7.
mere moral men, whose breath is in their Nostrils; they must die like men, and
fall like Princes. Look, how dies the greatest Potentate? even as the meanest
Subject. There will be no difference between you and them at the Great day, the
day of Judgment. They must (then at least whatever privilege they claim in this
life) give an account at the Tribunal of God, where there will be no respect of
persons, where there Cruelty and Tyranny (if they are guilty of any) and all
their Kingcraft and Mysteries of State will be disclosed, and must be answered.
The dread and expectation of which last Assizes will in a great measure check
their exorbitances, and put such manicles on their hands, that ofttimes the
things they would they cannot do; and what they would not, even that they do
against their wills.

Yet farther, you have the consideration of the sturdiness of many ill
principled Subjects among you, who (though not to be justified yet) are as a
bullwark to the peaceable and conscientious. There is a shrewd Proverb among
us, Oppression will make a Wise man mad, much more the Wicked and the
Rebellious. In the utmost extremities, there will rise up men (not strictly
conscientious, but) of undaunted natural spirit and courage, that will not
stick to break through all the honds of Duty and Obedience, and with the hazard
of their Lives and Fortunes endeavor to redress intolerable Grievances. And
thus their Sin through the righteous Judgment of God may prove the security.
But why do I mention these things? I see no necessity of this Discourse. I know
not wherefore we should entertain such odd suspicions of our Magistrates, as to
support our selves with the probability of their disasters. Let us be more just
and charitable toward them, accounting of them as men of Honor and Honesty as
well as our selves; that know their duty, and will laudably discharge it out of
a principle of Conscience. They cannot be ignorant of this one thing, that the
end of Government and the measure of their Power is the good of the People.
There is likewise the Oath of God upon them, that they will Govern according to
Law. And what other assurance would any man wish for? It Is more I am sure than
many among us will give for their peaceable demeanor. He that is not content
herewith it is impossible to satisfy him, except by delivering up the reigns of
Government into his hand, and then the Subject can still have no better
security than an Oath. An Oath is the end of all strife among men, and it is the
highest Assurance God has or can give us of the righteousness of his Government
and Providence. He that thinks not this sufficient is not fit to live in this
world, unworthy to enjoy the Society of men, and the benefit of Government.
Besides, it is the Interest of Governors that the Subjects Rights and
Properties be maintained, that they should be secured and encouraged in their
Labors, and reap the fruit of their Industry and Improvements, the Riches of
the People being the Glory, the Strength, and the Riches of the Prince; and
therefore if Conscience will not, yet at least his Interest will incline him
unto moderation in the exercise of Dominion. I shall yet farther add, that you
have the Security of your Fellow Subjects, such I mean as are wise and
conscientious, that will not be destructive instruments, nor actively assist in
oppressing the people contrary to Law. As for others, Fear will in some measure
check many of them, and the Law of the Land will curb them. The cries of the
afflicted Subjects will at length reach the ears of the Prince, and necessity
of State will prevail with him to deliver up his evil Counselors as a
sacrifice to the peoples discontents. Yea (as the case now stands with us) the
Kings Officers, though commissionated by him being punishable by Law, as I take
it, for their illegal proceedings, there is little ground to fear, it is hardly
possible any barbarous or unsupportable mischief should arise in our
Government; and the most that can in likelihood happen, will be much more
eligible than the breach of the public Peace, and the violent overthrow of the
present Establishment.

Finally, my Brethren, give me leave to add; count me not a flatterer if I
speak it out of the reach of his Sacred Ears, when I consider the person of our
present Prince, the sweetness of his Nature, our long experience of the
mildness of his Government, the blessings of Peace, plenty and increase of
Trade, which we have long enjoyed under him: When I recollect how strictly and
impartially righteousness and justice is executed among us, he seldom or never
obstructing the course of the Law; except it be in extending his mercy and
pardon to unfortunate Criminals, which is the height and pride of his good
nature; and wherein he may be said truly to resemble God himself. But otherwise
let me ask you, whose Ox has he taken, whose Ass has he seized, who has he
Defrauded or Oppressed, whose Life, whose Property has he invaded, whose
Liberty has he illegally or unreasonably restrained in Prison, or in Exile?
When I remember his Charity in forgiving us, his Readiness to oblige us, the
fresh assurances we have of his Governing by Law; when I here of foreign
Princes admiring his Wisdom, and courting his Friendship, as much perhaps as
Sheba did Solomon's; when I see the miserable and afflicted Subjects of other
Nations seeking and finding shelter under his wings; when I read those but just
thanks and commendations they return him, whilst they admire the prudence and
moderation of his Conduct, the protection and quietness we our selves receive
from him: Yea, when in a Seditious Author, I met with this Testimony of his
Royal Grace and goodness, -- That he never made use of his Negative Voice, or
denied his Assent but to one public Act only: And whereas one of the worst of
his Enemies has allowed him this Character, That he is a Prince under whose
displeasure his adversaries fall gently. In fine, since I cannot but behold and
admire his Wisdom in the choice of the subordinate Magistrates, whose Piety,
Learning and Integrity is conspicuous amongst us, I cannot forbear, not only
out of duty to the Divine Ordinance, but in gratitude and thankfulness to God
and the King, acknowledge our present happiness and security: Not only put you
in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, and to obey Magistrates;
but also offer up my Prayers to God, -- That he would grant the King a long
Life and abundance of Years, at home Peace, and Victory abroad* a Loyal Senate,
and a faithful People, a quiet World, and a secure Reign: And in fine, that God
would inspire us all with such a measure of his Grace, that by our patience,
peaceableness and cheerful subjection, our present happiness may be continued
still longer unto us under his Government, and his Successors that shall come
after him; that we and the Ages to come may lead quiet and peaceable Lives, in
all godliness and honesty.

AMEN.

