A NEW VOYAGE TO THE EAST INDIES; Containing An Account of several of those
Rich Countries, and more particularly of the Kingdom of BANTAM.

Giving an Exact Relation of the Extent of that Monarch's Dominions, the
Religion, Manners and Customs of the Inhabitants; their Commerce, and the
Product of the Country, and likewise a faithful Narrative of the Kingdom of
SIAM, of the Isles of JAPAN and MADAGASCAR, and of several other Parts, with
such New Discoveries as were never yet made by any other Traveller.

The Second Edition, carefully Corrected, and much Enlarged.

By Mr. Glanius.

LONDON, Printed for H. Rodes, next door to the Bear Tavern near Bride Lane in
Fleetstreet 1682

TO THE READER.
THE Good Reception the World afforded to the First Impression of the greater
part of the following Sheets, has engaged me to send 'em again abroad, ina more
exact dress, and with considerable Additions. You will find in these Memoires a
number of things which have escaped the vigilance of all former Travelers.
First you have a Description of all the Islands of Cape-Verd; From whence the
Author Sailing to Madagascar, where he stays long enough to know the Quality of
the Country, and the Manners of the Inhabitants, whereof he gives so exact a
Description, that nothing seems to be omitted.

Then he pursues his Voyage to the Isle of Java Major, of which, and especially
of the Kingdom of BANTAM, he gives so particular an account, that it equally
serves to the Readers instruction and entertainment; is both profitable and
agreeable.

What he says afterward of SIAM, is no less useful and pleasant. He relates
circumstances of that Country as were not yet known; and the Description he
makes of it is so perfect and delightful, that it is easy to perceive he
himself took a singular pleasure therein. I say nothing of Formosa, whereof he
only speaks by the by, tho what he says thereof, teaches us that all Men are
not made after the same manner. He ends his Voyage with a Description of
Nanguesiaque, and of the Manners of the Japanezes, whereof he gives a pretty,
tho short account, knowing there have been great Volumes upon that Subject. And
this Edition being perfect and correct, I do not question but the Reader will
give it even a more favorable entertainment than the former; especially being
all along interwoven with such surprising Cercumstances and Stories, as will
undoubtedly render the perusal of it very delightful; particularly at this
Juncture, when an Ambassador from those Countries, does make People the more
desirous of an account of this nature.

A NEW VOYAGE TO THE EAST INDIES.
Sect. I.
THO I was Born with a desire of Traveling, yet there was little probability,
I could pursue my Inclinations: My Father not being Rich, and also considering,
I might be useful to him, and to the World, if I learnt an honest Trade, made
it his business to persuade me into an Apprentiship. What repugnance soever I
might have to that sort of Life, I was forced to obey, at first indeed with
much difficulty* imagining that employ would be an invincible hindetance to the
design I had* formed of seeing other Countries besides my own; but afterward
with delight, when my Reason made me know, that what I did, was so far from
being an obstacle to my Inclination, as it opened me a way to the Travels which
I meditated. As Soon as I perceived this, I was the more fervent and brisk at my
work; I became more tractable and more assiduous than before. I never heard the
Compass mentioned without feeling an extraordinary joy; and when I saw Marine
Cards, I could never be wear with looking on them. The passion of Voyaging did
so fortify it self in me with Age, that I had hardly attained Seventeen Years,
but I began to grow weary of the life I led. Methoughts it was time to think of
departing, the difficulty was to find the means of doing so, and procuring my
Fathers consent. Seeing very little likelihood of prevailing with him, I became
extreme Melancholy; the young people whose Company I frequented, knowing the
cause of my sadness, dissipated it by some Discourses, which revived my hopes
that were half dead* and as about that time I happened to let fly some words,
which might be ill interpreted; My Father reprehended me with so much severity,
that I left him immediately, and went to Amsterdam, where by good luck having
found, that two Ships were fitting out for Genoa, I engaged my self in one of
them in quality of Boatswain's Mate, being little concerned at the employ I had
in it, or the place whither I went, provided only that I might Travel.

On the 26th. of December in the Year 1667, having set Sail, we were hardly out
of the Texel, when we perceived that our two Ships were not well ballasted:
thus, the shortest way was to return from whence we came, for the taking in as
much Pewter and Chests of Quicksilver, as was requisite for the giving them
their just Weight. After which, we made Sail the second time, on the first of
Jan. in the following Year, in a time, when the Ice was extremely thick.

On the 10th. a quite contrary Wind constrained us to put in at Dunkirk* and
two days afterward, the Wind being better, we pursued our Course; but we went
not very far without being obliged to seek out a Haven to shelter us from the
foul Weather and a very furious Tempest. The Isle of Wight being pretty near,
we put in there and stayed until the 25th. When we weighed Anchor again, but
were not destined without impediment to continue our Course* for on the Morrow
the Wind came again to be so contrary, that we found it very difficult to get
into a Neighboring Haven.

At length on the 6th. of February we cast Anchor at Portland, from whence we
Sailed three days afterward; and on the 10. the Currents carried us into the
Bay of Gibraltar, because they were much stronger than the Wind; but on the
morrow the Wind made us overcom^ them, and was afterward so favorable to us,
that in fifteen days after we came into sight of Genoa, when we cast Anchor
behind the old Mole.

On the 29th. of the same Month, the Cargo of the two Ships being unload^ and
discharged, by reason the Republic bought those two Vessels which she
furnished with all manner of Ammuni*tion for three Years, and into each of
which she put an Hundred Men all Ger*mans, except some few Bandities. By this
means I became free much soone^ then I expected; but as this liberty di^ put a
stop to the Passion I had of going much farther, I re*ingaged my self therein.

While the Ships were fitting out, I satisfied the Curiosity I had a long time
of seeing that famous City. The Port on the South side is open, and beset in
several places with little Rocks, that lie even with the Water, and are
dangerous in Tempestuous Weather. It Is built like an Amphitheater round about
the Port, and is a most pleasing Prospect to the sight. It is about Ten Miles
in Compass, surrounded with good Walls; which however have not the appearance
of being able to hold out against a long Siege, at least, if the Besieged do
not make extraordinary Efforts to defend them. Their Militia is Composed of
some Companies of Germans and Corses, and others of light Horse; some
maintained for the watching along the Coasts, and discovering the Turks; and
the others, to hinder any secret Practices and Conspiraces in the City. The
entrance of the Port is defended by Four Galleys, always ready upon occasion*
and there are a great number of them in the Arsenal, which the Genouezes often
lend to the Venetians against the Turks. On one side of the Port stands a Tower
considerably high, where fires are kindled by night, for the regulating the
Course of the Ships. There is at the foot of that Tower, a great Piece of
Cannon mounted upon its Carriage, which is never without a Sentinel. The Guard
of the Princes Palace is of Five Hundred Men all Germans, under a Colonel of
the same Nation, who have their Quarters there. As for the Buildings of the
City, they are all far beyond the Idea we can conceive of them: all Palaces,
all of Marble, especially along the Rivers side. But the Pomp of the Churches
does exceed all these Beauties; there are Thirty Parish-Churches, in one of
which they show a Key of an exact Figure of an Emerauld perfectly good. In that
of St. Bartholomew, they keep the St. Suaire, whither the People flock upon the
rumors of the Miracles that are done there. This City is very Populous, and
the Merchants are there in great numbers and very rich; their Principal
Traffic is in Velvet* and we may judge how great it is* by the number of the
Workmen who are employed about it; I having been assured, that there was above
Eight Thousand of them at the time I was there.

On the 12th. of April we made Sail toward Velez Malga, whither we came in
Four Weeks, from whence after two days repose, we made for Malgue, where we
cast Anchor on the 24th. of May. We were no sooner there, but all the Bandities
were set on Shore, and since that time we never heard of any of them. It Is well
known how famous that Country is for its Wine; whereof we took an Hundred Pipes
on board us, and after having provided our selves with necessary refreshments
for the Sick, on the 29th. of May the Wind seconding our Designs, we weighed
Anchor and made Sail toward Cap-Verd, where we were to stay and repose our
selves for some time. This design made us judge, that the Voyage must needs be
long; but none except the Officers, knew our intention, or whither we went.

The 4 th. of June at night we found our selves near 9 Ships which we took for
Corsaires. We were quickly satisfied of the Truth; for the Men of those Ships
having asked us, who we were, and from whence we came, we found they were
Algermes. This News did something Alarm our Commander; but as he was brave,
far from showing, that he was startled at this rencounter, he told the
Corsaires with a very good grace, that he only waited till break of day to make
an Acquaintance with them, and he should take it for an Obligation, would they
come on board him, where he would take care that nothing should be omitted for
their being well entertained. At the same time turning toward our Officers;
You see Gentlemen, said he to them, what Guests we have to Treat, and what
Dishes we must prepare for their good Reception; they are in great numbers as
you see, but that signifies nothing, and I hope that our Courage will make them
repent of their boldness, if they have so much as to attack us. They made no
Answer to the Commanders Speech, but every one running to his Post, gave him to
understand the resolution they were in, of making a brave defense. And indeed,
as soon as it was day, tho the Match was very unequal, all was disposed in such
a manner, that we had a kind of displeasure to see the Enemies, who had the
advantage of the Wind, make away from us without saying a word more. From that
time the Heavens were so favorable to us, that at the three Weeks end we found
our selves near the Island of Boa-vista. We had no sooner cast Anchor there,
than the Bandities, who inhabit it, brought us a great Quantity of salted
Goats-flesh and other refreshments. After which we loaded about ten Chaloupes
with Salt. This Island does so abound in all sorts of Fish, that provided,
People fish never so little there, they take as many as they please: especially
the great Salmon-Trouts are there in so great abundance, that we took above
fifteen Hundred of them in the space of half a day.

Boa-vista is one of the Islands of Capverd. Both near, and at a distance,
nothing can be more agreeable to the sight; and it is for its beauty it has
received that name. It Is very Mountainous, and about some 7 Leagues distance
from the Isle of Sabu. It Is about Twenty Leagues in Circumference, and it is
very hot. It has toward the North a bank of Sand of about Twenty Leagues in
Length, against which the Sea makes a terrible Noise. There are some other
Banks (...) so as dangerous as that, which have occasioned the loss of several
Ships. On the South side, there is a shelve of the same length as the former,
but it is likewise beset with Rocks, whose tops are sometimes seen above Water;
its extent is more toward the North, and the surest place of Ancorage is on
the South-West, where is but fifteen, sixteen, or seventeen Fathom Water at the
most.

In advancing toward the South, we found the Isle of May; that Island is about
Eight or Nine Leagues distant from Boa-vista, and is without contradiction, the
smallest of all the Islands of Cap-verd, having but Eight Leagues in
Circumference. In the midst of it stands high Mountains; and toward the North
is seen a Plain of above a League in Breadth* It Is likewise on that side, that
there is a great extent of Sand, which reaches a great way into the Sea; there
is also, One toward the West, which renders the Sea very dangerous on that
part. The figure of this Island is round, it^ Length and Breadth being almost
aqual* It is bordered with several little Points* which make as many Capes. The
common Road is on the South-West, where is but Fifteen or 16 Fathom Water. Ye^
behind a considerable high Point toward the North, is a convenient place for
Anchorage, when there is only Five or Si^ Fathom Water. There is at the foot
(...) that Point a small Village of about Te^ or Twelve Houses, from which
Strangers may receive considerable assistance. There is nothing to be seen but
Rocks amongst the Clefts whereof do grow some herbs, wherein consists almost
all the Verdine of the Country, the Soil being generally very dry. This dryness
joined to the heats which are there excessive, is the reason, we never see
there either Oranges or Lemmons, and all the fruit Trees consist in certain Fig
Trees, the fruit whereof hardly ever comes to be ripe: or if it sometimes
happens, that the color of it is passable, the taste of it is however bad*
Those ill Fig Trees, and some other Trees* that bear Cotton, are all that grow
in that Island* but in recom^ence, there is a wonderful number of ^oats, and
indeed the whole Traffic ^f the Country consists in those Animals, ^^ce they
vend every year an infinite ^umber of their Skins. Some little Horses ^here
are* but wild, as also Asses and Cows* but they abound extremely in ^owls;
among others there are Partridg^^, Geese, and several Fowls which are ^nknown
in Europe. In sundry parts ^ere is a certain reddish Salt proceeding ^^rtly
from a subterranean Water, and ^^rtly from the Water of the Sea, which they
convey into the Salt Pits. The Inhabitants, who are of a Tawny Color, live by
Hunting and Fishing; they catch Goats with Dogs, they are very dexterous at
that Exercise. As for Fish* especially the Salmon-Trouts, Guilt^ heads or
Goldenies, they have always ^ great abundance of them.

The Isle of St. James is the greatest o^ all the Islands of Cap-verd, and is
abo^^ 45 Leagues in its greatest length from South-East to North-East; Ten in
i^ greatest Breadth, and 95 in Circumference. What is called the High-Islan^ is
directly on the West Road of the (...) of May, excepting that the middle (...)
on the South West of Bo^*vista, and (...) advancing toward the West and Sou^^
West, quarters on the South of the (...) of Salt, to the space of 25 Leagues
from the Point of the South West to the Sout^ East. The Land is of two Leagues
^^tent; there is a Village called P^r^^^ that is to say, the Bank-side, the
Situati^^ whereof is very convenient, being betwe^^ two Mountains, and all
surrounded wi^^ two Rivers, which discharge themselv^^ not far from that place
into the Sea. Th^^ 2 Rivers form 2 Bays, the one of whi^^ is called Port de
Pray, and can contain ^bove 100 Ships. That Port is situated b^hin^ an Island,
sheltred from all Winds, and out of Canon reach, something beyond the Port de
Pray, still advancing toward the Village, is seen a Cape, which the Portugals
have named the Cape of Tubarao; on the West of which is the other Bay, called
the Port of Ribeirra Corca; this Port is situated as commodiously as the other:
it is likewise between two Mountains, in the midst of which runs a River,
having its source two Leagues from thence, which empties it self into the Sea
by a Mouth of a Bows shot breadth. There is in this Island a little City which
goes by the Name of St. Thomas; its Situation is very agreeable, there is
likewise another called St. James from the Name of the Island, and situated
upon the Brow of a Hill. This last is the Capital not only of this Island but
likewise of all the others; it being also the place where the Bishop of the
Portugals has his usual Residence. Somewhat more toward the West, upon a
Point, two Leagues from the Port de ^raye, they have built a Fortress for the
security of the Ships, that Anchor there; and toward the North-West of that
Point, there is the Port de Canise, where there are as great Convenienci^s.

This Island is extremely Fertile, and the River of Corea, which is Planted on
both sides, with Coconuts, Orange Trees, Lemon-Trees and other Fruit Trees, and
some Cedars, forms in my mind one o^ the finest Prospects that can offer it
self to the sight; there is moreover a great quantity of Rice, Mace, and other
Fruits o^ all sorts; as for Cattle, you have for a^^ use, as well as in the
Isle of May.

The Isle of Fire, so called, by reason o^ its Flames, which one of its high
Mountains does vomit without ceasing, is about Twelve Leagues in length, and
lies toward the South West of S. James* O^ the North West a little Fort is
situat^^ at the Foot of a Mountain, for the defense of the Ships, which Anchor
in the Haven that is hard by; the rapidity o^ its Current hindering it from
being commodious. Those who will Anchor o^ the East side, must steer their
Cour^^ toward the North of the Island, by reason, that otherwise they will
find it dif^^cult to get in. This Island is subject t^ Whirlwinds and
Hurricans, which ma^^ terrible havoc there; and the Water (...) there so deep
in all places, that one cannot cast Anchor in any part, but ne^ the little Fort
we h^ve newly m^ntione^*

Some Four Leagues from that Island, toward the South-West, is the Isle of
Brave, almost a desert and uncultivated, and toward the North, two or three
more that are very small. On the West of Brave there is a convenient Road for
the taking in fresh Water; but on the South-East there is another much more
commodious; its depth is of Fifteen Fathom; so that the greatest Ships may lie
by the Banks of it without danger. Above the Haven is a very Populous Village,
and at some distance from thence an Hermitage, the Situation whereof is very
pleasant; the Fruits of this Island are Figgs, Mulbe^^es, Melons and Maiz; but
it does not so much abound in Cattle as the others.

The Air of these Islands is generally ^ot and unhealthful; insomuch as the
^nhabitants are tormented with Burn^^g Feavors, Colicks, Dissenteries, and
^^veral other Diseases. There arise cer^^in Mists, that seem of a Reddish
Co^our, and are of a very bad Smell; this Country is situate between the Line
and ^^e Tropic of Cancer: thus the Sun is ^erpendicular upon them twice a
Year, and affords 'em a couple of Summers: ^^wards the Month of June the Rains
^^gin, and last almost without discontinuing, until the midst of October; but
the worst is, that these Rains are attended with Wind, Lightning and Thunder,
which would make the most undaunted tremble. When this Season approaches, the
Air grows thick and dark* the Salt melts into Liquor, and the Winds begin to
strike a terror into People.

We left these Islands on the Twelfth, and on the Second of August, we came in
sight of Sierra-Leona. Without seeing it, we were certain, that we were not far
distant; for according as we came nearer it, we heard without ceasing, a Wind
which issued from that Mountain, that resembled very much the Roaring of a
Lion, from whence it had the name of the Mountain of Lions. In the Evening we
went into the Pinnace, and as soon as we were on Land, we heard a terrible
noise; it was occasioned by the Waves, which being impetuously thru^^ on
between the Clifts of a Rock, made in their fall a certain noise, that is no^
easy to be expressed; this Mountain (...) Lions begins at the Cape of
Virginia, an^ ends at Cape Tagrin, or Ledo, which likewise bears the name of
Sierra Leona. 'T^^ situated under the 8 th. Degree of Lat^tude, and Thirteen
Minutes of Longitude. It Is seen afar off, for that it is much higher than all
on the North of that Cape* as also by reason it reaches very far into the Sea.
This Country is Mountainous on the South-East, but low, flat and Marshy toward
the North: There are to the Number of Thirteen Rivers, what in the Mountains
and elsewhere, all Planted on each side with Lemmon and Orange trees,
Pomegranates, and other Trees, which form an admirable Prospect at all times,
even to astonishment.

On the 3 d. of August we cast Anchor in the Bay of that Mountain, and at the
same time, our Commander sent to the King of the Country, Five Bars of Iron, a
Barrel of Brandy, and another of Spanish Wine.

Our Deputies were kindly received; and our Presents were so acceptable, that
the King and his Courtiers, who looked like wretched Fishermen, asked, double
of all that was offered 'em, by way of Repetition. We were not over-well
pleased with this Complement; but as we had occasion for Water, Wood, Oranges,
Lemons and other Refreshments, which are there in great abundance, we ^ranted
them what they desired. From that time those Caffres seemed to us goo^
tractable People; they came every day on board us with Fruits, and returned
very much satisfied with our kindness. In the mean while the King being allued
with our Easiness to grant him hi^ Demand, sent word, that he expected the same
Present should be made him the Third time, if we desired to have leave to come
on Shore. This procedure did so Nettle our Commander, that he resolved to be
revenged, which that he might the better effect, he dissembled his resentment,
and let him know, that if he pleased to come on Board of him in the Pinnace he
sent him, he would endeavonr to give him satisfaction. The poor King not
dreaming of any Treachery, did not stick to come on Board, where they only let
in with him five or six of his Gentlemen; he was so full o^ confidence, that he
was no sooner there, but he went directly to the Captains Cabin, where he did
not doubt but that a Treat was prepared for him; but instead of what he
expected, he found there People who very r^dely put shackles upon his Hands and
Feet. And what augmented the Suprize he was in to see himself so ill treated,
was, that the Commander after having remonstrated to him, that he was too
Brutal for so high a Dignity, threatened to have him Hanged; and indeed the
punishment had attended very closely these menaces, if the Officers of the Ship
had not represented, how the execution might have very ill consequences. Upon
their instances, the Commander changed his Punishment, which was to be cast
into the Sea: his Attendants being terrified at that sight, leapt into their
Canoes, and scudded to Shore, as fast as it was possible for them. No sooner
were they there, than they put themselves in a posture of Defense, to hinder us
from coming on Land. Our Commander being full of Indignation at their daring to
make Head against him, or fearing perhaps lest they should believe it was for
want of Courage that he doubled his Presents, filled two Pinnaces with
Soldiers, whom he ordered to cut to pieces those miserable Wretches, if they
had the temerity to oppose their Landing. Those two Pinnaces being seconded by
two more, our Men dispersed the Cafres, and took in spite of their Teeth, all
that they had occasion for: and to revenge themselves fully and finally, our
Commander caused their Houses and their Gardens to be Plundered, and set Fire to
the Temples of their Idols. In the mean time, the King having saved himself by
swimming, seeing we had the better, and the lamentable condition we had reduced
his Subjects to, assembled all his Forces, so as in a short time we saw a
Thousand Canoes half laden with Gabions coming down the River, in all
probability to have set Fire to our Ship, and make themselves Masters of our
Lives: but their design had no effect by the diligence we used to get away from
them, and to pursue our Course.

During our stay at Sierra Leona, we met with some Hollanders who Traded along
that Coast: They told us that the King of the Country had dealt with them as he
had done with us, and that in revenge they had paid him with the same Coin, so
that in less than fifteen days, he had had the affront of being Cast twice into
the Sea. Our Commander was upon the point of the giving one of his Ships for
the Hollander^ Vessel, thinking it to be more prope^ than his own for the
passing the Sands o^ the Red Sea, and for the running along these Coasts, but
was dissuaded from i^ by the Pilot.

Sierra Leona is the most proper place in the World for the taking in fresh
water, and all other refreshments. For besides that the fresh Water is
admirably good, there grows Millet, Oranges, Lemons, Bananas, Cocoes,
Wild-Grapes, Sugar Canes, Long Pepper, in a word, Fruits of all sort sand
Species. There is moreover excellent wood both for Dying and Building, which we
might have provided our selves with, as we did with all other things, had it
not been for the Adventure which happened to us. The Fish is very excellent,
and in great quantity; and all the Rocks which we saw, were covered* with great
and excellent Oysters. Tho there be a great deal of good fresh Water, its
goodness however does not continue in all Seasons; for about the Month of May,
which is the beginning of the Rains, it is there so unwholesome, that in
strangers it causes hot Feavors, bloody Fluxes, and other violent Diseases. The
malignity of the Rain at that time is such, that so many drops are so many
blistors upon the Skin, and as many Worms in the Clothes: for which reason,
strangers to whom it is only fatal, ought not to provide themselves with Water,
until some Monthsafter it begins to fall; because that toward the end it is
more pure and less dangerous, which we had the experience of, not any of our
Company having been incommoded.

The Inhabitants of that Country are not [however] black. Their Complexion is
something Tawny or Swarthy, and they make several Figures with hot Irons in
their Skins. One of their finest Ornaments is to boar their Ears and Nostrils,
which they embelish with Rings of Gold and other Metals. The Men and Women go
all naked, except a girdle made of the rind of a Tree, which hangs down to the
middle of their Thighs. The further you go into the Country, the less Humanity
you meet with; the Inhabitants are cruel, and even eat one another; those who
dwell along the Sea Coasts, are somewhat more tractable, by reason of the
frequent Commerce they have with the Europeans* The King that was Cast into the
Sea, seemed to be about Sixty Years old, was neither handsome in body, nor of a
generous temper; His Habit was after the Moorish manner, his Hat gray, but had
bare-feet, wherein he was imitated by his Attendants.

Sect. II.
FRom the sixteenth of August which was the day of our departure from Sierra
Leona, until the 13 th. of October, which was that of our Arrival at
Madagascar, we had not any considerable Adventure. The first Port that we met
with, was that at Antongil. As soon as we had cast Anchor, we went into a
Pinnace, wherein we set the white Flag; the People of the Island did the same,
but however with precaution; for they assembled upon the Mountains armed with
Arrows and Azagu^es, which are Staves of about five or six foot long, which
they lance very dexterously against the Enemy. This made us apprehend, that
they designed to seize upon us, and in that Opinion we would have returned on
Board, when one of the Insularies taking notice of the fear we were in, called
out to us in Dutch, and bid us be of good Courage, and if we would come on
Shore, he would answer for it, that no mischief should happen to us. The word of
a Man we understood, dissipated our Fears; and we went on Shore, where we were
kindly received by the King in Person, who was attended with a numerous Train.
The King after having told us we were very welcome, had us along to his Palace.
It is situated upon a rising ground, and Reintrenched on all sides: the inner
parts of it are neat, and all covered with extraordinary fine Mats. The King
asked the Commander who he was? whither he went? and for what design he had
Cast Anchor on his Island? to which the Commander answered, that he and his Men
were Hollanders, but that they Sailed for the Service of the Republic of
Genoa. The King having interrupted him to inform himself of some other things,
the Commander was surprised to hear him speak Dutch so well, and asked him the
reason of it; I have, replied the King, been the Slave of a Pilot called Iean
Meas originally of Holland; the necessity I was in, of understanding his Tongue
for to obey him, obliged me to learn it, and you see to what perfection I
attained in it. At our return from the Indies, where we had been, we were so
shattered by a furious Tempest, that it cast us upon this Island, and broke our
Masts. After that we had refitted our Ship, the day being appointed for our
Departure, the repugnance I had to the Name and Life of a Slave, made me hide
my self in the Island, where I have remained ever since that time. Did not you
call your self Diembro, said the Commander? how came you, replied the King, to
know my Name? because I had a Slave in the Indies, rejoined the Captain, who
had all your Features, and whose Adventures were very like yours: I brought him
hither by the Accident you have mentioned, where he hid himself for fear of
following me, as you you say you did: in a word, I am that John Meas, and if I
am not mistaken, I meet again in you, what I lost at my leaving of this Island.
You are not mistaken, replied the King, looking upon him with joy, you find
again in me the Man whom you had, and whom Heaven has preserved to render you
greater Services, than those you could have exacted from me at that time. You
were a good Master to me, pursued he, embracing him; it is but justice, that I
remember it, and it is with pleasure, I meet with this occasion, to testify my
sincere acknowledgments. I am obeyed by all here, and I will likewise have all
obey you: do here what you please, and do not fear, that any one should have
the boldness to contradict you. The Commander being surprised at so much
Generosity, gave him thanks for his offer, which he did not merit, and told
him, that he only desired the permission of changing some of his Merchandises
for those of the Country. In short, the King remained steadfast; he would needs
have him to take all he had a mind to, and keep his Merchandises. After which,
according to the Custom used amongst Friends of that Island, he offered him his
Wives, and made others do the same to all those of his Ship, As the Women of
that Country are not very avaricious of their Caresses, and the Europians are a
singular good ragoust to them, far from suffering us to beg their favors, they
offered themselves, and that too with so good a grace, that it would have been
very uncivil to have denied them.

While our Men were diverting themselves, and were all dissolved in Joy and
Mirth, Death came to disturb it, and caused a Division, which had like to have
been the ruin of us all. The Vice-Commander having languished under a fit of
Sickness for some time, at last died some days after our Arrival at Madagascar*
The Commander puts the Master of his Ship into his place, and would needs have
the other come on Board of his, but instead of obeying, this last sent word to
the Commander, that he did not understand, why he should be deprived of a Place
that was his Due, and that he would not go out of his Ship but by force: at the
same time causing all his Canon to be Mounted, that was at the bottom of the
Hold, and prepared himself as if he had been to fight. On the Morrow the
Commander seeing this Rebel had set up the Red Flagg, made preparations on his
side, insomuch as nothing was expected but the Hour of coming to Engagement. In
the mean while the Boutefeu sent a Chaloupe to a convenient place to take in
Water; which the Commander perceiving, filled his own with Soldiers, with whom
he went himself, and so ordered the business; that he constrained 'em to yield
themselves up, and put them all into Fetters, until he was made acquainted with
their Design. Whereupon he posted himself in such manner, as it was impossible
for the other to stir from his place. Whereupon the chief of the Rebels seeing
himself shut up on all sides, and besides his Men being weakened by the loss of
those whom the Commander had taken, repented of the fault he had committed, and
fancied that the shortest way of reparation, was to yield himself up at the
Commanders Direction. And taking along with him some of the Ships Crew, he went
on Board, the Commander, where as soon as he was come, he had Fetters put upon
his Hands and Feet, notwithstanding the cries of his Men, who protested, that
if he was not released, they were resolved to fight to the extremity, and not
give any Quarter. This Bravado had so little effect, that upon the first
resistance, that was made to the two Pilots in the Commanders Name to come on
board him, they went thither as Sheep, and were treated after the same manner
as the others. Those who remained being daunted by the detention of their
Leaders, lost heart, and yielded upon discretion. By order of the Council of
War, it was demanded of all the Officers, that were revolted, except the
Master, Which they would choose rather, either to burn altogether with their
Ship, or to submit themselves blindly to whatsoever Orders the Commander should
please to impose upon them? It Is easy to conjecture that they chose rather to
live than to undergo so hard a Death: and indeed they promised to be more
supple than Gloves, and protested after having asked pardon, not to fall any
more into such like faults. As for the Master's Punishment, it was remitted
until the return of the Ships to Genoa, and in the mean while, for the
preventing such like disorders, they divided the two Ship's Crew, whereof the
half was obliged to go board the other. This business did very much delay our
Voyage, for the time of continuing it, being passed before that all was set to
rights again, we were forced to wait for another Monzoon; but as in the mean
time we made good Cheer, and spent our time in Hunting, Fishing, gathering
excellent Fruits with which the Island abounds, we were easily comforted for
that Rub in our Voyage.

From the Coasts of Sofala to Madagascar, is reckoned about a hundred and Ten
Leagues, and from the Mozambiques Forty four. It is situated on the East of
the Coast of Zanguebar and the Cafrees; between the Eleventh and Sixteenth
degree of Southern Latitude; and extends from 72 degrees of Longitude to 81: so
that it is about 350 Leagues in Length from the South to the North; 120 in its
greatest breadth, and 900 in Circuit. The Island is divided into several
Provinces, which are almost all parted by great Rivers.

The Air is healthful and temperate, the soil very fertile in Fruits, as
Oranges, Pome-citrons, Lemons, very large Melons, and Pulse. It produces
Ginger, Rice, Cotton, Saffron, and other excellent Roots. They gather Wax and
Honey; several sorts of Gums, Balm; Oils, whose effects are admirable. There
are several Mines of Gold and Silver: the Gold is much courser there than in
Peru, and every where else, but the Steel of this Country is most excellent.
They have very choice Trees; as Ebony, Brazile and Sandale Wood, Red, Yellow
and White; Palm Trees of four or five sorts, from which the Insularies draw
very great conveniences: and several others which are of no less profit than
these. The Precious Stones which are most commonly found there, are Topazes,
Amnectysts, Emeraulds, Sapphires, Hyacinths and Agats. There are neither Lions,
Elephants nor Horses; but abundance of Tame and Wild Swine, Goats who bring
forth four times in the Year. The Sheep are so fat, that their Tails weigh
from twenty to five and twenty Pounds. The Swine and wild Boares are there much
fatter and more delicate than those of Europe. There are likewise Porcupines,
whose flesh, tho something harsh, has a most particular gust. These Animals
sleep there six Months together, and during that time their skin is renewed as
well as that of their Hedg-hogs, which are very common in this Island. The Dogs
here are very small, and most part of them flat-nosed, and without Hair; the
Monkeys are there in Troops, never less than fifty together, some are white of
the bigness of a Fox; they are cruel and hard to be tamed; but there are some
much smaller and browner, that are much more docible. Some very large, that
only go upon their Hind Feet, whose Skins are white, and not so tawny as the
rest. These love Women to that degree, that if they meet with one, they help
one another to violate her every one in his turn, after which they tear her in
pieces. There are those, whose Eyes sparkle like burning Coals; these are
looked upon as much the siner; but they are so wild, that when they are taken
they starve themselves to Death. They have great Numbers of Martins, Weasels
and Squirrels, as likewise Scorpions, Spiders, Cheeselips, and other hurtful
Animals, whose Venom is so subtle, that it is present Death to them who are
stung. All manner of Gumm is there very plentiful. The Island is inhabited both
by Whites and Blacks; these are for the most part of a middle Stature; and
their Hair is black and Curled: The Whites are somewhat bigger, their Hair is
less black, less frizled, and much longer; they shave their Beards, and are
tractable and humane, because they inhabit toward the Coasts. But they who
dwell in the midst of the Island, never shave their Beards, nor cut their Hair.
They are Brutal Savages, and without integrity, like the Cafres. Treachery and
Revenge are their Virtues; and those who are the best instructed in 'em are the
most esteemed; but Charity and Compassion are Monsters which they have a
horror for; and those who have the least grain of them, are reviled and
contemned. Idleness is natural to 'em, and they spend most of their time in
singing and dancing. Notwithstanding which, they have Workmen, as Smiths,
Carpenters, Potters, Cord-makers, and Weavers that are expert enough in their
Trades; some Goldsmiths they have, but they are none of the most dexterous.
Fishing and Hunting are their ordinary Occupations.

The places, whither they retire, are very pitiful Cottages, which nevertheless
they are used to take possession of with as much joy, as if they were the most
glorious Palaces. When these Hutts are in a condition to be inhabited, the
Proprietors fix the day of their Entrance, and make a Feast, to which they
invite their Relations and Friends; every one goes thither with Presents, for
it is forbidden to come with empty hands; and those presents consist of Gold,
Silver, Iron, Corn and Utensils, that are in use with 'em. Some give Oxen,
Sheep, Goats, Fruits; and all this mounts so high, that at the end of the
Entertainment, the Proprietor finds himself largely re-imbursed for his
Building and his Entertainment. The Feast lasts for some days, during which
they commit several Excesses. Their way of living is very plain, for they have
neither Tables, Chairs, Seats, Table-Cloathes, Napkins, Beds or Pillows.
Insomuch that whether it be for eating or drinking, they have only a pitiful
Mat spread upon the Floor.

The Common People go almost all naked, and often without hiding what we dare
not discover. Persons of Quality have a kind of Drawers, which reaches down to
the middle of their Legs; the rest of the body is covered very negligently with
a piece of Cotton. The Women are clothed with certain Robes, which reach but to
their knees: some of those Robes have Sleeves, and others none. They wear under
them a kind of Drawers, which differs little from those of the Men. They have a
Handkerchief upon their Necks, much like to those of France and England. Those
Robes are made of Cotton, rinds of Trees, and of Silk of several Colors,
garnished with Guimps and Laces, that differ much from the color of the
Stuffs. All the Inhabitants of both Sexes, go bare-headed and barefooted;
except those who are of a certain Race, whose Men wear a Bonnet much like a
Jesuits Cap; and the Women an Hood or Ornament in form of a Pyramid which
falls down upon their Shoulders.

Their Weddings are Celebrated with very few Ceremonies, and upon very slight
pretexts the Men put away their Wives. As it is neither a sin nor scandal to
Caress one another, the Men and Women make no scruple of doing so; and when
Lovers are taken in the Fact, they are acquitted for a Present of little Value.
For the Maids to Prostitute themselves is looked upon as a good honest Trade:
the more they gain thereby, the more are they esteemed; and the most notorious
Gallantry is the most ready way to Marriage. It is accounted a kind of shame
for Maidens not to know what it is before they are Contracted: they must first
of all have made several Trials, and when they have not Wit to find Gallants,
their Mothers have the goodness to furnish 'em with the means of so doing, and
to teach 'em to keep those whose Mistresses they are. With all this facility
there is nothing so Chaste as the Tongue of the Women of Madagascar; and such
an one is more lascivious and more debauched than Lais, that one would take for
a Lucretia, if youdid not know her.

When any Person dies, all the Relations assemble to wash the Body; after which
they deck the Deceased with his finest Attire; put him on Rings, Pendants and
Bracelets, afterward they wrap him up in fine Linen, and a^ last in a Mat,
wherein he is carried to his Grave. This is the Custom of the Common People,
but the Ceremonies of Persons of Quality there are wholl^ different. When they
have washed their Bodies, and cut of all, their Hair, they pu^ a Crown of the
finest Flowers that can be found upon their Heads, then the Relations and
Domestics bewail and lament round the Body with Grimaces that raise Horror.
After the Tears have made a pawse, the most Ancient of the Relations makes a
kind of Funeral Oration which contains the Life and most Memorable Actions of
the Defunct. After which they make a terrible noise in tingling upon Copper
Basins, to the noise of which they dance after an odd kind of manner; which
^ome of them leave off doing on a sud^en, and go to discourse their dead
kins^an. They ask him why he let himself ^ye? if it be for want of Money,
Jew^^s, Precious Stones? if life was a bur^en to him, or if he want any thing?
One day is spent in these fooleries, wherein the Relations do so tire
'em^elves, that they have need of repose. Wherefore they re-assemble the next
^ay at the House of the Deceast, where ^hey are entertained with a Funeral
Re^ast: they eat and drink as much as ever they are able, and without
disconti^uing, they sometimes give great sighs* first looking up to Heaven,
then upon ^he Dead, around whom there are burn^ng Lamps. On the Third day they
^ut him into a Coffin, made of two Trees, bored for that purpose, and which
they join together very neatly. Afterward they carry him into a spick span new
Hutt* wherein they put him into a Grave of six foot high; and round it a
Pannier of Rice; and a Pipe and Tobacco, together with a Chaffingdish, a Suit
of Clothes, and generally a little ^f all things which they believe he will
^ave occasion for in his Journey to the other World. They shut up the H^^ with
a great Stone, and they offer some living Creatures to the Devil, that (...)
would be favorable to him in the cours^ of his Voyage.

The whole Year is spent in mour^ing, and his Memory is so precious, tha^ his
Relatives make him the only subje^^ of their Discourse. It is he, whom the^
invoke in their distresses, and who^ they Consult in Affairs of moment; an^ for
their being the better understoo^ they go seek out his Soul where they i^
magine it is.

Some are Idolaters or without an^ shadow of Religion. Others toward the
Coasts are Mahometans. The fir^^ are Superstitious and so gross, that the^ are
afraid of all things. Some Ide^ they have of a First Being, who has Created all
things, but they do not believ^ themselves obliged to adore him, an^ they pay
him no Honor; and yet, when they are near the end, whether through age o^
otherwise, they confess their sins to him* and ask his pardon for 'em. As to
the Dev^ whom they call the Malign and Invisibl^ Being, they seem to have a
clearer knowledge of him. It Is he, they say, who give^ and takes away Life: he
is the Author o^ ^ll the evil which Men do, and all ^he Mischief which happens
to them. Wherefore they pray and Sacrifice to ^im for the making him
propitious, that ^e may ward from their Heads, the mis^hiefs with which they
are threatened. Besides these two beings, they acknow^edge a Third, whom they
call Dian^anans, that is to say, the God of Rich^s. They think it is he, who
renders Men happy, and on whom depends their Felicity. They have furthermore a
confused Idea, at least those toward the Coasts, of Angels, of Adam, Eve,
No^b, and even of our Savior, which they ^eceived from the Europeans; but they
do not operate any good effect, and if ^hey have Feasts and Fasts, it is through a
mere caprice, which they hold from Father to Son.

It Is perhaps from the same source, that they have received Circumcision, which
they observe very fantastically at ^ certain Season of the Year in the
fol^owing manner. On the day before the Ceremony, all the Kindred assemble at
^he Child's Fathers House, and fuddle themselves with a sort of Drink that is
(...) sweet as Mead, when they are some^hat heated, some tingle upon Basins;
others skirmish with their Targets, an^ Azagays, while the Young Men an^ Maids
dance to the sounds of those B^sons which serve them instead of M^sick. When
they are weary, they fa^^ to their Mead again, and fox themselv^^ anew at a
certain hour of the Night. The Mother takes the Child, who is the occasion of
the Feast, and goes to lie alo^^ with it in a Hut built on purpose ^ Month
before. At break of day she washes all her own body, and does the same to that
of her Son, whom she dec^^ up like a Puppet, with Pendants, Brac^lets and a
Neck-lace of a Value confo^mable to her condition. Hereupo^ she goes to find
out her Husband an^ his Guests, and the thinkling is renewed but some time
after, all this noise giv^ way to silence, during which, all tho^^ who have
been in the act of Venery a^^ obliged to retire, and likewise those wh^^ are
suspected of having layn that Nigh^ with their Wives; for all is Mystery i^
this occasion; and if the Father of the Child had touched his Wife the Nig^^
before, they would be sure to defer t^^ Ceremony. Besides this precaution, the^
have also that of sending those awa^ from the place of the Ceremony, wh^ carry
about them any thing of a red color, because their presence, say they, would
hinder the stopping of the blood in the Wound, All being thus disposed, the
Priest approaches with measured steps, and with Devotion takes the Knife
destined to that use, and ties a Napkin on his left Leg; the Father and Unckles
of the Child do the same upon their Arms; and in that Equipage they follow the
Priest through the Door situated on the West, into the Hut, where the Mother is in
Bed with the Child. In fine, after the Circumcision, the Foreskin is cast upon
the ground, if the person Circumcised be a Slave; but if free, the Foreskin is
put upon the Yelk of an Egg, whereon the Father or Uncle of the Child receive
it from the hand of the Priests. After having put upon the Wound a Mixture of
the blood of a Cock and the Juice of Herbs, the Child is brought back to his
Fathers House, with Huzzas and Acclamations, which last the rest of the day.

To see these Grimaces, one would say, that these Insularies are very
Religious, and very tender of their Children; however we may affirm, they are
nothing less than that; for indeed they neither sincerity nor affection, which
it is easy to prove. When they have a Child born, they give notice thereof to
their Priests, who make those ignorant People believe, they read in the Stars
all that happens upon Earth. The Priest pretends to consult the Heavens upon
what is to happen to the Child; and according to the humor he is in, he speaks
well or ill of his future inclinations: and if His Holiness says, that he is
born under an ill Constellation, that his manners will be corrupted, that he
will be wicked, cruel and bloody minded, from that moment the Child is carried
out of the House and cast into a Bush, where it serves for food unto the
Beasts. If a Woman during her bigbelly finds her self more ill than usually,
they stick not to believe, that it is the Child who torments her, and this is an
ill Omen: whereupon they give the Mother a certain Potion, which kills the
Child; or if they wait till it be born, it is no sooner born, but it is cast
into a Ditch, or into Water. This inhumanity is so general, that all Women both
Free and Slaves, make no scruple of losing their Fruit upon any pretext
whatsoever. Sometimes it is by reason that the Mother being a Slave, takes it
ill to see her self put away by her Master, who has deflowred her: sometimes
for that a white Maid being got with Child by a Blackmore, has some horror of
being the Mother of a Child of a different color; and lastly, sometimes for
that a Maid having got an itch to Libertinisme, and is not willing to Marry,
chooses rather to kill her Children, than take the trouble of breeding them up.
But if the Women are unnatural, the Men do not fall short of them in that ill
Quality; for if it happens, that the Mother expires in the Delivery, the Father
causes the Child to be put in the same Coffin, saying, that it is better for it
to be dead, than to be brought up by Strangers. Besides these unhappy pretenses
of getting rid of their Children, there are a hundred others caused by
Superstition: thus it is no wonder, that this Island, as voluptuous as it is,
is however so thinly populated. Those who inhabit toward the Coasts being
become more humane through Commerce with strangers, are something less easy to
put their Children to Death. When the Priest has told them his Sentiment, and
gives them no good hopes, there are those who will have them educated privately
by Slaves, who bring them up like Beasts, to the end, (say they) that they may
overcome by that means their ill nature.

The Island is governed by several Kings, who are almost always in War. Their
Arms are Bows and Arrows, Javelins and Targets; they do not want Courage, but
they Fight without Rules and Art. Their principal dexterity consists in
surprising the Enemy in an advantageous Place, and keeping him in play, while
the others secure the Country, and burn all they meet with. In the mean while
the Women take their pleasure, and seek out all means of diversion, but they
dare not be unfaithful to their Husbands, at least, those who love them;
believing that if they had any favor to their prejudice, they would not fail
to be killed or dangerously wounded: whereas by making good cheer without
having to do with Men, the Husband would become both stronger and more
courageous.

During our abode in the Island, King Diembro having marched against His Enemies
in the Head of Seven Thousand Men, we went upon a Mountain, from whence we saw
the field of Battle. The two Armies being in sight, they began confusedly with
Javelins; then endeavoring to join, the strongest flung his Man upon the
Ground, and killed him without remission; the Fight was long and doubtful, but
at length, Diembro had the advantage, tho he was much inferior in Number,
those who remain Conquerors, return to their Homes singing, but the greatest
noise comes from those, who have been made Nobles, which is performed in this
manner. some days before that of the Battle, there are Detachments drawn out on
both sides to skirmish; those who are the strongest cut their Enemies Heads
off, and carry and lay them at the Kings feet, who Caresses 'em very highly,
and gives 'em the Title of Noblemen: if in the following Wars, those Noblemen
bring still more Heads, they are qualified proportionably, insomuch as the
Heads of their Enemies are as so many steps, which raise 'em to the highest
Offices and Dignities.

When they have a desire to make Peace, the first means to attain it, is to
make Presents on both sides, and to appoint the day for the Treaty. The day
being come, both Armies set 'emselves in Battel-Array upon the Banks of a
River, which parts 'em: They kill a Bull on each side, out of whose Liver,
Kings send one another a Portion, whereof they and their Generals eat in the
presence of their Deputies: at the same time they swear to execute punctually
the Articles of Peace, which they had newly agreed to; which commonly consist
in never poisoning the Waters nor Cattle more; and in not burning the Houses,
and in abstaining from all Pillage: Wishing that the Liver they eat may serve
'em for Poison, if they speak against their Thoughts.

Sect. III.
AFter five whole Months stay at Madagascar, we departed from thence on the 16
th of March, and on the 12 th. of June we arrived at Sumatra. We cast Anchor in
the Port of Sillebar, where we took in Peper and some other refreshments. In
Cruising along the Coasts we took two Joncks that we met with. All the People
they had on Board, leapt into the Sea, except a Woman, whom all the Italians
vitiated, in spite of our Officers, after the most brutish manner imaginable;
when their Rage was glutted, they let her go, but she was no sooner on Land,
than her Husband stabbed her to Death.

On the 28 th. we made Sail toward Indrapoura, and in our way we took two
Joncks more of Arquin, that were laded with Pepper, Sandalewood, Camphire and
such like things. On the 29 th. we arrived at Indrapoura, where we bought what
we wanted. We expected to have met with some more Joncks, but they were already
departed.

From thence we made toward the Sonda, and a little after that we were in the
Streights, Fourteen Holland Ships came thundering upon us. They came from
Batavia, with Orders from the Company to bring us thither either by fair means
or foul; immediately they Summoned our Commander, who very bravely made Answer,
That he was not a Man to yield till after having bravely defended himself, and
that perhaps, how strong soever they might be, they would find it difficult to
constrain him to it. The Hollanders not thinking to have met with so resolute a
Man, sent to Batavia to know what they were to do; the Answer was, that they
should press us, and if they found themselves too weak to perform their
Commissions, they should make use of the Reinforcement that was coming to them,
which was a great Man of War advantageously fitted out, whose help was in no
wise necessary. The Hollanders having received this Order, bid us with an
imperious Tone, bring to them our Flag and strike Sail, or they would sink us
to the bottom. This daunted our Commander, who had had time to think of what he
was to do: he became pensive uneasy, and perhaps he had reason so to be. His
Men had still in mind the Dispute at Madagascar; he knew they hated him, and
they only waited for an opportunity to be revenged for the affront he had put
upon them. These Considerations made him inclinable to yield; but before he
came to that Resolution, he took Council of his Officers, who were unanimously
of Opinion, that he should follow the Law of the Strongest, since their loss
was infallible, if they persisted to make resistance; this Resolution was
applauded by all the Ships Crew, whose disunion was so visible, that they could
hardly have lived longer together: thus the Hollanders were received with open
Arms. We were overjoyed at the changing of our Masters, and never were any Men
better pleased with coming out of Prison, than our Men were to go into it. If
the passion of Separating had not been so great among them, it would have been
easy for them to have made their Escape by Night by the way of Batavia, for
our Ship was a swift Sailer, and those of the Hollanders so heavy, that we were
always twenty four Hours more advanced than they.

On the 15 th. of July, the Commander of the Hollander, called Jacob vander
Meule came on Board us; and in the General of Batavia's name, took an Inventory
of all he found there. After having written our Names, and the Name of the
place of our Birth, those whom they met withal of our own Nation, were put
apart in the Corpse de guard of Java; the others remained in the Ship, whose
Coffers they picked, taking out all the Money they found there, and making
their escape, the Italians to Goa and Bantam, and the Hamburghers to their own
Country. Presently after this Plunder, our Commander was found dead, and we
judged, by the signs he saw upon his Body, that he was poisoned, probably by
the Italians, for fear he should have defeated 'em at his return. As for our
parts, we were kept Prisoners for fourteen or fifteen days, but having
presented our requests to be set at liberty, we were accordingly set free; and
by order of the General, each Man having received the Wages he pretended to
from the Republic of Genoa, it was left to his choice, either to return into
his own Country, or enter into the Service of the Company. I was one of the
number, which accepted this last offer, and the others were dispersed.

Shortly after my entering into the Service of the East India Company, I was
sent by the General of Batavia to regulate some Affairs at Bantam, where having
dispatched my business, I took occasion to make all the inquiry I could into
the State of that Island, which take as follows.

Java Major is an Isle declining 7 degrees 40 Minutes toward the Antartic from
the Equinoctial; and placed in 21 degree of Longitude; a very great and noble
Isle for from East to West it stretches one Hundred and Fifty Leagues, or of
Miles Four Hundred and Fifty, and from North to South Ninty Leagues, or two
Hundred and Seventy Miles English. The Mid-land is for the most part
Mountainous, and meanly Peopled; but the Maritine low, and very Populous: the
first is very subject is Wind but Healthy: the latter Marish and insalubrious.
It may be called a Compendium of the World; for it abounds in all things that
be either useful or excellent. The Coast by reason of Trade for P^per has Towns
well built, and very wealthy: upon the North side and to the North East, are
Bantam, Palamban, Jachatra, (now called Batavia by the Dutch, but formerly
Sunda Calapa by the Inhabitants, and not unlikely to be that City Sunda, where
the People used with a dead Man to bury so many live fish, as he had slain
Enemies in his life time) as also Japarra, Tubur, Jortan, Grecy, Chiringen,
Serebaya, etc.

Bantam is under the Antartic declination or Latitude 6 degrees 20 minutes* and
of Westerly variation, 3 degrees. It Is the biggest City in the Island, being
situated at the foot of a Mountain* whence three Rivers rise, two whereof run
by the Walls, the other through the City; but all too shallow for Navigation* the
Town is indifferently great, but Rascally Houses; the Walls which are Brick,
and three foot thickness, are not entirely lined with Earth, yet so flanked,
that at every Hundred Paces lies a Canon, which would sufficiently secure the
Curtains, were it in condition for service, but their Artillery is not mounted,
and they have no other Ammunition than a little Powder, brought from Malaca,
where the Portugueses have a Mill. The City Gates are so wretched, that they
might be beaten down with a Club; but so vigilantly guarded, 'twould be hard to
approach without notice; there are neither Bastions nor Towers, but in lieu
thereof Scaffolds of three Stories, which yield a strong defense.

In the whole City there are but three principal Streets, which all about upon
the Castle called Pacebam. The one from the Pacebam to the Haven; another where
the Kings Slaves and Domestics inhabits, leads to the Gate toward the Fields,
and the third to the Gate at the foot of the Mountain. The Streets are not
paved, but are as commodious, by means of the Sand they are covered with. The
Channels which in diverse places cross the City, are foul and stinking, in
regard the Stream of the River is not strong enough to carry off the filth it
brings, and what is thrown forth choaks the Water, and makes Puddles, that
infect the whole City. No Person of Quality, but has his private Chapel, or
Mosquite in his House; but one is common near the Palace on the Magazin and
Stable-side. The City is divided into several Posts, each of which is assigned
to some Person of Quality, who commands in time of War, and gives direction in
Civil Affairs. They have a Drum as big as those German Casks called
Thunderbolts, used instead of Bells, which they beat with a woodenbar as big as
a Weavers Beam, Morning and Evening, as also upon Alarums they have brass
Basins, which they beat Musically and Chime upon, as we do our Bells.

At every corner of the Streets there stands a Guard, and at Sun*set they draw
up to make fast all passage Boats, so as in the Night there is no stirring in
the Street. At the Prison-Gate, near the Palace, stands a Guard of Fifty Men:
nor is there a Person of Quality, who has not one of Ten or Twelve at his
House. The Town is full of Coco-Trees, nor is there a Mansion without diverse
belonging to it. The Houses are poorly built of Straw Reeds upon Piles made
like those at Ackim. They cover their Houses with Coco-Leaves, and the sides of
their Lodging Rooms have only Curtains for freedom of the Air, which is
exceeding necessary in this hot Climate. For preservation of their Wares they
have store Houses of Stone, but they are covered with straw, so as to secure
them from fire, which is but too frequent amongst them; they lay great pieces
of Timber on the Ro^f, and cover it with Sand, that the Fire may not find
passage. The Rooms in their Houses are only divided by partitions made of Canes
called Bamboos, which they slit so thin, that a Horse-Load serves for all the
Rooms in their Houses. At the Houses of Persons of Quality upon the first
Entrance, you come into a Square Court, where the Guard is, and where the
Master of the House speaks with such as have business with him, under a little
shed, covered with Canes or Coco-leaves, in one of the corners of this Court
stands the Mosquite, where at Noon they do their Devotions, and not far thence
the Cistern where they wash themselves. Being entered the House, you find on
both sides of a very narrow Gallery several little Nicks, for Slaves to rest
in, who watch there for their Masters security; by reason they are all afraid
of being surprised and killed by their enemies in the night. All Foreigners, as
the Natives of Bengala, as Gusurats, Malayans, Abyssins, Chinese, Portugals,
and Hollanders, ly out of Town. Here are three great Market Places, where the
Merchants meet daily; the Grand Bazaror Exchange, is toward the East part of
the Town, and is the Meeting place of Foreign Merchants, as Portugueses,
Arabians, Turks, Chinese, Pagans, Malayans, Bengalans, Gusarats, Malabars, and
other Indians, who are there from the break of the day until Nine of the Clock,
and then break up; the second Market Place is before the great Mesquite divided
from it by a Palisado. To this place Women resort with Sacks, and a weight of
three Pounds, they call Gantam, who buy Peper of the Country People, an eight
or nine Hundred Caxas the Gantam. But the Chinese, who are very skilful in
this Trade, forestal them sometimes, for they go to the Peasants, and buy all
they have by the lump beforehand. Betwixt the Pallisado and the Mosquite,
stand Women that sell Bettele, Araca, Bananas, Melons, etc. and some there are
set fine Cakes to be eaten hot.

A little higher on the Right Hand are Armorers, who sell small pieces of
Cannon, Pistols, Sword-blades, Battle-axes, etc. Not far thence, there are
others that sell Sandale Wood, White and Yellow, and on the Left Hand are
Confectioners that sell Sugar, Honey, and all sorts of Sweetmeats wet or dry.
Near to that is the Bean-Market, where are sold all sorts of Beans, black
white, red, yellow, green and gray, at the three Hundred Caxas the Gantam. Next
to this is the Onion Market, where the Merchants that sell Cloth by wholesale
come, and such as deal in return of Money, and assurances of the return in
Vessels. Hard by this is the Poultry, where besides tame Fowl, they sell also
Kids, Geese, Pigeons, Parrots* etc. coming thence you meet with 3 ways, one
going to the Chinese shop, another to the Herb and Pulse Market; and the 3 d.
to the Shambles. By the way to the Chinese shops, on the Right Hand are some
Jewellers, who for the greater part are Choroacones, that is to say, Persians
or Arabians, who sell Rubies, Hyacinths, Turquesses, Granats, etc. And on the
Left Hand is the place for the Bengalians, with their Toys and small Wares. On
the back side of this Street, the Chinese sell their Silks Raw and Colored,
Damask, Velvet, Sattins, Brocadoes of Gold and Silver, Purcelane Cabinets and
works of Lacques, etc. By the way to the Herb Market, on the Right Hand upon
the Sand, are the Bengalians with their small Wares. On the Left Hand Merchants
of Linen Cloth, and at the lower end of this Market, Married Women have
Seamstresses shops; but Men are forbidden to come there under pain of a
Forfeiture. Then you come to the Herb Market, where are a multitude of Simples
unknown to us. Turning thence you see the Fish-market, then the shambles, with
Stalls full of Beef, Buffles and Venison: Then the Spice-market, where Women
sell Peper, Cloves, Nutmegs, Mace, etc. and all sorts of Gumms and Druggs, to
Europians unknown: and the Rice-market where likewise they sell Earthen Ware
and Salt; whence they pass by the same way they came to the place, where
Merchants and Masters of ships meet about their Affairs:

The sale of these Commodities lasts but till Nine of the Clock, and then opens
the Market before the Pacebam, or Palace-Royal, where are sold all sorts of
Victuals, as likewise some Pepper, which they truck with the Chinese. About
Noon the Market in the Chinese Quarters begins, where nothing is sold but for
the Table.

Next to Bantam, Tuba, or Tuban, is the Chiefest Town in Java, and in effect is
stronger than all the rest, and although not so great as Bantam, it is at least
as handsome; and as well built. The Palace is exceeding spacious, and has very
fair Apartments, where Elephants and other Beasts have their several Quarters:
each Elephant has his Lodge built upon four Pillars, with a Post in the middle
to tie him to. The Rooms are filled with Chests, and Hampers for the Baggage,
when the King goes His Progress. Near to his Lodgings is a place where his
Game-Cocks are kept every one in his Pen apart, and every one his keeper; as
likewise the Parrats, which are much before those brought into these Parts, the
greatest part of a beautiful flame color, with a great Golden spot on the
back: The outside of their Wings blue and red, and the inside a lovely
Carnation. They are to endure the inconveniences of a long Voyage: besides the
Indians highly esteem them, for that they love their owners, and delight to be
made much of by them. The King of Tuban was much taken with all these
Creatures, as also with Dogs, Horses, and white Ducks, much larger than ours.
He had four legitimate Wives, Six Sons, and Two Daughters; besides Natural
Children, a great number by Concubines, which he kept in several Apartments:
His Bed was raised at some distance from the Ground, built like an Altar of
Great Stones, whereon lay a Quilt, and certain Pillows of Satin, filled with
raw Silk.

The chief Commerce they have at Tuban consists in Pepper, which they carry to
the Isle of Bady, where they truck it for Cloth and Stuffes of Cotton and Silk,
which afterward they bring to Banda, Toanate, and the Philippins, and other
parts, to truck for Cloves, Mace and Nutmegs, The Inhabitants for the greatest
part, live only on Fish. They wear no other Garments than a Linen Cloth about
the Loins; only Persons of the First Quality have sometimes Hangselines of
Chamelet, which reach but to their Knees. They are by this Habit distinguished
from others Persons, and by their Trains of Slaves, without whom they never
come abroad. They delight much in Horses, and to have their Saddles exceeding
Rich, which are made like our great Saddles; only their Trappings studded with
Gold and Silver, striving to appear well Mounted at Assemblies, and to show the
King their Horsemanship, and the dexterity of their Horses.

The Inhabitants that live in the inner part of the Isle of Java are Pagans,
and the greatest part Pythagoreans, believing a Transmigration of the Soul; for
which reason they eat neither Fish nor Flesh. Toward the South part of the
Isle, there are, tho but few, Mahometans, who observe the Turkish Religion in
all things, sending for Priests to Mecca.

They observe two great Festivals, the greater of the two begins the 5 th. of
August; and at the beginning of this fasting Lent it is, the Slaves renew their
Submission to their Masters, with Ceremonies extraordinary; for they take them
by the Feet, and rub 'em upwards to the Knees; then closing their Hands, they
rub the Head, Face and Neck, and then unclose them again.

Lent being ended, they celebrate their Easter, entertaining their Children and
all their Domestics with a Dinner. There is scarce a Man in Bantam, who has
not three or four Wives, and some have ten or twelve, besides Concubines, who
wait on their Wives, especially when they go abroad: they make no difference
between legitimate and natural Children: a Father has not power to sell his
Child though he had it by a Slave. Children go stark naked, only the Girls
cover their Privities with a thin Plate of Gold and Silver: they marry at the
AGe of Eight, Nine or Ten Years, not only to prevent the Disorders, which in
this hot Climate were inevitable, but because the King is Heir to all who dying
leave their Children under Age, whom he makes his Slaves, as he does the
Widows and Family of the deceased. The Dowry which Persons of Quality give
with their Daughters consists in Slaves of both Sexes, and in a sum of Coxas,
which is very considerable among them when it amounts to three hundred
thousand, tho it be but much about twenty two Crowns and a half of our Money.

The Women appear with great Decency at the Marriage of their Relations, tho
they use no great Ceremony. One may know the day by certain Poles, which are
stuck in the Houses of the Bride and Bridegroom, with Tassels of red and white
Cotton.

Dinner ended, they bring a Horse to the Bridegroom, whereon he rides about the
Town till Evening, expecting the Slaves he is to have in Marriage, who come
commonly laden with Presents. None but the nearest Kindred sup with them, and
see the new Married Couple abed.

Women of the first Rank are kept in such restraint, that their own Sons are
not suffered to come into their Chambers; and when they go abroad, which is
very seldom, all give place and respect to them, even the King himself does it:
nor dares any Man speak to a Married Woman without the leave of her Husband.
Women of Quality are known from others only by their Train; for all are dressed
after the same Fashion, wearing a Petticoat of Cotton or Silk, which comes from
the Breast to the mid-leg, Stockings they have none, and go all bare*headed,
tying up their Hair together on the Crown of their Head; but, when they come to
Weddings or other Public Assemblies, they wear a Coronet of Gold, and have
Coronets and Bracelets on their Fingers, and about their Arms. They are so much
addicted to Cleanliness, that there passes not a day, but they bath themselves
three or four times. They never do their natural Necessities, nor receive their
Benevolences from their Husbands, but they go up to the neck in Water to
cleanse themselves: they do no work at all, which is no wonder; since the
Husbands themselves having employed two or three Hours about their Merchandise,
all the day after do nothing but chew Bettele amongst their Wives, who are very
sollicitous, by all the little Kindnesses, imaginable to court their Loves,
washing and rubbing 'em till they are stirred up to Voluptuousness.

The Magistrate of the Town of Bantam sits in Judicature in the Court of
Pacebam, from four or five in the evening until it be night. The Plaintiff and
Defendant appear both in Person, and plead their own Cause. One only Punishment
is used for Criminals; that is, they tie them to a Post, and stab them to death
with a Poniard. Strangers have this privilege, that giving satisfaction to the
party complaining, they may redeem themselves from death, except they have
murdered in cold blood, or upon advantage.

The Kings Council meets upon Affairs of State under a broad spread Tree by
Moon*light, where sometime there comes near five Hundred Persons, who part not
till the Moon goes down. When the Council is risen, they go to Bed, and there
ly till Dinner. Afterward the Counselors of State give audience to all who
have ought to propose to the Council. When the King comes there in Person, he
sits in the midst of them, or else with the four Principal Ministers of State,
and propounds the point wherein he requires their advice, or causes the
Governor of the Town to propound it, To a Council of War they call the three
Hundred Captrins, Commanders of the Troops the Armies consist of, which are
raised in the Town it self. They have a particular course for quenching Fire,
which happecs but too often among 'em; for the Women have this office imposed
upon them, while the Men stand in Arms to defend 'em in the mean time from
Pillage.

Persons of Quality, when they go to Court, or through the Town, they have
carried before them a Lance and a Sword sheathed in a black Velvet Scabbard,
and by these Ensigns oblige all the Street to make way for them, and retiring
back to sit on their Heels, till these Grandees are past. Their ordinary wear
is of Stuff wrought with Silk, and they wear Turbants of a fine Bengalian
Cloth. Some amongst them wear Mandillions of Velvet black or crimson, and never
forget the Dagger or Poniard under their Girdle. They ever go with a numerous
Train of slaves, one amongst them carrying the Bettel Bottel, another the
Chamber*pot, and a third the Vmbrello. They all go barefooted, it being thought
a disparagement among 'em to walk with Shoes through the Town. In their Houses
many wear 'em; they are made at Achim, Malacca, and China, and the Isle of
Sumatra, where are also made most part of the Vmbrello's used in the Indies.

The Bantamites are haughty, selfconceited, perfidious, mischievous, and cruel;
who never fail to make an end of such they get advantage of; and having once
committed a Murder they kill all in their power; for knowing Death to be their
inevitable reward, their discharge their fury indifferently on all they
encounter, without consideration of Sex or Age: so as sometimes they are
constrained to kill them in the place, instead of taking them to be delivered
up into the Hands of Justice.

They generally wear long Hair, are of a Chestnut Complexion, having great Jaw
Bones, flat Faces, great Eyebrows, little Eyes, thin Beard; and being of a
middle stature, well set, and strongly limbed. They are naturally addicted to
Theft, and so vindicative, that to be revenged of an Enemy they stick not to
turn upon his Weapon, and choose an assured Death to take away another Life.
Of which there was an example during the King of Bantam's besieging Batavia in
the Year 1659. a Dutch Soldier lying in Ambushcade in a Marsh, a Bantamite
little dreaming that any body had been there, came to the same place to
discover the Enemy, and was by the Dutchman thrust with his Pike into his body.
Upon which the Bantamite finding himself wounded, did not strive to pull the
Pike out of his body, but thrust himself further upon it, to the end he might
come at his Enemy, whom he stabbed to the heart as soon as he got within his
reach.

This bloody disposition shows, they have courage, and would make good
Soldiers, were they but as dexterous at Fire Arms, as they are at their usual
weapons, which are the Pike, the Battle-Axe, and the Broad Sword, but above all
the Dagger or Poniard. Their Bucklers are of Wood or boiled Leather stretched
upon a Hoop; and for their Bodies they have Cuinasses, the pieces being fastened
together with Na^ls of Iron. Soldiers in times of Peace have no Pay, but in
time War they have Arms and Cloths, and Rice, and Fish for Provision. They are
all Slaves, and not only such as belong to the King, but likewise to other
Lords, who are obliged to enroll them for their Princes service. They are
seldom or never idle, but employ themselves most commonly in making Sheaths for
Poniards of Sandal Wood made hollow, or polishing their Arms, which they
generally poison, keeping 'em so well, that no Razor can be sharper than their
Swords. The Bantamites, as indeed all the rest of the Indians, hold their
Daggers so dear to them, that they will not speak to any Man without that by
their side, not one Brother with another, and at Night they lay it under their
Bolsters. Some use Trunks, through which they blow little poisoned Arrows, so
bearded that pulling it out, the Head remains in the Wound, which by these
means becomes incurable and mortal. Amongst such a multitude of Villains, there
are notwithstanding some honest People, but the number is very small; for
except some that inhabit near Bantam upon the Straight of Sunda, at the foot of
the Mountain Gonon Bezar, who were transplanted thither from Pasarvan, all the
rest are depraved. The People not able to live under the Tyranny of the King of
Pasarvan, put themselves on certain conditions under the protection of the King
of Bantam, and have built the Town of Sura, which has a peculiar King, but
subordinate notwithstanding to the King of Bantam, they living peaceably, and
persevering in the exercise of the Pagan Religion.

The Soil is cultivated either by free People, who take it of their King or
other Lords at a certain Rent, and are not bound to labor longer than by their
Bargain, and may afterward do what they please; or by Slaves, who cultivate
their Pepper, Rice and Cocoes, breed Poultry and Cattle for their Masters
profit, and supply his Kitchen. Some Slaves take the Cocoes at 1000 Caxaes the
Tree. Others work by the day, and get Eight Hundred Caxaes the day, which is to
their Masters profit. Others are not maintained by their Masters, but serve
them six days, and the six days following work for themselves, and so get their
Livelihood. The Women-Slaves keep Market, where they sell their Masters Pepper
and other Commodities; or else employ themselves in scouring or making Cloth,
that they might not live unprofitably. When they have a mind to be cased of
them, they lead 'em from Port to Port, and sell them to him who will give most.
The ordinary price for one of an able body, is five Fardoes, that is about a
Pistol a piece. The Children of a Slave belong to the Master, who disposes of
'em as he thinks best; but he has not power over the life of his Slave,
without the express consent of the King or Governor.

The Pepper, which the Bantamites sell to Strangers, is usually mixed with
Ordure, black Sand, or Gravel; or they adulterate it some other way, either in
quality or weight, as they do all their other Commodities. They keep a Trade
amidst all the neighboring Islands, with notable advantage. At the Towns of
Macasser and Surubya they fetch Rice, which there they buy for one Sata de Caxa
the Gantan, and sell it for double the Price. At Balambuam they buy Cocoes, a
thousand Caxaes the Hundred, and venting 'em by retail at Bantam, they sell
eight Cocoes for two Hundred Caxaes, there they likewise buy the Oil of the
same Fruit. At Joartam, Gerrici Pati, and Juama, they fetch Salt at a Hundred
and fifty thousand Caxaes the eight Hundred Gantans; and at Bantam three
Gantans are worth a thousand Caxaes. They carry Salt to Sumatra, where they
truck for Lacque, Pepper, Benjamin, Cotton, Tortoyse-shells and diverse other
Commodities; from Jacatra, Jappara, Cravaon, Timor and Palimbaon, they fetch
Honey, Wax, Sugar, etc. Salt-fish from Cravaon, and Bender-messing; Iron from
Crimata in the Isle of Borneo; Copper and Lead from Pepa and Gusebun upon the
Coast of Malacca; from Bali and Cambaya, Cotton, and Cotton-Cloth, etc.

Rich Merchants make no Voyages themselves, but venture the greatest part of
their Money for more or less profit, as the Voyages are long and dangerous, and
near upon the like Conditions we do here in Europe. Obligations, as all other
Instruments, are written upon the Bark of a Tree, the Letters ingrav'd with a
Bodkin; and they make it up in a Roll, or fold it apiece betwixt two
Boards, which they tie together with a Pack-thread very neatly: sometimes they
use China Paper, which is very fine and of all colors. As yet they know not
the Art of Printing; but they paint their own Characters exactly well, which
are rather Figures than Letters. The usual Language is peculiar to the Country,
but the Malayans is more general; the Mohammedan Relion has likewise brought in
the Arabian Language.

The Persians, by the Bantamites called Coracons, traffic here for precious
Stones, and all sorts of Gums and Drugs, and are a People to be confided in,
because they are open-hearted and civil. The Arabians and the Beguians come
thither for China Ware, and bring with them the Commodities of the neighboring
Islands. The Malayans and Quilens let their Money out at Interest, or upon
Change. The Gusurattans are poor, and commonly Sea Men. All these Foreigners
are attired all of one Fashion, in a Cotton Garment, and in a Turbant of the
same Stuff. At their coming to Bantam, they buy a Woman that is for all Uses,
and at their Departure thence they sell her again; but, if they have Children
by her they are tied to provide for them.

The Chinese are they, that bring the greatest Trade thither, the most
industrious to get Wealth, and live the best. They are a self-ended People,
that live by Usury, and have there the same repute as the Jews in Europe. They
go into the Country with a Weight in hand to buy all the Pepper they can meet
with, and having weighed one parcel, so as they may have a near guess at the
rest, pay them present money, or according as they have occasion for it, and by
this means engross so great a Quantity, that they have sufficient to lade the
China Fleet when it arrives, selling for fifty thousand Caxaes the Sack* what
cost them but twelve thousand. This Fleet arrives at Bantam, in the Month of
January, to the number of eight or Ten, and are Vessels of forty five or fifty
Tun.

By them likewise comes the Money hither, which in the Malayan Language is
called Cus, in the Bantam Tongue Pity, and is current not only at Bantam, and
all the Isle of Java, but through all the Neighboring Islands. It Is a little
thin Plate made of Lead, and the scum of Brass, so brittle, that letting fall a
string of Caxaes, you shall break at least ten or twelve. They are made in the
Town of Chincoa in China, and they are beholding to Wantay King of China for
them, who lived about the Year 15^0, and finding that the Caxas made by his
Predecessor Huyen King of China, went not off, by reason the Chinese had so
filled the adjacent Islands with 'em; He contrived this brittle Money, which
his Successor Humedon put forth, as now it is corrupted. It has a apiece
hole through it, at which they string them on a string of Straw; a string of
two Hundred Caxaes, called Sata, is worth about three farthings Sterling, and
five Sataes tied together make a Sapocon. The Bantamites when this Money came
first among them, were so cheated with the Novelty, that they wonld give six
Baggs of Pepper, for ten Sapocons, thirteen whereof amount but to a Crown. But
they have had leisure enough to see their Error, for in a short time the
Island was so filled with this Stuff, that they were compelled absolutely to
prohibit all Trading, which so disparaged this Money, that at present two Sacks
of Pepper will scarce come for one Hundred Thousand Caxaes.

Likewise from China they bring Purcelane, which they sell here at cheap rates;
for at the first arrival of the China Fleet, six pieces of Purcelane may be
bought for a thousand Caxaes. They bring their Country Silks, Sattins and
Damasks, and take away Pepper and Lacque brought to Bantam from the City of
Tabenbaen, Any or Indico, brought thither from the Town of Anier, Sandal-wood,
Nutmegs, Cloves, Tortoise-shells whereof they make Chairs for the Mandowins,
who prefer this stuff before Silver.

The Portugals that deal at Bantam live out of Town, in the same Quarter with
the Chinezes. They drive here a great Trade in Pepper, Nutmegs, Cloves, Mace,
Sandal-wood, Cubebs, long Pepper, and other Drugs that are sent them from
Malacca; for the greater part of them are Factors, and Commissioners of the
Governor of Malacca, and the Archbishop of Goa. At Bantam they have neither
Priest nor Chapel, but at Panarucan they have both.

In the King of Bantam's Dominions are all sorts of Beasts, both wild and tame:
the Forests are full of Elephants and Rhinocerots, Leopards and Tigers, which
are more cruel and furious than those of any other place, and do so much
mischief, that People go not without danger to gather Frankincense, Mastick,
Myrrh, and Benjamin, which is there in its greatest Perfection, and whereof
there were great quantity to be gotten, if the Forests were not almost
inaccessible, by reason of the Wild-Beasts, as also for Serpents, Lizards and
Salamanders, exceeding dangerous, and of so extraordinary a growth, that there
are Serpents have swallowed Children and Sheep, eaten Tigers and Leopards,
often come out of the Wood and make great Spoil among the Cattle which for this
reason are reared with great difficulty. Their Swine have no Bristles, and are
so fat, their Bellies trail on the ground.

The Rivers breed Fish in abundance, and Oysters have there been seen, that
have weighed three Hundred Pound; a thing that would seem incredible if there
were not two Oyster-shells, which weigh four Hundred sixty and seven Pounds,
now to be seen in the Duke of Holstein's Cabinet at Gottorp, that were brought
by a Sea-Captain from the Indies: the Captain affirming, that there was so much
Meat in them, that it sufficed all that were in the Ship, being a Hundred and
twenty Persons.

It Is very hard to hunt Deer, Goats, Boars, and other Game, fallow or black,
which abound there, in regard the Woods are so thick, that it is impossible to
make any way through them; and the Bantamites are so unskilful at their
Firearms, that it has been observed, that a Bantamite having shot a wild
Buffler, made a shift to kill the Beast: but, the Musket recoyling he fell
down, with his Cheek all bruised, and the loss of two of his Teeth; insomuch as
these Creatures may be seen in whole Herds feeding up and down the fields.
There are likewise abundance of Apes, Foins, Squirrels, wild Peacocks and
Parrots, and infinite other Birds exceeding beautiful to the Eye.

In the Rivers there is abundance of Crocodiles, which seize not only on Men
bathing, but attempt the very Canoes as they pass along, snatching men out of
'em, and dragging 'em to the bottom. The Chinese tame this Creature, and
fatten it, to be afterward eaten as a great dainty. Their Civet yields as much
perfume as that of Guiney, but it is neither so white nor so good.

They have two sorts of Poultry, one like ours, the other betwixt ours and the
Indian kind; and these last, which are in a manner Monsters, are so furious,
they will fight, till death decides the Battle. Amongst the common sort there
are some whose flesh is black, yet are they very good meat.

The Rhinocerots, by the Indians called Abadu, is not so ordinary in the
Country of Buntam, as in Bengala, Patane, and other places, though there are
some; and the Bantamites make so great account of this Beast, that there is
nothing about him, which they use not in Medicine, not only the Flesh, the
Blood, the Horn, the Teeth, but even his very Dung; they hold there is no
better Antidote against Poison, and attribute the same qualities to this, as
Ancient Authors do to the Unicorn.

The Ants are exceeding troublesome in most of these places, but especially in
the Country of Bantam. They are much bigger than in our parts, and so
mischievous, that there is no Stuff, but what they spoil, no Victuals but what
they consume, if they can get to it; wherefore they ordinarily set the feet of
Tables and Cupboards on dishes half filled with water, to hinder the Ants from
creeping up; and 'twere impossible to preserve any Birds, did not they set them
on Poles planted in a dish of Water; for should they put them in a Cage, the
Ants would get up and kill 'em. There is besides another sort of Ants about the
length of a man's finger, and red; but these are only in the fields, where they
live on the Barks of Trees and Herbs.

As concerning the Trees and Fruits in the Isle of Java, amongst others there
is the Areca, the Portugals call the Tree that bears it Arrequero, the
Arabians, Faufel, and the Malayans, Pinang. It is a kind of Coco, but not so
great, nor the Leaves so big and broad: the Fruit is like a Date; Nature
encloses it in a Husk, which opens not till it flower, and when it ripens the
Shell falls off, the fruit remaining at the Branch. It has scarce any Taste,
but it moistens the Mouth, dies the Lips red, and the Teeth black. The Indians
lap it up in a Bettele Leaf, mix a little Chalk or Lime with it, and chew it
rather out of Custom than for any Pleasure, though they hold that it
strengthens the Stomach and Gums, and is a topical Medicine against the Scurvy;
and in effect, there is scarce an Indian that is subject to this Disease or
troubled with the Toothache. This Drug will make some People so drunk, that all
things to 'em seem to run round; but that dizziness is presently over.

The Mangas grow on Trees not much unlike our Nut Trees, but they have not so
many Leaves: They are of the bigness of a Peach, but longer and something
bending like a Crescent of a light green, drawing a little toward the red. It
has a great shell, that encloses an Almond of greater length than breadth, and
eaten raw is very distastful, but roasted on the Coals not unpleasant: it is
useful in Physic against the Worms, and the Diarrhaea. It ripens in October,
November, and December, and being perfectly ripe, it is full as good as a Peach.
They get them, while they are green, and put 'em up in Salt, Vinegar, and
Garlic, and then they call them Mangas d'acher, and they serve instead of
Olives. There are likewise wild ones, which they call Mangas bravas, of a pale
green too, but brighter than the other, and full of Juice, which is immediate
Death without a present Antidote.

The Ananas is one of the loveliest, pleasantest, and wholesomest Fruits of the
Indies: it grows on a Bush, and has Leaves like Sempervivum; the Fruit at
first is green* but being ripe, turns Orange or Aurora colored, drawing a
little to a red, sharp like a Pineapple; for which reason, the Portuguezes who
met with this Fruit first in Brasil, called it Pinas; but it is tender an easy
to cut* It Is yellow within, of a delicate Scent; it is eaten in Wine, but the
excess is dangerous for Fevers; the Juice is so sharp, that if one wipe not
the Knife it is cut with, next Morning it will be found eaten. The Tree is so
apt to grow, that a Sprig will take Root in the Earth, tho it have not past two
or three Leaves, be half withered, and have been cut fifteen days before. The
Canarins call this Fruit Ananasa, the Brasilians Nava, and in Hispaniola, and
the other Western Islands, they call it Jajana; it is as big as the larger sort
of Lemmons, or the middle Melons, excellent both in Scent and Taste. At a
distance they look like Artichoaks, only they are not so picked as the Leaves
of that Plant: the Stalk is like that of a Thistle, and every stalk bears but
one, and that at the top of it; for tho many times it puts forth at the side
other stems, yet the Fruit that comes of 'em is very small, and seldom comes to
Maturity. They have of them in March, and then they are very pleasant, for the
Juice has the Taste of sweet or new Wine, and is exceeding easy of digestion,
but it heats and after brings a Fever.

In the Territories of Bantam there is another Fruit called Lamnea; it is as big
as a Citron, the Color green, something drawing to a red; full of Juice that
is tart and Toothsome, and within has diverse black Kernels: the Leaves are
like those of Lemmon Trees, but not so long: they put them up in Salt or Sugar,
or use them as Tamarinds against burning Fevers, Inflammations of the Breast,
against pains in the Stomach and Fluxes.

Tamarinds grow on great Trees full of Branches, whereof the Leaves are not
bigger, nor unlike to the Leaves of Pimpernel, only somewhat longer. The flower
at first is like the Peaches, but at last turns white, and puts forth its Fruit
at the end of certain strings: as soon as the Sun is set, the Leaves close up
the Fruit, to preserve it from the Dew, and open as soon as that Planet eppears
again. The Fruit at first is green, but ripening, it becomes of a dark gray,
drawing toward red, enclosed in husks, brown or tawny, of taste a little
bitter, like our Prunelloes. Every husk contains three or four little Beans in
a certain skin, which is that the Portugals call Tamarincho. The Fruit is
viscous, and sticks to the Fingers, but of so good a taste, that the Indlans
use it almost in all Sawces, as we do Verjuice; but 'twould turn a man's Stomach
to see them cook meat with this Drug: for squeezing it between their hands, the
juice that runs through their fingers looks more like a Medicine than a Sauce.
These Trees bear twice in the Year, and grow every whete without being planted,
or otherwise looked after. Physicians use this Drug against burning Fevers,
heat of the Liver, and Diseases in the Gall; and infused a Night in cold Water,
it purges gently. The Tamarinds brought to our Parts, are either Salted or
preserved in Sugar. The Inhabitants of the Isle of Madagascar, where there
grows plenty of it, call it Quille, and the Bantamites Sundalassa. The
Portugals give it the name of Tamarinches, for the resemblance the Fruit holds
with the Date of Arabia, called Tamar, as if they would say, Dates of India.
The Malabars call it Pali, and the rest of the Indians Ampuli: the Tree is as
big as a Walnut Tree, full of Leaves, bearing its Fruit at the Branches, like
the sheath of a Knife, but not so strait, rather bent like a Bow. The Indians
when they would transport their Tamarinds, take them out of the Husks, and make
them up in Balls as big as a man's Fist, unhandsom to look on, and worse to
handle.

Common it is in this Country to plant Pepper near a sort of Canes, by the
Bantamites called Mambu, in which the Tabaxir is found. It Is true, in the Isle
of Java these were never any of 'em found; but again, it is certain that on the
Coast of Malabar, Coromandel, Bisnagar, and near to Malacca, this sort of Cane
produces a Drug called Sacar Mambus, that is Sugar of Mambus, The Arabians,
Persians and Moors call it Tabaxir, which in their Language signifies, a white
frozen Liquor. These Canes are as big as the Body of a Poplar, having strait
Branches, and Leaves something longer than the Olive tree. They are divided
into diverse knots, wherein there is a certain white Matter like Starch, for
which the Persians and Arabians give the weight in Silver, for the Use they
make of it in Physic, against burning Fevers, and bloody Fluxes, but
especially upon the first approaches of any Disease: and which, according to
their Application, is a Sovereign Remedy against the Stone.

These Canes are so big, that the Indians cleave them to make Boats, leaving
Knots at each end, whereon they sit to guide it, one before, another behind,
and use this sort of Boat the rather, for that they are persuaded Crocodiles
bear a respect to the Mambu, and never hurt the Boats made of this Cane.

In the Isle of Java there is another Fruit, called amongst the Malagars
Duriaon, not to be seen any where but in this place, and the Malaccaos. The
Tree that bears 'em, by the Malagars called Batan, is as big as our Apple Tree,
the Bark thick, plentiful of Boughs, and wealthy in fruit: the Blossom, which
they call Bnaa, is white, inclining to yellow, and the Leaves half a Foot in
length, and two or three Fingers broad; on the outside of a pale Green,
drawing toward a Gray, but on the inside the Green is very delicate and
lively; the Fruit is as big as a Melon, covered with a thick rough Rind, green,
and has ribs, as the Melons. Within it is divided into four quarters, which are
again divided into two or three little Cells, that contain the Fruit, which is
as big and white as a Pullets Egg, and of taste so delicious, that the
Bianc^-Mangiares, which the Portuguezes compound of Rice, brawns of Capons,
Cream, Sugar, and Rose Water, is not more dainty; Each Fruit has a Stone as
big and rough as that of the Peach; ii will not keep; for when the White begins
to turn, it must be thrown away and must be eaten as soon as the Husk begins to
open. Such as are not used to this Fruit, will not like it at first, being it
has the smell of a roasted Onion, but the Taste is so pleasing, that it may be
reckoned amongst the prime, and most excellent Fruits of the Indies. One thing
it is very remarkable for, that there is so great an Antipathy between it and
the Bettele, that the least number of Bettele Leaves laid near a Room full of
Duriaons, they corrupt and rot immediately. Accordingly, when a Man has eaten
too much of this Fruit, let him but lay two or three Bettele Leaves upon his
breast, and he shall be eased; and the eating but one of these Leaves after the
Duriaons, causes speedy Digestion; so as thus one may eat as much as he will,
without the least inconvenience.

The Lantor-Tree, which is another sort of Cocoe-Tree, as we said before, is
frequent in the Isle of Java; the Leaves are five or six foot long, and so
smooth that the Bantamites write upon* it with a Bodkin, and use it instead of
Paper.

Of all the Indies no part bears Cubebs but the Country belonging to the King
of Bantam; the Bantamites call it Cuciombi and Cuma^; the other Indians call
it* Cuba Chini, because the Chinese first fetched it thence, to furnish other
Parts, before the Portugals or Hollanders had any Commerce there. This fruit
grows upon another Tree like Pepper, and in Bunches like Grapes. The Bantamites
knowing it to be no where but with them, esteem it so much as they will not
suffer a Plant to go from them, and sell it not unboyl'd, for fear it should be
planted elsewhere, tho there is such plenty of it, that at Bantam a Weight of
fifty six Pounds is worth but six, or at most, seven thousand Caxaes. The Use
of it is, to fortify the Stomach, and clease the Breast, but the Mahometans
take it with a little Arek, and are of opinion it restores languishing and
spent Nature.

The Manghostan is a fruit growing by the Highways of Bantam, upon Bushes,
like our Sloes, and much of the same taste.

The Herb the Bantamites call Talassa, and the Malagars Lalade. It bears
neither Fruit nor Flower, but is used in Sawces, and some eat it green, and
assign it the same Virtues as they do the Cubebs.

In Java they have another Fruit, which grows likewise in other places called
Jaca, in form and bigness like a Citrul, with a thick and rough Rind; Within
it is full of certain Nuts, the kernels whereof being roasted on Coals, are good
to eat, and stay the flux of the belly. The Tree is very great, but the Boughs
not being strong enough to bear the fruit, it hangs all along the Body of it,
up from the very ground: Being full ripe, the Rind grows hard and black, and
emits a very sweet scent; the fruit it self changes taste, yielding one while
that of the Melon, another that of the Peach, sometimes that of Honey,
sometimes that of sweet Lemon; but is so hard of digestion, that it is never
eaten, but vomited up again. The Nut of it is as big as a Date, and causes
windiness in those that eat it green, but roasted after the manner we told you,
they are very pleasant, and good for such as have a kindness for Women.

In the same Island, toward the Straight of Sundy, grows also abundance of
wild Cinnamon, which the Portugals call Canela de Mato, and Malayans Cajumanis.
It is not near so good as the fine Cinnamon, whence it comes, there is but very
little of it bought, it being hardly worth the Transportation.

The Carcapuli is a Fruit about the bigness of a Cherry, and much of the same
taste, and the Trees which bear it are like our Cherry-Trees* Of these there
are several kinds, whereof some are white, some of a dark red, and some of a
lively Carnation Color.

The Costus Indicus, by the Malayans called Pucho, by the Arabians, Cost, or
Ca^t, is the Wood of a Tree resembling the Elder, as well in height, as in
Flower and Scent: the Turks, Persians and Arabians, make an extraordinary
Traffic of it, as they likewise do of Calamus Aromaticus, which also grows on
the Coast of the Straight of Sundy. That yellow and Spungy Matter which Women
use against pains in the Matrix, is properly in the Stalk of it. The Bantamites
give it to their Horses, compounding it with Garlic, Cummin-seed, Salt, Sugar,
and Butter, making it into a Paste, which they call Arata; and they hold it
very sovereign for their Beasts, to whom notwithstanding they never give it,
till the extremity of the Heats be over.

The Zerumbal, which the Bantamites and Malayans call Canior too, grows in
these parts and is like to Ginger, only the Leaves somewhat more long and
broad. They use to dry it, or preserve it in Sugar, as they do Ginger, but
esteem it above Ginger.

There are two kinds of Galanga, by the Arabians called Calvegian. The lesser
comes from China, and is much better than that which is brought out of the Isle
of Javan, where they call it Lanquas. This Herb is neither sowed nor set, but
grows naturally, and is about two foot high above the ground. The Flower is
white, and the Leaves pointed, and as hard as the point of a Knife. The
Bantamites use it for a Sallad, as also in Physic, as they do the Root, which
is thick and long, and full of knots like a Cane, as biting in taste as Ginger,
and of a very sweet scent.

Benjamine is a Gum distilling from Trees, not unlike Lemon trees. While they
are young the Benjamine is black, which is the best. But as they grow old the
Benjamine grows white, and loses strength; so as to put it off they mingle it
with black. The Moors call it Louan Javii, that is, The Incense of Java.

In the Forest of Java, Trees there grow of red Sandale, but the white and
yellow Sandale, which is without comparison the better, comes from the Isles of
Timor and Salor. This Tree is of the bigness of a Walnut-Tree, and bears a
fruit not unlike our Cherries, but it is black and insipid. The Indians beat
white and yellow Sandale, and make a Concoction, wherewith they rub their
Bodies, not only for the odor, but for that they believe it is restorative.
They value not red Sandale, but sell it at cheap rates to other Parts.

They have likewise abundance of Ginger, by the Malayans called Aliaa, and by
the Bantamites Gauti; but they either eat it green in Sauces, or preserve it,
for they never dry it.

Anacardium by the Portuguezes called Fava de Malacca, by reason of its
likeness to a Bean, is very common here: and the Bantamites take it in Milk
against the Asthma, and the Worms. Some pickle 'em as they do Olives; and they
are altogether as pleasant as Olives.

That Wood the Portugals call Pala de Cuebra, grows there in great abundance.
It Is white inclining to yellow, hard and bitter. The Indians bruise, and take
it in Wine or Water against burning Fevers and the stinging of Serpents: it is
said, that for this Cure they are beholding to a Creature in size and shape
like our Ferrets, by them called Quil or Quirpela, which they breed for
Recreation, and to catch Rats and Mice. This little Beast being a mortal Enemy
to Serpents, never meets with any of 'em, but it sets upon 'em, and being
bitten runs immediately to this Root, which is his present Cure.

Palo d' Aguila, by Druggists called Lignum Aloes, by the Portugueze Palo d'
aguila, and by the Indians Calamba, grows in Java, but not in such quantity as
in Malacca, Sumatra, Cambaya, and other places. The Tree is like the Olive
tree, only a little bigger. The Wood while green has no scent, but as it drys
its odor increases. The weightiest and brownest is the best: its perfection is
known by the Oil that issues out of it when it is held to the fire. They make
Bands of it, and the Indians use it to embellish their Cabinets; but the
chiefest use is for Physic, for this Wood beaten to Powder, and taken in Broth
or Wine, fortifies the Stomach, stays Vomiting, and Cures the Pleurisy and
Bloody Flux. What the Portugals call Aquila brava, or wild Calamba, is not so
good as the others, and the Indians chiefly use it at the Funerals of their
Bramins, making the fire of it that burns the Corpse.

At Bantam they sell also store of Lacque, whereof they make Spanish Wax, and
the Varnish they lay over so many excellent Works in China, Japan, and other
places: the Territories of Bantam produce it, but the best comes from Pegu,
where it is called Tieck, and where great and winged Ants get up the Trees, and
suck the Gum, which afterward they lay upon the Boughs as Bees do Honey and
Wax. When the Boughs are full, the Owners cut them, setting 'em to dry in the
Sun till the Lacque falls from the Boughs, then they beat it to powder, and
give it what color and form they please.

The other Druggs gotten in the King of Bantam's Dominions are Pody, a mealy
kind of substance, which they use against Rheum and Wind. Carumba or Floris a
Root whereof they make Sawces, and wherewith they dye their Cotton Cloths.
Conjuapi a Wood with which they rub their bodies. Samperentam is a root found
near Sundy, stronger than Ginger, and very bitter. Pontiou they hold good
against Fevers, but it is exceeding dear. Gatogamber is a fruit like an Olive,
good against the Toothache. Ganti, a Root so like Ginger, that the Bantamites
have given it the same name, but it is dearer; and with it they rub their
Bodies. Sasum is Mustard Seed. Doringi a Drug they give Children as soon as
they come into the World. Galan, a root growing in the water, and very
refreshing. Madian, Maya, and Corassini, are intoxicating Drugs they mix in
their Drinks. Rhodium the ashes of a Tree growing near Sundy, wherewith they
scour their Bodies, as they do with Sary, which is a flower, The Turgary,
Sarahan, and Sedowaya are Roots for the same use. Sambaya is the fruit, the
Chinese call Guiduar, as big as an Acorn, of high price, by reason it is not
ordinary, and is a sovereign remedy against Poison, and the biting of Venomous
Beasts. Jalave is like Sambaya, and of the same use in Medicine. Paravas is a
very cooling Herb, but very scarce and very dear. Tomonpate a Root like
Galican, used against Inflammations of the Spleen. The Conduri, which the
Bantamites call Saga, are red Beerries spotted with black, wherewith they weigh
Gold and Silver, but are not to be eaten they are so bitter, and as some say
poisonous. There is likewise Azebar, the Sycomore, the Nux Indica, and diverse
other Trees, Plants and Druggs, to Europeans some unknown; but 'twould require
a peculiar Treatife to name 'em all, and would fill a large Volume to describe
their good and bad qualities.

Sect. IV.
AMong the Creatures, which we said the Land of Bantam abounds withal, we
mentioned Apes; and it is observable, that where there are a great number of
these Animals, there are very few Crows; for as soon as they have built their
Nests, and laid their Eggs, the Apes get upon the Trees, and throw their Eggs
to the ground: I do not know whether it be to see, if they can fly or no. As I
was one day traveling along the Road in a Coach, attended with a great many,
we saw a vast number of Monkeys Males and Females, and many of the Females
holding young ones in their Arms: Having a desire to shoot at one, I took a
Harquebuss, and killed a Female Monkey, who lay stretched out upon the Boughs,
letting her little one ^all to the ground. But immediately all the Monkeys that
were upon the Trees, to the number of sixty, came down in a great fury to have
leaped into our Coach, where they would soon have strangled us, had we not
prevented them by closing the Shutters; and had we not had a great number of
Men, who with much ado kept them off; yet they pursued our Coach above a
League, and were stout lusty Monkeys. In several parts of this Country there
are particular Hospitals for these Creatures. On the ways there are commonly
Copses of Bamboos growing very high; some of these are so thick, that it is
impossible for a Man to get into 'em; but they are pestered with prodigious
numbers of Apes. Those that breed in the Copses upon one side of the way, are
enemies to them that are bred on the other side; so that they dare not cross
from one side to the other, but they are in danger of being immediately
strangled. Here the Travelers have good sport by setting the Apes together by
the ears, which is done after this manner; In several parts of the Road there
is Rice to be sold, and they that would see the sport, cause five or six
Baskets of Rice to be set in the Road, some forty or fifty paces the one from
the other, and close by every Basket they lay five or six Botoons about two
foot long, and two inches about; then they retire and hide themselves:
presently they shall see the Apes on both sides of the way, descend from the
tops of the Bamboos, and advance toward the Baskets which are full of Rice;
They are about half an hour showing their Teeth at one another, before they
come near the Baskets; sometimes they advance, then retreat again, being Ioath
to encounter. At length the Female Baboons, who are more eager and courageous
than the Males, especially they that have young ones, which they carry in their
Arms as Women do their Children, venture to approach the Baskets; and as they
are about to put in their hands to eat, the Males on the other side advance to
hinder 'em. Immediately the other Party comes forward, and thus the feud being
kindled on both sides, they take up the Battoons, that lie by the Baskets, and
thrash one another in good earnest. The weakest are constrained to fly into the
Woods with their Pates broken, and their Limbs maimed, while the Masters of the
Field glut themselves with Rice, and the joys of Victory, tho it may be when
their Bellies are full, they will suffer some of the Female Party to come along
with 'em.

As for the Elephants, I happened to see two that were lately taken. Each of
them was placed between two Tame ones. Round about the wild Elephants stood six
Men, with every one a Half Pike in their Hands, and a lighted Torch fastened at
the end of a Pike; who talked to the Beasts, giving them Meat, and crying out in
their Language, Take, eat it. The food which they gave 'em was a little Bottle
of Hay, some pieces of brown Sugar, and Rice boiled in Water, with some few
Corns of Pepper. If the wild Elephants refused to do as they were bidden, the
Men made Signs to the Tame Elephant to beat 'em, which they did, banging the
Refractory Elephant upon the Head and Forehead with their Trunks; and if he
offered to make any stir or resistance, the other Elephant thwack'd him most
unmercifully on the other side; so that the poor Elephant not knowing what to
do, was constrained to learn obedience.

Being thus fallen into the Story of Elephants, I will add some other
Observations, which I have made upon the nature of these Creatures. Though the
Elephant never meddles with the Female after he is once taken, yet he is
sometimes seized with a kind of lustful Rage. One day that the King was Hunting
upon an Elephant, with one of his Sons that sat by him to fan him, the
Elephant became so furious by reason of his Lust, that the Governor who was by
no means able to master or rule him, declared to the King, that to allay the
fury of the Elephant* who would doubtless bruise him to pieces among the Trees,
there was no way but for one of the three to forfeit his Life, and that he
would willingly sacrifice his for the safety of the King, and the Prince his
Son; only he desired His Majesty to take care of the three small Children which
he must leave behind him. Having so said, he threw himself under the Elephants
Feet, who had no sooner taken him in his Trunk, and squeezed him to pieces with
his feet, but he grew quiet and peaceable as before. The King as an
acknowledgment of so signal a deliverance, gave to the poor Widow 200000
Roopies, and highly advanced every one of his Sons, that had so generously laid
down his life for the safety of the Father of his Country.

I observed also, that tho the Elephants skin be very hard whilst he is alive,
yet when he is dead the skin is just like melted Glue.

There are several Parks that are empaled with nothing but Elephants Teeth, the
least of which Parks is above a League about. In some places they Hunt the
Elephants, and eat the Flesh; but they are obliged to give the Tushes of every
one they kill to the Lord of the place. When they intend to take their
Elephants, they make a long Lane closed in on both sides, so as the Elephant
can run neither to the right nor to the left. This Lane is broad at the first,
but grows narrower and narrower, till there is no more Room left at the further
end, than for the Female Elephant to lie down, which must be one that is
desirous of the Male at the same time. Tho she be tame, yet she is bound with
good Ropes and Cords, and by her Cries will call the Male, who presently runs
through the Lane toward her. Now when the Elephant comes where the Lane grows
narrow, they that lie hid for that purpose, immediately barricado up the Lane
behind; and when he comes near the Female, then is another barricado set up,
that stops him from going any further. When he is thus between the Barricadoes,
they so entangle his Legs and Trunk with Ropes and Cords, that he is soon
taken, having no way to help himself. The same way they use for the most part
in the Kingdom of Siam and Pegu; only that the Natives there mount the Female
Elephant, and go to find out the Male in the Forests; and when they have met
with his haunt, they tie the Female to the most convenient place they can find,
and then they fix their Snares for the Elephant, who in a short time hastens
toward the Female hot for generation, where her Cries call him.

This is observable of the Female, that when she begins to be hot, she gathers
together a great heap of Herbs and Weeds, and makes her self a kind of Bed some
four or five foot high from the ground, where contrary to the Custom of all
other Creatures she lies upon her back in expectation of the Male, whom she
calls to her by a peculiar Cry.

This is furthermore particular to the Elephant in the Isle of Ceylon, that
only the first, which the Female brings forth has Tushes. And it is also
observable, that the Ivory which comes from Achem, when it is wrought has this
peculiar quality with it, that it never grows yellow, like that which comes out
of the Continent, and from the East Indies, which makes it more esteemed and
dearer than any other.

When the Merchants bring Elephants to any place to sell, it is a pleasant sight
to see 'em go along; for in regard there are generally old and young together,
when the old ones are gone by, the Children will be running after the little
ones to play with 'em, and give 'em something or other to eat. While the young
Elephants (which are very wanton) are busily taking what is offered them, the
Children leap upon their Back; but then the young Elephants, that lately stopped
for the lucre of Victuals, perceiving their D^ms a great way before 'em, double
their pace, and playing with their Trunks, throw the Children off their backs
to the ground, and that without doing 'em any harm.

Notwithstanding all the Inquiry I have made, I could never find exactly how
long the Elephant will live; nor can all the Governors and Keepers of those
Creatures tell you more, than that such an Elephant has been in the possession
of their Father, Grandfather, and Great Grandfather: and by that computation I
have found, that they have lived some of 'em six score, or an Hundred and
Thirty Years.

The Javians making their benefit of the Portugals Ingratitude to the Indian
Princes, who entertained 'em, did pertinaciously oppose the establishment of
any strangers in the Isle. But the profit the Kings of Bantam and Jacatra
receive by vending their Spices to the English and Dutch, was so considerable,
that at last they consented, that the People of those two Nations should build
a House for such Factors, as they should have occasion to leave there, and for
stowing up the Commodities they traffiqu'd in. The Dutch by Treaty with those
Kings, regulated the Customs of Importation and Exportation; but those Articles
were so ill kept by the Indian Kings, who raised their Rates according as they
discovered the strangers necessity of Commerce; that the Dutch to avoid this
Injustice, and secure 'emselves from the violence of the Barbarians, by degrees
secretly fortified their Quarters at Jacatra, and in a short time made it
defensible. The Indians perceived it not, till 'twas past their hopes of
forcing it; so as in this despair of driving out the Dutch, they made use of
the bad Correspondence between the English and them, which chiefly appeared in
a Seafight they had near Bantam and Jacatra, June 2. 1619. the Holland Fleet
being put to Flight by the English. The Dutch being forced to retreat, the King
of Jacatra with the English Forces, besieged the Dutch Fort, now called
Batavia, which Siege lasted six Months, till the Holland Admiral having
reinforced his Fleet with the Ships that lay in the Molucques, constrained the
English to raise the Sieg, to embarque their Guns, and quit the Straight of
Sundy, to get into the main Sea. The King of Jacatra would have cast the blame
of all these disturbances upon the English, but the Dutch General would not be
satisfied with such excuses, but landing his Forces, to the number of Eleven
Hundred Men, he assaulted the Town of Jacatra, which he took by force, and
having put all to the Sword, fired it. That done, the Dutch completed the
Fortification of their Quarters, and brought it to a regular form, with four
Bastions of Freestone, well Trench'd and Pallizado'd, with Half Moons,
Redoubts, and other necessary works. The King of Matram, who is (as it were)
Emperor of Java, in the Year 1628. besieged this Fort, and lying under the
Canon stormed it several times; but in the end was forced to raise the Siege,
as he in like manner was the Year following; and since that time the Dutch have
established their Commerce jointly with the Chinese, Siameses, Succadans, and
other Neighbors, taking Ten in the Hundred Custom upon all Commodities,
whether imported or exported thence.

The City of Batavia is twelve Leagues from Bantam, Eastward in a Bay, which
being sheltered with some small Islands on the Seaside, is one of the best
Roads in all the Indies. Strangers that inhabit there pay a certain Tax by the
Month, according to the profits they make, which is great; for a Porter who
will with ease get two Royals a day, pays but one and a half in a Month; a
Fruiterer four Royals, a Fisherman three Royals, Distillers of Arach eight
Royals; Mechanics, as Shoomakers, Tailors, and the like, so as at present it is
the most important place and firm establishment the Dutch have throughout the
Indies.

Shortly after my return from Bantam to Batavia, I was drawn out amongst others
to be sent to Siam, where we arrived safely. That Kingdom extends not only in
the Peninsula, beyond the Ganges as far as Cape sin Capare; but it likewise
comprehends the Kingdom of Martaban, which is upon the Gulf of Pegu, and that
of Cambaia, upon the Gulf of Siam; it is situated in the most Eastern part of
all the Indies, and contains abut 360 Leagues from the South to the North, and
about 200 in its greatest extent from East to West above the Peninsula.

It may be divided into four or five principal parts; that which is above the
Peninsula, in the midst of the others, is particularly the Kingdom of Siam. On
its West is that of Martaban, on the East Cambaya, and Maluca on the South*
This Island formerly contained several Kingdoms, that are at present reduced
into Provinces, the Princes whereof are Subjects and Tributaries of the King of
Siam.

Very pleasant and fruitful is this Country, being watered with several great
Rivers, the principal of which is called Menan, which after having Bathed Prom,
Travai, and Brema, Cities of Ava and Pegu, enters into that of Siam, passing
thorough India the Capital thereof. This River is so deep, that it can carry
Ships of four Hundred Tun, and which take Twelve or Thirteen Foot Water; and it
might bear those that draw as much more, were it not that at its mouth there is
a Rock, which fills the bottom near which you are to pass, and hinders greater
Vessels from coming in. Its breadth near the City, and for two Leagues beyond
it, is two Bow-shoot, which renders the unlading of Commodities so much the
more easy. Every where else its Banks are a good Musket shot distance one
from another. From the City to thirty Leagues beyond it it is all along beset
with Gardens, Buroughs, Villages, Monasteries, and other very fine glorious
Buildings, the sight of which is infinitely charming. And what exalts their
beauty, is that instead of Mountains, we see nothing in all that Country which
is plain and even, but Towers and Pyramids, which have something very singular
both for Art and Materials.

Eight Leagues from the City stands another called Bancock, where all manner of
Ships, of what Nation soever they be, are obliged to stop to declare from
whence they come, whither they go, what is their Cargo? and how many Men they
have on Board? after which they pay the Customs, for which the Toll-man gives
an Acquittance, which they are obliged to show to another little City, called
Canon Bantenau, which is but a League from India; and in case it be without
deceit, they are permitted to go whither they please, and to trade freely
through all the Kingdoms, without being obliged to pay any other Customs than
those of going out, which every Ship is to pay upon pain of Confiscation. As
for India, which, as I have said, is the Capital of the Kingdom, it is without
contradiction, one of the finest things that can be seen. Its Ramparts are
about three fathoms in height, with Bastions of all sorts, for there are both
solid, plain and cut. Admirable are its Buildings, but especially the Temples,
the Monasteries, and gilt Towers, are there of an unexpressible Richness and
Ornament. The River Menan does there run into eight parts, which after having
formed two Islands, discharges it self into the Gulf of Siam. The Kings Palace
is of so vast an extent, that one would take it for a Ci^y. It has its separate
Ramparts, and ^he Towers which environ it are in such great numbers, so high
built, that nothing is more magnificent; and the inside is answerable to the
outside. I know by those who have traveled China, that in no other Country is
any thing so perfect ^o be seen.

The Air is very temperate, considering its being so near the Line, (for it is
but fifteen degrees distant) perhaps by reason of the narrowness of the
Country, which is refreshed by Winds. The Soil is fat, and very fruitful in
Rice, Barley, and Fruits. They gather there a great quantity of Pepper,
Benjamin, Musk and Aloes. There are Mines of Gold, Silver, Copper, Pewter, and
other Metals. It breeds a great number of Elephants and Horses. There are great
Forests toward Cochinchina, which serve for retreats to Tigers, Lions,
Leopards, and other ravenous Beasts, and for Venison; but the number of Red and
Fallow Deer is incredible, since that there is carried every Year to Japan,
above Three Hundred Thousand Skins of those Creatures, wherein the Company have
a good share. Oxen, Cows, Hares, Hogs, wild Boars, Buffeloes, and Rabbets are
there without number. Birds there are of a Thousand several Species, and even
of all sorts, except the Swan and Nightingale, which have never bin seen there.
The Country* wants not Fish, but above all they make a great Trade of the Skins
of Thornback, the most part of which are sold in Japan, where they are worth
fifty, sixty, and some an Hundred Ducats a piece. I have seen one sold for an
Hundred Crowns; and that was no extraordinary rate, yet they would not give
five Pence for one that has the least defect. There is a great number of
Crocodiles, which the Inhabitants do happily make use of for the Curing many
evils.

The Natives are all Idolaters, and extremely superstitious. They have many
Temples inhabited by Monks, who are had in great Veneration.

This Country was always governed by a King or an Emperor, to whom His
Subjects pay a kind of Adoration. He reckons Princes among His Subjects; His
Dominions are so vast and so extended, that he is esteemed one of the most
powerful Monarchs in the World, which we shall see more at large in the
following Section.

Sect. V.
THE Kingdom of Siam, tho vast, yet is Populous, proportionably to its
greatness. The Natives are goodnatur'd, witty and industrious. All the
Artificers are very dexterous; and tho they be of all sorts, most part of 'em
however are either Fishermen or Husbandmen, because very few but have their
Lands in Property, or certain Places of Rivers and other Waters, where they
have Right of Fishing, which suffices them for their subsistence. For Avarice
and Ambition are no Vices of this Country; the Abundance being so great, that
mostly the day-labouring People have but three Pence a day for their
nourishment and pains, on which they live very handsomely, and have besides
something to lay up. The Merchants are all rich, because perhaps they know the
end and art of Trade, wherein few Nations excel them.

In each City is a Sovereign Court, whose President, that is Triennial, being
assisted with his Counselors, sits as Judge in all Causes both Civil and
Criminal. But they do not judge there in the last Appeal, and none but the
great Council, which resides in the Metropolis, have that privilege. The
Proceedings there are much shorter, and less subject to Corruption, than in
Europe. They do justice without distinction, and whosoever finds himself
attainted and convicted of Larceny, of Murder, etc. no favor can hinder him
from being punished, according to the enormity of the Crime.

There is no Court more superb than that of this Emperor. He never goes on
foot, no, not in his own Palace, where he causes himself to be carried from one
place to another in a Chair of Massy Gold. The greatest Lords of the Empire,
who are obliged to follow him at all hours, and at all times, however never see
him more than once a day; and that too with so much Pomp and Splendor, that he
dazles all those who look on him. When one of these great Men is desirous to
speak to him, he approaches him with his Knees upon the ground, his Hands
joined, his Head bowed down, and begins and ends his Speech with these words,
Javva Fiauw Perre Bond, Tiauw Javva; which signifies, King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords. His Throne, which is of Massy Gold, and all best with Precious
Stones, is raised very high from the ground; he mounts it by several steps of
the same Metal, but it is a Crime to see him mount it, and every step at both
ends supports an Animal of different kind, and of fine Gold. When he goes out
of His Palace, whether out of Devotion* or for Pleasure, which happens two or
three times in the Year, he is attended by the greatest Princes of His Empire,
by His Wives and Concubines, who are in great numbers all very richly clothed,
by Land upon Elephants, and by Water in Barges all guilt without and within.
From the Palace to the place where the Emperor goes, the Lifeguard stands in
a row on each side, all well apparelled and mounted to advantage; principally
the chief Officers, who are upon Elephants, whose Houses are of Gold and
Silver. All along the way nothing is to be heard but Fifes, Drums, Flutes, and
other Instruments, which make a passable Harmony. And as soon as the Emperor
appears, every one upon pain of Death is obliged to come out before him,
prostrate 'emselves, and adore him: wherein they are so rigorous, that if one
waits never so little to acquit himself of this Devoir, he is punished at that
instant, which I have seen with my own eyes. This Custom is quite contrary to
what is practiced in Peru; for in all places where the King goes with his Wives
and Concubines, the People must shut their Doors and Windows, and remain as in
Prison until all is gone by. Those who happen to be in the Emperors way, are
obliged to dislodge, and make way for His Attendants; which often occasions
people to die of Hunger and Cold; especially when the Order comes by night,
those who give it being so punctual, or rather so hard-hearted, as they force
obedience, without giving the People time to provide themselves with Clothes
and Food. A hard extremity in all particulars, since besides the inconveniency
which they receive from this surprise, they have likewise the displeasure of
leaving their Houses to be plundered.

Gold is so common in this Court, that their Cattle are served in Vessels of no
other Metal. The Elephants, and especially the White Ones, are there treated
like Princes; and of this last sort there is always one in so great Veneration,
that they attribute to his presence the Prosperity of the Empire. Those
Creatures have in all times served for a pretext to Wars of long continuance
betwixt the Neighboring Kings; for besides, that they are rarely of that
color, they reverence 'em in memory of Xaca, whose Mother being with Child of
him, once dreamed, that a White Elephant came out of her mouth, and at another
time out of her left side.

It was upon the account of these Animals, that in the Year 1548, the Kings of
Ava and Pegu, made a League against the Emperor of Siam, in whose Territories
they had made a great Progress, before he was in a condition to resist 'em. At
length with the Aid of His Generals He got in the Head of two Hundred Thousand
Men, with whom he went to encamp within Half a League of His Enemies. Those who
thought to have surprised him, seeing so strong a Barrier opposed to their
Design, made show of preparing 'emselves for a Battle; but whether their Forces
were unequal, or they began to abate in their good intelligence among
'emselves, three Months passed without making any attempt; at the end of which
those Kings seeing their Armies perish for want of Victuals, abandoned the
ground, and left by that means the Emperor of Siam the peaceable possessour of
the two White Elephants, which they pretended to seize on. What at first
delayed his March, was, that he had neither Soldiers nor Ships to go to the
place, where he was to join the Enemy; and he caused above Twenty Thousand
Vessels to be built, which required some time. Besides the two Hundred Thousand
Men which he brought with him, he left upon the Frontiers Fifty Thousand
Citizens, who were obliged to guard 'em at their own costs. Some were amazed,
he did not take advantage of His Enemies weakness; but he said, That he had
gained more by destroying them after that manner, than if he had constrained
'em to end the quarrel by a Battle, the issue whereof was uncertain. He
pretended to have conquered 'em more cunningly, and more happily for His
Subjects, whose Lives and Estates he preserved, without costing 'em one drop of
blood. So that he was received in Triumph in His Metropolis, as if he had made
the greatest Conquests. After the death of the King, if he has left no Male
Infant, or his Son has not attained the Age of 15 Years, this Son loses His
Right to the Crown, to which the eldest Brother of the deceased becomes the
Legitimate Successor. And as for the Offices possessed by the Grandees of the
Court, they are all Hereditary, at least if he who enjoys 'em does not oblige
the Prince to declare his Heir incapable of succeeding him.

Sect. VI.
THE great number of Strangers, who trade at Siam, help much to increase the
Treasures of the King; there is continually a coming in and going out of His
Kingdom, a prodigious quantity of Merchandises, on which there are considerable
Imposts. His Mines of Gold, Lead and Pewter, do contribute very much thereunto;
as likewise great Forests of as fine wood of Japan as that of Brasile. The
Trade of this Wood lies along the Coasts of Coromandel, Dabul' China, Japan,
and all the Neighboring Islands. Add to this, that all His Subjects being His
Slaves, He inherits all their Estates, or at least two Thirds, leaving out of
favor, the other Third to the Relations of the Defunct. A Custom so
advantageous, as this Prince extends it even to Strangers, whose Heir he is, as
well as those that are born in His Country; and as there is ever an incredible
multitude of 'em, it is certain, His Finances are thereby much augmented.

The greatest Expense of this Prince is the great number of Pagods, Convents,
Hospitals and Towers, which he causes incessantly to be built, and what it
costs him in raising 'em, does surpass the Idea People have conceived thereof.
After having applied Himself to what concerns Religion, he takes care His
Arsenals be largely provided with all that is requisite for War: and indeed all
things there are in a surprising abundance, and so neatly kept, that it would
be very difficult to imitate them therein.

As for His Forces, they consist almost all in Infantry, which is very good;
the Pay of the Soldiers is but a little Rice; the rest they have occasion for,
they are to gain it from the Enemy, or by laboring very hard at any kind of
Work, for they are treated as Slaves, and they give a blind Obedience to
whatsoever they are commanded.

As for the Citizens, their condition is little better than that of the
Soldiers; for, besides the Subsidies with which they are excessively
oppressed, and that they have nothing in Propriety: they are obliged to work on
the Fortifications, and to work as well as the Soldiers in occasions of
necessity. Notwithstanding this, they are so supple, and so tractable, that
they are never heard to complain or murmur: tho the Government is severe, they
live contented and happy, because they desire nothing. From that soft and
tractable Humor, they easily proceed to Devotion, which is as natural to 'em;
and whether they are little addicted to Riches, whereof they have only the use,
and not the Property, or they think 'em unworthy of their Affection, they
employ 'em almost all in Alms, which they bestow upon the Bonzes, who ^re the
Priests of the Country, and in building Pagods and Convents, to which they
annex so many Revenues, as no Monks live more at their ease, nor know better,
how to take advantage of the useful Ignorance and Superstition of the People,
than the Monks of that Country. The great esteem the People have for 'em,
causes 'em to multiply more than can be imagined; these Priests affect a fine
outside, and a modesty which savours ^ of nothing less than of Ambition. But
this appearance is very deceitful, for under pretenses of maintaining the Glory
of their Gods, to whom they boast they are much dearer than their Lives, they
only think of advancing themselves, insomuch that there has been those found,
who have made secret Cabals for the dethroning the King, for to Reign in His
place.

These good People are clothed in yellow, and every New Moon they have their
Heads, Beards and Eye brows shaved. They neither wear Gold nor Silver, and dare
not so much as touch it, but they receive and dispense it by a Procurator, that
is to say, by the Hands of a Man of an approved Fidelity, and who Honors the
Secrets of the Order, but pretends to see nothing. They make a Vow of Chastity,
and seem to keep it very rigorously; but they see Women in private, and
provided there results no scandal from that Commerce, they make little scruple
on it* but if it comes to light, the Criminal is punished very severely. Bating
this, they lead a very delicious life, exempt from all care; for as they want
nothing, and they have not so much as the care of heaping up Riches, which
shower down upon 'em, without spending their thoughts in that way, they have
nothing more to do than to study, how to entertain their Votaries in the good
intention they have of nourishing 'em in a Heavenly Idleness. Their Rule
obliges 'em to preach to the People every Quarter of the Moon, to Catechize at
all times, and to induce 'em to Peace. The great Modesty which they affect in
their Pious Exercises, does invite to their Houses all the People, who in
acknowledgment of the spiritual Benefits which the Monks communicate to 'em,
bestow upon 'em such as are temporal, and that even to profusion. About four a
clock in the Morning, they rise at the ringing of the Bells, and go all
together to a certain place appointed for Prayer; part of the day is spent in
visiting the sick; in the Evening they return to Prayers, where they remember
the dead, for they believe that their Prayers contribute very much toward
their comfort and ease, and for the freeing 'em from an imaginary Place, where
(they say) they endure great Pains.

They have an infinite number of Idols, who represent several postures of Men
and Women, most being of Gold or Silver, some of Copper and Pewter, and very
few of Stone or Wood. In the great Pagod, where the King goes once a year,
there is one, who tho seated with Legs across, is about sixty foot high; the
others are much richer, but not so great. Those of the Altars are much the
finest, but their Beauty is not in the least to be compared with the Idols of
the Pagod, which is in the midst of the City; where of four Thousand which it
contains, there is not one but what is either of Gold or Gilt. As for their
Ceremonies, they are in many things conformable to those of the Papists, who
its easy to prove, have sucked most of their Superstition from Paganism; for
at the Entrance of their Pagods, there is Holy Water; and without speaking of
their Altars, that are loaded with Images or Idols, there are Lamps always
burning, a number of other Lights, and every where Boxes to receive the Alms of
Pilgrims. The Works of Supererogation are in great Credit amongst 'em; and if
we would believe 'em, there is not a dead Person, but whom their Prayers are a
great help to, nor any living, but to whom they are considerably useful. Tho
the Indians, especially the Bonzes, have commonly a blind aversion to those who
are of a contrary Religion to theirs, these People seem very moderate in that
respect, and far from being passionate. When we represent to 'em the Vanity of
the Gods they adore, they answer modestly, protest they search for the Truth,
and if they knew a better way to attain it, they would quit all to pursue it. I
have heard one of those Banzes say, that the Christians after them were the
most beloved by God, and the nighest to Salvation. I esteem them (said he) so
much the more, in that they seem to love Justice, Probity and Sincerity;
because th y leave the Conscience free, and do not traduce us, at least in our
presence, as the Mahometans do, who cannot suffer those, who are not of their
belief. A pride which we detest, and which binders us from praying for their
Conversion, as we do for the Christians, whose God is the Brother of our God.

Sect. VII.
NOthing is wanting in that Kingdom of things necessary for the Structure of
all sorts of Buildings, especially it abounds in very fine Stones, and yet the
Houses there are only of Wood: the reason of it is, that the Stones are
reserved for the building both the Pagods and Pyramids, whereof there is a
prodigious number through all the Country, Stools, Chairs and Tables are of no
use there, and the Siamites as well as all the other Orientals, sit in all
occasions, only upon Mats or Carpets. All their Movables, which consist in
some Utensils of the Kitchen, are of Brass, always very bright and very neat;
their Houses are so clean and neat, that they far exceed Holland in that; and
as for their Persons, they wash their Bodies three times a day from Head to
Foot, in the clearest Fountain water that can be found; then they rub 'emselves
with a Perfume composed of Sandal Wood, Aloes, Ambergreece, Rose Water, Musk,
and such like things, whose Odor is very agreeable; wherein they take a much
better course than the Javans, who perfume 'emselves with a Drug that is
insupportable to those that are nice in the least. Commonly it is forthwith
after those Bathings, that they make their Visits and their Devotions, but they
first deck 'emselves with all their fineries; those of the Men consisting in a
number of Gold-Rings, and a long Vest of Cotton-stuff, upon which they have a
Sash of several colors, and under, a very loose shirt of Linen or Cotton,
which is sometimes red, sometimes white, or of another color. The Sleeves of
their Vests are very large, most of 'em open about the Elbow, and hanging to
the Knees, but they go almost bare-headed, and without shoes.

The Women make a round of their Hair, which they fasten behind their Head with
a Bodkin. Their Pendants are of blades of Gold, of a Fingers length, which are
inchased with some Jewels; those blades are so massy, that the weight of them
makes holes in their Ears big enough to put a Thumb through. Their Bracelets
are likewise of Gold and Precious Stones, and they have very fine Diamonds upon
their Fingers. As for their Habits, they are of Cotton, as well as those of the
Men, and made much after the same manner; except that they have upon their
Bosoms a Veil of Linen or Silk, the color of which is Arbitrary, and the form
something resembles the Scarfs Women wear in England. The Complexion of both
Sexes is Tawny; they are Tall of Stature, but well set, and of a Free Carriage,
and generally the People there are good natured and polite.

Tho the young Men and Maids see one another with liberty enough, and it is no
Scandal for the latter to grant sometimes Favors, they live in Marriage with
so much reservedness, that there is no Nation where the Women have more: Not
that they are all perhaps so many Lucretiaes, but as Adultery is there severely
punished, the fear of Punishment is capable of rendering 'em discreet. Moreover,
the Mothers forbid their Daughters when they are young, too great a Commerce
with Men, for fear of getting an ill Habit; or perhaps too, for fear that the
Men should not be so eager to court 'em by way of Marriage. This Circumstance
makes the Maids, who have a desire to be Married, of difficult access; and the
more they conceal 'emselves, the more do their Lovers crowd after 'em. The
means to obtain 'em is, to address ones self to the Parents, who, without
consulting their Daughters Inclinations, grant her to the Man, who pleases 'em
most, provided he be of the Kindred; for it is the Custom of the Siamites, to
ally 'emselves only in their own Family, where all Alliance is permitted,
except between Brother and Sister; nay, and these may Marry together, in case
they be but Half-Brothers and Half-Sisters; that is to say, of the same Father,
and not of the same Mother. Thus Intrigues of Gallantry are of no use in that
Country, and such an one Marries, who has never seen the Person she is to wed.
As Interest reigns there as well as elsewhere, they make Alliances commonly in
consideration of Estate and Fortune; and when the Match is advantageous, for
fear of a disappointment, the Maids are Married at Nine years, and the Young
Men at Twelve; insomuch as the married Couple do not both make five and twenty
years, when they find 'emselves already Fathers and Mothers. Out of Marriage
the Men are permitted to have as many Concubines as they can maintain, and in
Marriage, if they have but one Wife, they are free to quit her upon slight
pretexts, especially when they have no Children, and then either the one or the
other may Marry again when they please.

Tho the Priests are very much reverenced in that Country, yet there is no
respect had to 'em in Marriage, and far from calling 'em to be Witnesses of the
Union, they are on the contrary avoided, and People take it for an ill Omen,
that they should be present at such a time. He who performs the Ceremony of it,
is one of the nearest Relations, who in the heat of the Feast, makes an
Exhortation, after his mode, to the new married Couple: and whether the Bride
and Bridegroom live together until death, or they part, the Clauses of the
Contract of Marriage are religiously observed.

As to the Children, they are brought up with great gentleness, and yet they
are very supple, and do punctually, without any need of using rigor, all that
is exacted from them. It Is usually the Priests, who take care of their
Education; and as this sort of People live happily, their Disciples observing
it, turn Priests as well as they, for to enjoy the same pleasures.

Their Custom in regard of the Dead, is to burn them, and to make their
Funerals conformably to their Means, which is performed in the manner
following; The Relations of the Defunct raise up a Tomb, which they fill with
sweet scented Wood, which serves to burn the Corpse, and whereto the Priests set
fire, after having said Prayers. The Rich preserve the Ashes in Urns of Gold or
Silver, or bury 'em under a Pyramid, or in a Pagod, which the Deceased has
caused to be built; for there is not a rich Siamite, but who is at that expense
to eternize his Memory. The Ashes of the Poor are cast into the Wind. Those who
die naked of all, through an excess of Charity, that is to say, for having
spent what they had of Value in building Monasteries or Pagods, those I say,
are burnt at the expense of the Priests and Monks, who have profited thereby,
for which reason the Pomp is very small. As for Criminals and Children, who end
their Lives, those by a Criminal, these by an untimely death, their bodies are
not burnt, but they inter 'em, it not being reasonable, that they who have
lived without honor, or died before they attained to the Knowledge of Religion
and the Gods, should enjoy the Honors and Privileges of the Country.

The Civility of the Siamites extends even to Strangers, and of what Nation
soever a Man be, he is favorably received there. What contributes to this good
Reception is, that the more Strangers there be there, the more are the Natives
of the Country esteemed by the Neighboring States; for which Reason, it is
forbidden to trouble them in any kind, whether in the course of their Trade, or
Customs, or in the exercise of their Religion. True it is however, that there
are some who are privileged; and of all those who frequent there, none are so
well received as the Hollanders, to whom the King has been particularly kind,
as well in their Trade as Imposts; and even contrary to his Custom, which is to
see no Foreigners, he gives 'em Access in His Palaces, and calls 'em, His
Children.

Sect. VIII.
THose sensible Marks of the King of Siam's Goodness toward our Nation, have
raised us Enemies who have endeavored to destroy us; but far from attaining to
their ends: their Hatred has only served to make us take Precautions, which
have confirmed us in the Favor and good Opinion of that Prince. Since we have
had the Honor of having Access into His Palace, he has heaped upon us new
kindnesses; and that which he did in permitting us to assist at the Funerals of
his only Daughter, is certainly one of the greatest that Strangers can receive.
This Princess being deceased at my first arrival there, six Months afterward
the King sent word to the Sieur van Muyden Principal Commissioner of the
Company, that he had leave given him to be present at the Obsequies. Van Muyden
received with all due respect the Honor the King did him: and thus, with some
others, of which number I was, he was Spectatour of a Ceremony which merited
well to be seen.

Preparations were made for that Pomp in one of the Courts of that Palace,
where there were raised five Towers of Wood; whereof that in the midst was
about an Hundred and twenty Foot in Height, the others diminishing by the same
degrees they stood at a distance from that. Those Towers were painted and gilt,
and had communication by Galleries, with Ballisters enriched with the same
Ornaments. Before the highest of those Towers, the Body of the Defunct, was
reposed upon an Altar, all covered with Gold and precious Stones; she was
standing, her Hands joined, her Face turned toward Heaven, in a Coffin of Gold
an inch thick. Her Robe had a long Train, and was all beset with Jewels; her
Crown, her Necklace, and her Bracelets likewise, all over covered with
Diamonds, were of an inestimable price. When every one had taken places upon
Scaffolds made on purpose, all the Grandees of the Kingdom went to make their
Bows to her. The Ladies came thither afterward, and both Sexes were only
apparelled with a white Cloth, without any Attire or Ornament; each one
scattering round the Body and the Altar Flowers and Perfumes, with a very sad
Countenance. After which, the Body was carried twenty paces from thence in a
Chariot, the riches whereof equalled that of the Altar. The Potentates of the
Kingdom, and the Ladies, having paid her the same Honors, they all wept
bitterly, and after so mournful a manner* that it seemed as if they had lost
what they had dearest in the world. These Tears and Lamentations having lasted
for half an hour, the Principal Officers of the Crown drew the Chariot very
gently toward the place where the Funeral Pile was. It was attended by the
same Lords and Ladies we have already mentioned, still weeping and lamenting.
Before 'em marched the Eldest Son of the King, only Brother of the deceased
Princess, and both born of the same Mother: He was clothed in white* as well as
the Lords who attended him* and was mounted on an Elephant whos^ Hoose was
embroidered, with Chains o^ Gold upon his Neck. On each side o^ him went his
two Brothers, born of other Women, upon Elephants, like the first, each holding
a long Skarf of white Silk, whereof one of the ends was fastened to the Coffin.
Round the Bed, walked fourteen of the Kings Sons on foot, clothed also in
white, with a branch of a Tree in their Hands, all so well instructed in
weeping, that there was not one in the Company but did it with a good grace. At
half way from the Funeral Pile, there were Stages or Scaffolds, where the Lords
of lesser Quality than the former, expected the Convoy. When the Body was come
up over against them, some cast several sorts of Habits to the People; others,
Oranges full of Ficols, which makes half a Crown of our Money: and some certain
pieces called Masen, which are about our Crown in value.

The Convoy being arrived at the place where the Ceremony was to end, the
Grandees of the Kingdom took the Body with great Respect, and laid it upon the
Funeral Pile, several Instruments in the mean while sounding, whose mournful
Harmony, attended with the Tears and Lamentations of all the Court, was capable
of staggering the hardest Hearts. This sad Consort being ended, they covered
the Body with Sandal and Agor Wood; and after having cast therein a great
quantity of Perfumes, the King and Lords Children returned to the Palace,
leaving the Ladies with the Corpse, which was not to be burnt till two days
afterward. Tho this Term appointed for Tears, seemed long to Persons weary
with weeping, they were notwithstanding forced to continue that sad Exercise
for the space of two whole days, without any ones being permitted, of what
Quality soever she was, to exempt her self a Quarter of an Hour: a severe
Custom upon my word, but necessary to all that have Ambition, Tears on that
occasion, being the surest and shortest means of rendering ones self
recommendable. Tho a Persons Honor i^ concerned to show a deep mourning and a
profound silence, there were however some, on whom those Considerations had so
little effect, that they grew weary of weeping; and it was for those weak
Souls, that they had left Old Women among them, to revive 'em with Lashes of a
Whip, made in the form of those sorts of Disciplines, which the Monks make use
of in Europe; and if it happened that those poor Ladies left off weeping for
one moment, because they were oppressed with weariness and sleep, they lashed
'em in such a manner, that instead of feigned Tears, they obliged 'em to shed
real ones.

Whilst the Ladies were weeping round the deceased Princess, the Priests were
upon Scaffolds in the Court where the first Tears were shed, praying Night and
day for her Soul: And while the Body was exposed there, they interrupted their
Prayers often, for to cast to the People Garments of all sorts, Utensils for
Housekeeping, Instruments for Artificers, Beds, Mats, and other Movables. On
the side of the Court, there were Twenty other Towers made of Reeds, faced
within and without with Paper of several Colors: those Towers were filled with
numbers of Fireworks, which lasted fifteen days together: during which, the
King caused great Alms to be given, both to the Poor, and the Priests, the
Expense whereof was [the Preparations being comprehended therein] of Five
Thousand Calfi, which makes of our Money about Sixty Thousand Pounds, beside
the Statues of Gold and Silver, amongst which, there were two of Gold, of four
Foot and a half high, and an inch and a half thick, which were put, for the
Honor of the Deceased, in the finest Pagods of the Country; all made of Gold
Silver and Jewels, which the Deceased had received during her life, as well
from the King her Father, as from the Principal Lords of the Court.

Sect. IX.
THE Body having reposed two days upon the sweet sented Wood, which served to
burn it, all the Court went to relieve the doleful Ladies, whom their Fatigue
had rendered very lean. The Ceremony began with Prayers and Speeches, which the
Priests made; and when they had done 'em, the King took a lighted Wax-Candle
from the Hands of the Archpriest, and set fire himself to the Funeral Pile,
where the Body was reduced to Ashes in the Coffin of Gold, wherein they had
left the Riches, wherewith it was adorned. When they thought the Body consumed,
and went to gather up the Ashes for the putting 'em into an Urn of Gold, there
was found a piece of flesh of the bigness of a little Child, so fine, and so
Vermilion-like, that it seemed at first, as if the Fire had spared it out of
respect; but that thought was followed by another, which occasioned the
shedding of a great deal of blood. The King, who was one of those who gathered
up the Ashes, looking upon that piece of flesh, What do ye think (said he, to
the Lords who were present) is it out of respect, the fire has spared what
remains of the body of my Daughter? The King waiting their answer, one amongst
'em said, That His Majesty had too much understanding to doubt what he saw.
How! (replied the King all in a fury) I have but too much reason not to doubt
any longer of a suspicion I have had a hundred times, my Daughter was poisoned.
In finishing those words he gave order they should secure all the Women who had
served the Defunct, and that not one should be excepted.

The days following, new suspicions were formed, upon which a number of
innocent People were imprisoned: for what tortures soever they made them
suffer, there was not one but disavowed the Crime. In the mean while the Kings
fury daily augmented; all those that were accused made appear, they were not
culpable: but the Cruelties did not diminish; and when the Court was dreined,
and the King no longer found any one upon whom to discharge his Anger, he sent
upon diverse pretexts, for the greatest Men of the Kingdom, and their Wives,
whom he caused to be put in Prison as soon as they arrived at Court. When he
had 'em in his power, he caused several holes to be dug round the City,
about twenty Foot square, wherein great Fires were kindled, guarded by
Soldiers, who took care to hinder 'em from going out. And thither he sent the
Prisoners, loaded with Chains, to the end he might draw from 'em by force what
Threatenings and Promises had not been able to make 'em confess. When they were
at the place of Punishment, it was begun with making 'em enter into a Tub of
hot water for to soften their skin, and render it more susceptible of the
impression of the Fire. After which they scraped the Soles of their Feet with
Irons as sharp as Knives; then carried 'em before Judges, who examined 'em
concerning the pretended business of poisoning; those who continued obstinate
to deny that they were culpable of it, were forced to walk bare footed upon
burning Coals; and if it was found afterward that the Fire had penetrated 'em,
it was a convicting proof, they were guilty of the fact whereof they had bin
accused. An Error which in all times has been entertained among the Pagans,
who made use of Fire for the trying of Criminals; Witness the Roman Vestals,
who only proved their Chastity by grasping a burning Iron, without burning
'emselves. As for the Siamites we speak of, they whom the heat of the Fire
caused to fall into a Swoun, and who had not Strength enough to get out of
'emselves, perished there miferably, no body daring to to help 'em, for fear of
running the same danger. Those who escaped it, were tied to a Post, from whence
an Elephant instructed in that manner of Death, tore 'em with his Trunk, cast
'em into the Air, from whence they fell again upon his Teeth, and after several
Tosses he trod 'em under Foot, and made their Guts come out, which were
afterward cast into the River. Besides this hard punishment, there was one,
that was no less to be feared, which was to be Interred all alive unto the
Chin, upon the Highway of the City, with obligation to Passengers to spit upon
'em, and prohibition to give 'em ease in any manner, and even to advance their
Deaths, which was the favor those miserable Wretches demanded with most
Ardency.

Amongst other Punishments, there was this very remarkable, and which is also
very frequently executed upon notorious Malefactors. The Criminal is bound so
straight about with a Napkin, that a Man may grasp him with his Hands, and then
is pricked with Engines as sharp as Needles; not only make the blood gush out,
but force the Patient to hold in his breath. Which taking the opportunity of on
a sudden, they cut him through the middle, and clapping immediately the upper
part of his body upon a flaming hot piece of Brass, through the cauterization
of which, he remains a considerable time alive, in far greater torments than
can be imagined.

These cruel Executions lasted for above four Months, during which, they took
the Lives away of an incredible Multitude. One day in less than four or five
Hours, I my self saw above fifty put to death. People imagined, that would have
been the last day of the Massacres, because some Months passed afterward
without putting any body to death; but they were quickly disabused. As the
Nobility, that were terrified, began to take Heart and return to Court, the
Executions were renewed, and so many Heads fell at length, that the flower of
the most Apparent, whom the King thought ill intentioned to His Person and
Children, perished upon the Pretext of having had a Hand in this Sham-business
of Poisoning, or of having been privy to it. To have seen those Cruelties, and
so visible an Injustice, it was much to be wondered there was no Rising, and
indeed, there has been such for less considerable Reasons: but the King had
provided against that, by keeping on foot a great number of Forces, with which
he had filled his best Towns, in appearance, for to send 'em against the
Chinezes, but indeed to bridle those whom he distrusted, while he made sure of
the others. And further, His Hatred did only extend to the Great Men, whose
Fall the People did joyfully see, by reason of their Insolence, and the ill
Treatments they received from 'em.

On the 28 of February, they carried three Hundred Persons, who had served the
Defunct Lady to go through the Fire: but whether it was only a Fire of Straw, or
painted, it is said to have spared those three Hundred Domestics, who by those
means were absolved and released: some days after one of the deceased Kings
Daughters was impeached; she was one of the youngest of his Children, who was
suspected of the Crime then in Examination, because it had been observed, that
she laughed when all the others wept at the Obsequies of the Princess. They
were fortified in this Suspicion by the Remembrance of the frequent complaints
she had made of the King, by reason he had not Consideration enough for her,
and His Slights were the cause, that she was no longer treated as a Kings
Daughter, wherein she was in no wise inferior to His other Children who were
the Delight and Admiration of the Court.

Tho these Conjectures were but Half Proofs, yet they were made use of for the
bringing her to a Trial; or rather, she was condemned contrary to all forms of
Justice; for, without hearing her reasons, they caused her to pass through the
Fire, with almost all her Attendants: but, as they had only a design upon her,
a Rumor was spread abroad, that it had hurt no body but her; wherefore they
loaded her with Chains of Gold in an obscure place, with prohibition, to
whomsoever it was, to see and speak with her. Nothing was now expected but the
Hour of that Princesses Death, when People learned, that the King being moved
with Compassion, desired nothing more than to save her, provided she could
justify her self of the Crime, that was imputed unto her in the Presence of
His Counsel. On the day of her Appearance, instead of being terrified at the
Torments that were preparing for her, My Lords, said she, looking scornfully
upon her Judges, All in Chains as you see me, I am of the Blood, which you
adore in the Person of the King, and which you have adored in the Person of my
Father. It Is of the same value; it is the same in my Veins that it is in his;
and yet the same Blood is treated in me, as if I was a vile Slave, at the same
time that Incense is paid to it elsewhere, and they render the same Honor as
to the Blood of the Gods. From whence comes this difference, My Lords? Is it,
that the Blood which animates me is corrupted? But whence should that
Corruption Infamous Diseases among the Siamites, and for woh they are
ignominiously treated.
proceed? Thanks to the Gods, I have neither a Fever nor the Pox; and tho there
had been something impure in me, the Fire I have been made to pass through must
needs have purged it: but I am said to have taken away my Cousins Life, and by
that Action I have degenerated from the Dignity of my Ancestors. I do not
examine the Effects of the Crime, whereof I am accused, nor if our Actions
deface in us a Character, which Nature bath imprinted there; but let us see if
it be just to condemn me without hearing me; the greatest Barbarians take
another course, and the worst of Crimes are punished among Them according to
the Laws. However, they make a scruple of treating me as all the World is
treated; I do not deserve the least regard should be had for me, and upon the
least appearances, I must be condemned to undergo the severest Punishments. But
I laughed, said they, instead of weeping at the Obsequies of my Cousin, I have
complained of the Kings slights, How! When were the most innocent Actions ever
condemned? Is it so culpable a thing to laugh when we are young, and not yet at
an Age to dissemble? And for some small Complaints which were none of the worst
grounded, have I merited either Fire or Sword, and ought they to profane in me
the Blood of a Prince, who never sought Pretexts to profane Yours, under whose
Reign this Empire has so long flourished, and under whom it would still perhaps
have flourished, if certain secret Enemies had not snatched the Scepter from
him by an Action that is commended in them, because they have had the Happiness
of triumphing without Opposition, and which is basely punished in me because I
am weak, and all the Authority is in the hands of my Antagonist. Thus you see,
My Lords, the Injustice of this Procedure; but after the manner I speak
thereof, you may very well judge I have no desire to be spared; and indeed, My
Lords, I hate Life, and since the Affront that has been put upon me, I only
wish for Death; not that I am troubled with the Remorses of my Conscience, but
because I blush to live in so sordid an Age, and I have no Body to help me to
repulse the Blows of a Tyrant, who cannot endure the sad Relics of your
Kings, Go, My Lords, and tell him my Resolution, and endeavor to represent it
to him after such a manner as may terrify him in case my Death be in the least
deferred: This is the only favor I demand of you.

The Princesses boldness did stagger Peoples Minds, and if the King had not
foreseen it by the raising of the Forces we have before mentioned, it is
certain, that there would have bin some Revolt; but the fear of the approaching
Danger stifled the grief of the Judges: they made their report of what they had
heard, and the King dissembling the Vexation he had to see himself braved after
that manner, pretended to have some pity, and made her appear before him with
an Air, as gave occasion to believe, he had a desire to save her. Well, said
he, to her, at her coming into his Presence, I hear that Life is grown a burden
to you, and it would be in vain for us to endeavourto save it; but from whence
proceeds that great Aversion to it? Is it not from the Remorse of having
poisoned my Daughter, or from some other yet more violent? for I do not believe
you of a humor to confine your self to one Crime: but as wicked as you are, I
have no desire to see your Ruin, which it lies only in your Power to try,
which you may easily do by confessing your Crimes, and your Accomplices.

Do not think, Sir, (replied the Princess boldly) I am terrified with Menaces,
or your false kindness is capable of surprising me. I am in a condition to
speak to you sincerely; you have lost a Daughter, and you will needs have me to
be the cause of her loss: Yes, yes, let it be so, I confess, it was I, who
poisoned her, but I likewise avow, that this Crime is not so great as you make
it, or rather that that Victim was too vile to be sacrificed to my just
resentment. It Is well known, that it was by your Plots, the Scepter of my
Ancestors fell into your Hands; and by your Order, we are in the dust: could I
do less than take Vengeance for so considerable a loss, and for a Treatment so
unworthy the Blood of so many Kings? Wherefore I have sought to comfort my self
in the death of my Enemies; but I have so ill performed it, that I think my
self unworthy of the Light; and it is for having failed of depriving you of it,
that I can no longer endure living. As for my Accomplices, I confess with the
same sincerity, I have had none of those whom you have so cruelly murdered. But
why should I tell you what you know, and what no body is ignorant of? No body
is ignorant, that you, hated 'em long since, you dreaded 'em, and have a long
time sought for a pretext to get rid of 'em; you have found that happy moment,
you triumph, you are beloved by Heaven, enjoy in repose the favors which it
heaps upon you; and if you have still any humanity left, finish what you have
begun; for I must confess, I am weary of breathing the same Air that is sucked
by the Executioner of my blood, and the basest of all Tyrants.

The King used great violence upon himself to suffer her speak so long, but at
length, affecting to appear what he was not, that is to say, good natured and
humane; after having asked her if she had nothing more to say, the Princess
making no answer, he caused a piece of her flesh to be cut off, which he
commanded her to eat; Content thy self (said she to him) with being my
Executioner; thou may tear my body to pieces, but thou have no Power over my
Will. She was going to continue, when the Kings Choler augmenting, she was cut
to pieces as she finished these words, and cast into the River.

Of the Family of the deceased King there remained no more than two Children,
viz. one Son of twenty years old, and a Daughter who had not yet seen ten. Her
extreme Youth saved her life, but the Son lost it the same day, and after the
same manner as his Sister did. What torments soever he was made to suffer, he
protested, his Sister and he were innocent of the Crimes that were imposed upon
'em; and he was not very sorry to die, Life being insupportable to him, since
he saw himself fallen from the State that he was born to; but he had a regret
that the Tyrant survived him.

Sect. X.
WE have already said, that the King of Siam is one of the richest and more
powerful Monarchs of the East; but we have not yet seen the Titles which he
gives himself. As the manner thereof is singular, I imagine the Reader would
take it as an obligation to be shown two Copies, which fell into my Hands while
I was at Siam, through the intermission of one of the Great Lords of the Country,
to whom I testified my desire, that he would leave them with me. As the Phrase
of that Tongue is something barbarous, I have caused them to be Translated
according to the genius of ours.

Alliance written in Letters of Gold, wherein shines the Divine Splendor, and
which is the most excellent of all those that are in the World; which
comprehends the Sublimest Sciences, and which is alone capable of rendering Men
happy. It is the best and surest in Heaven, and above and below the Earth. All
the Words thereof are Royal; they are soft and delicious, but Almighty and
Energical. The Renown that is spread thereof through all the Earth, produces
there the same effect, which the sighs of the Dead raised to life would
produce, when done by an all-Divine Virtue, and purged from their corruption,
as well spiritual as corporal. All Persons too, constituted in Dignity, as well
amongst the Nobility and Clergy as the Commonalty, do never see 'em without
feeling a certain joy which no other thing can cause. Thus there is nothing in
the Universe which is comparable to 'em, no more than to the Source from whence
they issue, as being a Monarch most Illustrious, most Invincible, most
Powerful, and most High, and Crowned with an Hundred and one Crowns of Gold,
all adorned with nine sorts of Precious Stones: being the greatest, the purest,
and the most Divine Master of Immortal Souls, the most Holy who sees all
things, and the Sovereign Emperor, who holds under the shadow of his Wings,
the Great, the Rich, and the most incomparable Kingdom of Siam; the Splendor
of the fine and famous City of India, whose Gates and Passages are inhabited by
an infinity of People, and which is, without Contradiction, the Capital of the
Universe, the only Throne worthy of the greatest of Kings, to which is subdued
the goodliest and the most fruitful of all Countries, which the Sun gives light
to; who is a greater Lord than the Gods, and whose Palace is only of fine Gold
and Precious Stones: the divine Master of the Heaps of Gold, of the White, Red,
and round Tail Elephants, which three Animals are the Sovereign God of Nine
sorts of Gods: the Divine Lord, in whose hand is the Victorious Sword, who
resembles the God of Armies, with Arms all of Fire, and the most Noble and most
Excellent of all Kings.

The Second was much of the same force, and is as follows: The most High
Paducco Dyrisultaan nelmonam, Welgahu, Nelmochadin magiviitha, Jouhen der
Eateten lillaula fulan, the King of Kings, who causes the Waters to ebb and
flow, the Monarch who is as a God, as a Sun in the highest point of its
Elevation, as bright as the Moon in its greatest Luster, the Elect of God for
to be esteemed as much as the Star of the North, whose Extraction is altogether
Royal, as being the Issue of the Great Alexander, and whose Wit is all-perfect,
all-seeing, and all-penetrating; like to a Globe, always rolling, and so made,
as to measure the Abysses of the Sea: a King who has adorned the Tombs of all
the decayed Saints; who is as just as God; and of so vast a power, that all the
World may hide it self under the Shadow of his Wings: a King who holds from the
Hand of God a number of Mines of Gold; who has caused Pagods all of Gold and
Copper to be built; who sets upon a Throne that is only of Gold and precious
Stones: the King of the White Elephant, who is King of all the other Elephants,
and before whom, several Millions of other Elephants are obliged to prostrate
themselves: a King whose Eyes are so sparkling as the Morning Star: under whom
are Elephants with four Teeth; red Elephants, purple colored Elephants, and of
several other colors; as likewise, of an Elephant Buytenaque, for which the
Almighty God has made him a Present of several sorts of embroidered Houses, in
great numbers, and all beset with Precious Stones; a number of other Elephants
exercised in War, whose Harnaces are Shot proof; others whose Teeth are armed
with Steel, and their Harnace of Brass: a King who has Horses without number,
shod with Iron, whose Houses are likewise of Gold, and all beset with Stones,
besides an infinite number of others, which are proper for War. A King who is
above all the Emperors, Monarchs, Princes and Potentates of the Universe, from
East to West; who raises to Honor and to Dignities, those who have the Wit to
get into his good Opinion, and who on the contrary causes those to be burnt
alive who revolt from him: A King as powerful as God, and in whom resides the
power of doing all that God has done and created.

By these proud Titles the King of Siam pretends to insinuate into His Subjects
that he is as great as God, and more than all the Powers which reign upon
Earth; and to confirm it, he makes 'em believe, that he stops the Course of the
Waters, which he goes to work to after this manner: The River of Siam being one
of the Branches of the Ganges, which Increases and Decreases regularly in
certain Seasons of the Year: its Increase and Decrease is likewise limited.
When it begins to diminish, which happens in the Month of November, the King
takes that time to make one of his public Appearances, whereof we have spoken:
to which, he is attended by all his Court, and shows himself on that Occasion,
with all the Riches and Splendor imaginable. His Galley is all shining with
Gold and Precious Stones; he is therein seated upon a Golden Throne, covered
with a Canopy set with Diamonds; he is attended by two Hundred Galleys of a
prodigious length, each having two Hundred Rowers, and being for the most part,
painted and gilt. About six Leagues from the City, the King and Archpriest
enter alone into a little Barge; wherein the latter, after having uttered some
Prayers upon a Sabre of Gold, presents it to the King, who strikes the River
three times with it, and commands it, by His Divine Authority, to retire into
the Sea. While the King is employed in this Ceremony, the People, whom the
Priests do make believe that none but His Majesty can stop the Course, are
prostrated upon the Shore, surprised at the Power of their King.

Sect. XI.
ON the twelfth of April we departed from Siam, in a Ship freighted with
Buck-skins, Sandale Wood, and Amrac, whereof the Japanezes make the finest
Varnish; and we made Sail toward Formosa. In the way near a Shelf called
Pracel we discovered a Jone with an Holland Flag, which seemed to come directly
to us; the more it approached, the more did we believe, it was a Pyrate:
wherefore for fear of a surprise, and to be so much the more free in case he
attaqued us, we were contriving how to cast some Merchandises into the Sea,
when we perceived, it was a Merchant-man. Being delivered from our fears, we
called to 'em to come show us their Passport, but they excused 'emselves, in
that their Jonc was in so ill a condition, that it sprung Leaks on all sides.
We armed Seven or Eight of our Men, and put 'em into a Pinnace to go on board
of 'em. All the Men on board the Jonc were Chinese and Gambodians; they had
Sandale Wood, Amrac, and Buck-skins as well as we; but they were moreover
freighted with counterband Goods, and had no Pasport, for which reason we
seized upon 'em. Having got all they had on board of us, while the Jonc was
repairing, we caused the Gambodians and the Chinese to return into it, who
were exposed to the Sea without Sails, Masts and Rudder, that we might be
revenged of the Massacre which the latter had executed a little before upon
some Hollanders.

On the tenth of May being arrived at Formosa, we cast Anchor before the Fort
called Zelandoia, from whence presently after, we saw a Jonc strike so hard
upon a Rock, that both it, the Goods, and Men were all cast away.

This Island is situated under the Tropic of Cancer, at 21 degrees of Southern
Latitude, and ending toward the 25 th. of Northern; its Circuit is 130
Leagues. It abounds in Fish of all sorts, but above all they catch a sort
called Harder, of the bigness of a Whiting, which being salted and prepared
like Stock fish, is distributed through all China, as Herrings are in Europe.
They salt appart the Eggs of that Fish, which the Chinese make a very savoury
Dish of. That Nation paid formerly to the Dutch East India Company a certain
Impost for the fishing of this Fish, but that Right does no longer subsist.

Its Soil is very fruitful, but the Inhabitants (who are lasie) do not make the
best advantage on it. It produces Rice, Wheat, Barley, Millet, Ginger, Cinnamon,
Coco's, Lemons, Oranges, Melons, Gourds, and all sorts of Pulse, Majavinades,
Guigavas, Cadiany, Potates; and the Focufocoes, which is a Fruit of the form
and bigness of a Bon Chrestien Pear. This Fruit is of a Purple color, and lies
upon the ground as Melons do, and is of a most excellent taste. There are
likewise some Sheep, but not so many as Deer, Goats, Hares, Rabbets, Pigeons,
Fallow Deer, wild Goats, wild Boars, Tigers, Bears and Monkeys; besides a
certain Animal, called by the Hollanders, the Devil of Fayovan; it is about
three quarters of a yard in length, and about twenty Inches large; it has
Scales like a Fish, and very sharp Claws. It only feeds upon Pismires, who go
of themselves upon its Tongue, when Hunger presses it to put it out. This
Creature is very timorous, and especially of Mankind: if it can only shun one
by hiding it self in the Earth, it makes a hole therein with so much ardour,
that in a moment it retrenches it self as in a Fort; or if it be surprised in
such a manner, as that it has not time to get in, it wraps its self up in its
Scales, and takes the form of a Ball. Those who have named it Devil, must needs
not have known it, or they were frighted with its Figure; for tho you hurt it
never so much, it will rather suffer it self to be killed than make any
Defense. There are no Parrots, but many other sorts of Birds, and an infinity
of flying Locusts that are very dangerous and troublesome.

The Men are of a low stature, particularly those who inhabit the Mountains;
neither are the Women of a larger size, most of whom have broad Faces, great
Eyes, flat Noses, and full bosomed; and what they have most singular is, that
they have Beards grow upon their Chins as well as Men; and were they not very
diligent in pulling it out, they would be much better furnished. Add to this
beauty very long Ears, which they take great care to lengthen and augment by
the weight of certain great Shells, which serve 'em instead of Pendants. This
Ornament seems to 'em so rare, that the more Solemn the Feasts are, and of the
greater quality the People they see, the more they lengthen their Ears, which
reach, on those occasions, down to their very Breasts, by the counter weights
which they put in 'em. Their Hair is both very black and long; some wear it
much after the same manner as they do in Holland; others tie it up after the
Chineze manner, or make it into several Tresses, which they fasten round behind
their Heads with a Tin Bodkin. Their Necklaces are of Glass or Stone, and of
little pieces of Silver in several Figures. Their Complexion is yellow and
black, and some toward Kubeland are yellow and white. The Women of Miday,
whose King is Master of the greatest part of the Isle of Souten, Norwe and
Lamei, are altogether yellow. As for the Gifts of Mind, all the Inhabitants in
general are pretty well furnished.

The Women are clothed from the Neck to the Middle with a piece of Cotton,
which flys about negligently; and from the Middle to the Knees with another
piece of Cotton. Their Head-geer is of some Silk stuff, or most commonly of
Velvet, whereof they make two points, which advance on either side the
Forehead: They go always barefooted, and are almost ever followed by an Hog,
who is as familiar to them as the Dog is in Europe.

The Habits of the Men consist in several Else of Cotton, whereof one part
falls from the right Shoulder to the midleg, the two ends crossing over the
left Arms, insomuch as half of the Body is always uncovered. They go commonly
barefooted, except in a long Tract of way, when they have sometimes certain
Shoes made of Goats Skin, and much like the Sandales of our Monks. In Winter
they dress 'emselves in Beasts Skins, as Tigers, Bears, and Leopards. Those of
the Province of Soulang dressed 'emselves formerly after the Mode of the
Hollanders: At this day it is after that of China, as well as in all the rest
of the Island, where all the Inhabitants went naked, before the Spaniards and
the Hollanders set foot there, which is still at this day observed by those who
inhabit the Mountains; except that they cover grossly, what Civility forbids to
name.

The Men paint their Breasts, Backs, and Arms, with a juice of Herbs, which is
never worn out: they have Bracelets of Glass and Necklaces of the same, and
they have such straight Sleeves of Iron upon their Arms, that they can hardly
move 'em; as for their Legs, they deck 'em with rows of white Shells very
neatly wrought.

The Inhabitants of Tocadeol take for a Sumptuous Ornament (for they only deck
themselves with it on Holy Days) a long Reed or Cane of a yard and a quarter in
length, the one end of which, is fastened upon the Reins, the other bends over
the Head, to which, is tied a floating knot of red and white stuff, of almost
half a yard long, and seven or eight Inches broad. They have moreover a Crown
of Cocks Feathers, and the Tails of Bares upon their Arms and Legs. Their Beds
are as extraordinary as the rest, two Stags Skins serving 'em for Quilts,
Sheets and Blankets: these Beds seem so delicate to 'em, that they are loath to
leave 'em; and when that happens, which they do the latest they can, it is with
no design to go to work, for they are neither Shoo-makers, Weavers nor Joyners.
In a word, they make Profession of having no need of the most necessary Trades:
or rather, they know 'em all, every one being capable of doing what he has
occasion for: their particular Dexterity lies in handling the Bow; and whether
running, lying, standing, or sitting, they never fail of hitting the Mark they
aim at, provided it be visible. They are also excellent Swimmers, but
especially they run with an incredible Swiftness, and when they undertake it,
there is not a Horse that can outgo 'em; they have, while they are running, a
piece of Iron of a round Figure, six Inches long, and five Inches broad; they
strike with those Instruments upon the Bracelets or Sleeves of Iron we have
mentioned, to animate one another, according to the need they have thereof,
making more haste, or making the less speed, according to the number of the
blows they give. Navigation is an Art which they do not understand; and all
they know in point of Water is to cross a River in the hollow of a Trunk of a
Tree: but tho they are ignorant of what is the delight of most other Nations,
yet they live very happily, fishing and hunting furnishing 'em abundantly
wherewith to live; and if they have an occasion or desire of something else,
their Women have so natural an Inclination to Agriculture, that they find
means, without the help of other living Creatures, to dispose the Earth, to
produce 'em what they sow there. They make War after the same manner, that
Savage and Brutal Nations do, that is to say, without Art and Order; and what
is therein most inhumane, without Quarter too: for, those to whom Hazard gives
the advantage, never give Quarter to their Enemies, for fear they should be
taken with a desire of returning to the Charge, or they should become more
happy the second time than the former. Thus, say they, to remove all Fears that
may arise from that side, it is requisite to take that course.

Before I had seen this Island, I had often heard say, there were Men with long
Tails like Beasts, but I could never believe it, and I thought the thing so far
from our Nature, that I could hardly give credit to my Eyes, when they took
away all doubts by an Adventure somewhat odd. The Inhabitants of Formosa being
accustomed to see us, we saw one another with so much confidence, as not to be
afraid of any ill accident on either side. So that tho Foreiners, we believed
our selves in safety, and went often abroad without a Guard, when Experience
made us know that we hazarded our selves too far. One day some of our People
walking together, one of our Ministers being of the Company, went a Stones Cast
from 'em upon some Natural Occasions, the others in the mean while walked still
on, very attentive to a story that was told 'em. When it was ended, they
remembered the Minister did not return, and waited for him some time: after
which, being weary of waiting, they went toward the place where they expected
he was; they found him, but without life, and the sad condition he was in, gave
sufficiently to understand that he had not languished long. While some kept
him, others went on several sides for to discover the Murderers: they went not
far without finding a man* who seeing himself enclosed by ours, foamed, howled,
and made 'em comprehend, that he would make him repent who should first
approach him. His desperate Carriage made at first some impression, but at
length their fears ceased, they took that miserable Wretch, who confessed, that
he killed the Minister, but they could not learn for what reason. As it was a
heinous crime, and that impunity might have ill consequences, they condemned
him to be burnt. He was tied to a Post, where he remained for some hours before
the Execution. It was then that I saw what hitherto I had not been able to
believe; his Tail was above a foot long, all covered with red hair, and very
like to that of an Ox. When he saw that the Spectators were much surprised to
see in him what they had not themselves, he told 'em* that that defect, if it
was one, came from the Climate, since all those of the Southern part of this
Isle where he was born, had the like as well as he.

Sect. XII.
HAving made Sail on the 15 th. of July for Japan, we arrived there on the 10
th. of August. Half an hour after having given the Signal of our Arrival, we
saw on board of us a hundred Japoneses, who made us a sign at their coming,
that we needed only to be at rest, and they were going to do our business. What
desire soever we had to discharge 'em from that trouble, we were forced to
obey, and remain with Arms across, while some took away the Sails, others the
Rudder, some the Ammunitions of War, others the Anchors, carrying all on shore,
as well as the Merchandises, which were shut up in a Magazine, which the
Governor of Nanguesaque, being the place where we went on Shore, did answer
for. This course was no Novelty it is a Custom established for all strangers;
the Japonezes, who are extremely distrustful, act in that manner for the
securing their Repose, for they are always in fear, it is l^ss the Traffic,
than the desire of supplanting 'em, that invites other Nations thither. The
Magazine which the Hollanders have in that City, is situated in a little Isle,
separated from the City by a River of about forty foot broad. The Ramparts of
that Island are of Planks of a foot and a half thick; the Bridge of
Communication is an Hundred and fifty foot long, and fifty broad. At the end of
the Bridge they enter into the Magazine, in the midst whereof is the House of
the chief or principal Officer of the Company. It Is a very regular Building,
very large and well furnished. There is round the Magazine a number of Houses,
which form Streets of a good handsome largeness, where there are convenient
places for the Inhabitants of that little City. On the Seaside they descend by
a large Pair of Stairs, from the Magazine to a great Court, where they
discharge their Merchandises, which consist in raw and wrought Silks, in
Velvet, Damask, Satin and Cotton, in Bucks and Kaimans Skins, in Quicksilver,
Sublimy, Spanish Green, Camphire, Wax, Alum, Pepper, Elephants Teeth, and
several other Commodities.

Three days after our Arrival at Nanquesaque, the Japoneses finding that the
Li^ts of our Mearchandizes did agree with what they had 'emselves unloaded,
came on board us, and sealed up the Hatches; and to charm the displeasure which
this course caused in us, they brought with 'em six little Barrels of Saqui,
which is a strong drink made of several sorts of Corn, but wherein there is
most Rice, and which fuddles like Wine. There were those of our Ships Crew, who
without being much concerned for what might happen, gave their hearts up to
joy, and drank so largely thereof, that they set up the Flag, round which they
sung, danced, and to which they pretended likewise to show a Comedy, when a
Hurricane came, and broke all their Measures; it came with so much fury, that
we had hardly time to get into the Hold, than the Masts, Sail-yards, Mainyards,
all were broke like Glass, and cast very far into the Sea. Our Cables broke
like Threads, and our Ship had such furious shakes, that we believed it was
going to open; however it held good: wherein we were more happy than those who
were at the mouth of the River, for they were so hardly treated, that they had
much ado to save 'emselves. Those who were on Land, were not much more in
surety, all running the risque of being incessantly oppressed under the ruins
of the Houses, that fell pell-mell, which commonly happens on the like
occasions.

The City of Nanguesaque is situated in 33 Degrees of Northern Latitude, in a
very agreeable place. Very great and very Populous it is, but without Walls, as
well as most of the Cities of Japan; its Port is large and commodious: it is
full of fine Buildings, especially on the Seaside; over which do appear at a
great distance the Towers of the Pagods, in great numbers. The Houses are only
of Wood, as being l^ss dangerous during the Earthquakes, which are very
frequent in that Country, than if they were of Stone. Ordinary Peoples Houses,
are pitiful and low; they are covered with Planks, which advance the one upon
the other, and reach beyond the Wall about four foot, for to cover the Gallery,
which reaches the length of the Houses on the Garden side.

The Houses of the Nobility and the Rich, are more exalted and more beautiful;
their Apartments are divided, insomuch as that of the Husband has no
communication with that of the Wife. All the Chambers are painted and gilt, and
generally the Houses there are more gay and agreeable than in Europe. The Walls
on the inside are garnished by several stories of all sorts of Porcelaine Ware,
and Boxes of a very fine Varnish, all being ranged upon Frames, that stand out
for half a foot broad. The plain ground is a painting of some excellent
workmanship, and from space to space the Floor is covered with great vessels of
Porcelain, filled with sweet-scented Flowers. The outsides are not so fine,
and to see 'em one would not say, that such nice Gentlemen as those of Japan
would inhabit there, but enter never so little, and one is quickly undeceived.
The City is cut by several Canals, much after the same manner as in Holland.
There are counted Eighty Eight Streets, all in a right line, and four Hundred
Paces long. Each of these Streets is locked up separately, and from Ten a clock
in the Evening until the next morning, there is no reason strong enough to have
it opened. It is thought strange, that in case of Fire, or any other such like
accident, that order should be so rigorously observed, but when the Japanezes
have taken a Resolution, it must needs subsist even at the Expense of their
Lives.

The Country round about is pleasant and fruitful; most of the Nobility have
their Houses that are only made for Pleasure, not only for that of the Eyes,
but likewise the Taste and Ears: for besides sweet Oranges* excellent Pears,
and other good fruits which grow there, the Birds with their wild Notes charm
your Senses there more than they do in other places.

The Inhabitants of all Japan do not pretend much to whiteness. They are
commonly Tawny, but much less at Nanguesaque than in other parts. Of a strong
complexion, ^obust Bodies, flat Faces, their Noses the same, and their Eyes
small and black. The Habits of the Men consist in certain Vests, which reach
down to their Feet, the one side crossing over the other, and being so fastened
by a Girdle more or less large, plain or rich, according to the humor and
inclination of every one.

The Modes of the Women differ little from those of the Men, for they are both
much of the same length, and carried after the same manner; but Women of
Quality have usually such Vestments as are so rich, that it is easy to
distinguish 'em from the Commonalty: All their Robes are embroidered with Gold
and Silver, at least those that are uppermost: if the others are not so rich,
the Stuff of 'em is so fine, that they may put 10 or 12 of them one upon
another, without having too many Clothes on, or being too much troubled. All
these Robes are hanging, and have Trains, and are tied with a Sash extremely
large, and which is answerable to the riches of the Habits. Though these Ladies
are so pompously clothed, they seldom go abroad, and when they do so, it is
either in a Chair or a Boat, as well because Walking is something too common to
be the Mode amongst them, as because they have hardly any feet, having, like
the Ladies of China, the folly to imagine, that a Woman is so much the more
beautiful, as that her Foot is small.

The Japonezes have for the most part great hearts; of what condition soever
they are, they love Honor and Glory, and are so sensible of Contempt, that
they do all things to avoid it, and for to revenge themselves if they are
insulted; insomuch as an Artisan leaves his work imperfect, if he who employs
him pretends to treat him scornfully. There is no Nation that knows so well to
constrain themselves, principally in Adversity; they endure it like Stoics,
and the greater the Misfortune, the less does it outwardly appear. They have
Friends as well as elsewhere, hut they never make use of them either to receive
their Complaints, or to give 'em pity in their Troubles; how great soever they
be* neither Regrets nor Murmurs are ever heard to come out of their Mouths. But
tho they are firm in the miseries of Life, they are incapable of a vain joy in
Prosperity. They live there without Concern, and see with the same Eyes their
Advancement and Fall. This firmness is a Virtue which passes in them from
Father to Son, and is become natural to them by the frequent Revolutions to
which they are subject; their Fortune is so wavering, that they may fall in a
Thousand ways; and it is from Experience they have learnt to contemn it, or at
least, to enjoy it without fearing to lose it.

With all this the Japonezes are not without Defects; and without speaking of
their contemning Christianity, of their Idolatry, and that they have neither
Piety nor Religion, but through Interest, they have little sincerity, never
faithful to any body, and especially to Strangers. Cruel they are, treacherous,
deceitful, and so vindicative, that to repel an injury, they violate the most
holy Laws.

An Idea of their Cruelty may be had from the punishments they inflict upon
Criminals, one of which consists in fleaing some parts of the Offendour, tying
him to a Tree, bedawbing him all over with Honey, and then they leave him to
the mercy of Bees and Wasps, who meeting with such a Regal never leave him till
they have stung him to Death, which he suffers with all the Tortures and
Torments that may be imagined. Charity is a Virtue which they are ignorant of,
and neither the Poor nor the Sick can hope from them either ease or pity.

The Government is Monarchical; above threescore petty Princes do Homage and
Prostrate their Coronets before the Supreme Diadem. The Country is most part
Mountainous, but full of Rivulets, which makes it abound with Corn, Grass and
Minerals: The North and East parts are less peopled than the South and West.
Upon any trivial accusation, their Children are so sensible of their
Reputation, that without any pawse, to evince the Truth, they will whip off a
Joint from their Finger, with this Imprecation, if true, I wish my Hand may
never heal again.

Of all the great Towns of this Island, Fucate or Falcate is looked upon as the
most pleasant, being watered with a sweet River, and made defensive by a
Castle; a Forest of lofty Pines, and spreading Sycamores, for three Miles
space, well nigh compasses the Town; of force against the scorching Sun,
delightful to the eye, more grateful than any other Object, did not Idolatry
render it unpleasing; for under those green Trees, where are many small, but
richly tyled Fotiques, they adore Pagothas, in shape not unlike Pan and
Priapus, yea the Devil himself in his ugliest resemblance. For where the
Country is most inhabited, and garnisht with greatest variety of Trees, and
Corn, etc. as 'twixt Edoo and Suring^^ there are erected most Fotiques, and
there the People are the greatest Idolaters. In Meacco a Mediterranean City,
and the Metropolis of Japan, are 60 Temples and Colleges, in which some have
numbered 3333 Chamortirae, or* little gilded Demons, of several shapes, which
they call Mannada^s: of which Shaca and Amida have the highest rank in their
Calendar. Nevertheless one of their Princes has erected there a monstrous Image
of Awricalk, so large, as albeit was sitting, the Chair was not less than 70
Foot high, and 80 broad: His Head was capable to hold Fifteen Men, and the
Thumb in compass was Forty Inches, by which the rest may be conjectured. Near
this grand Pagod is a Fotique, in the Cloister whereof a Memorial is registered,
how that the Ears and Noses of Three Thousand of the captived Corcans were
there interred.

At Dabys such another Coloss of Concave Copper was raised; an Idol 24 Foot
high, notwithstanding his posture was such, as his Buttocks rested upon his
Legs, as the usual Mode of the Orient. ^ut of most remark was the Fotique at
Fencheday, where, if Fame speak truth, the Devil often times made an Apparition.
This Temple was of more than ordinary bigness, and the Bonzes numerous. Amongst
other Sacrifices or Forms of Worship, one was, that a Damosel every New Moon
was by the Bonzes brought into the Temple and placed right against the Idol.
The Room was forthwith illuminated by a preparation of Lignum vitae with other
costly Perfumes, put into a Lamp of Gold; after a small space, the Lights (as
it were by a Miracle) extinguish, and then in gross darkness, the Phasma having
assumed a Bodily shape, or other false representation accompanies her, at
least, as she imagines, and the rather, because certain Scales like those of
Fishes are left behind as an argument to persuade it was no Phantasm. But
unless the Bonzes second that work, upon that imaginary familiarity, the most
is but a Tympany or false Conception. Nevertheless for her Applause, at her
issuing she is entertained with Music and Songs, and the Enthusiastic Girl
resolves 'em several Questions they propound, and is of more repute with 'em
ever after.

One Temple is dedicated to a Lizard, which they make the Author and Patron of
Learning without Altar or Image in it. He that reads of the huge Works of
Taiscosoma holding sometime an Hundred Thousand Workmen in labor at once, may
present to his imagination the incredible Buildings which those Tyrants, by so
many Slavish Hands, can raise. Their buisy Wits appears by their questions to
the Europeans, of the Nature of the Soul, of Angels and Devils, etc. And some
of 'em seeing the absurdities of the Bonzii, worship nothing at all. The
Bonzii, as the Jesuits report, raised slanderous Rumors of 'em, to be eaters
of Man's Flesh, and causes of the Wars and Plagues, which their Gods, provoked
by this new Sect, sent among 'em: they slandered the new Converts as miserable
Apostates, which became Christians because they would not be at the Charges of
their Idolatry. The Jesuits tell of a great Woman, possessed with a Devil,
which said, that he was a Fox, for some injuries offered by the Maid, thus
dealing with the Mistress. There were in those parts store of Foxes, multiplied
by their Superstition, not daring to hurt any, notwithstanding their great
harms, hecause forsooth, they were the Devils instruments to punish 'em. Yet in
this case, the Wizard being consulted, counseled, to take a Fox, without
hurting him, (which with a Trap was done) and to give him all kind
entertainment, with most delicate food and usage, so to pacify the good Wifes
angry Demon, who yet (like a Devil) with fair entreaty grew worse. Hereupon
another famous Wizard was called, who writ a long Scroll, binding himself in
the Devil Foxes name to free the Woman, subscribing with bis blood; which
Scroll he hanged on the Foxes Neck before taken, which being neatly trimmed and
shaven by a Barber, and painted (as their Women, being of pale Complexion, use)
was let go, and the Devil intermitted his Tortures a while, but after
reiterating the same, the Woman's Husband caused all the Foxes thereabouts to be
slain, for this perfidiousness: and a third Wizard cured the Mistress, by
Conjuring the Devil into one of her Maids.

They are very curious and ambitious in setting forth their Funerals. Thus
briefly: The Friends assemble in their best Array to the Fire: the Women of his
Acquaintance go forth in White Raiment, with party colored Veils on their
Heads, and their Maids attending, their Chief Women are carried in Beds, o^
Litters of Cedar. After 'em follow the Men in sumptuons Habit^. Next come^ the
Chief Bonzius of his Sect in his Po^tificalibus, carried in a costly Bed,
attended with three other Bonzii, in their Linen Vestments, Then one in
Ashcoloured Garments (for that is also ^ mourning color) with a long Torch
lighted, shows the Gorps the way to the Fire; followed by two Hundred Bonzii,
singing to the Deity which the dead had chiefly observed. Others bea^ on the
Basin till they come at the Fire* Others carry Paper Baskets full of painted
Flowers, which they shake out by the way, as a token that his Soul is gon^ to
Paradise. Eight Bonzii draw Banners on the ground, in which is written their
Idols name: Ten Lanterns with the same Inscription, are carried with Light^
burning. Two follow with Torche^ unlighted, wherewith afterward they kindle the
Fire. Many come after i^ Ash-colored Habits, with three Squar^ Caps on their
Heads, with the name also of their Devil therein written, which Name another
bears written in a Table with large Letters of Gold. After all these (did you
think you had lost him) comes the Corpse sitting in a Bed, in white, borne by
four Men, his Hands joined in a praying Gesture. His Children are next, the
Eldest carrying a Torch to kindle the Fire. Lastly, comes the Multitudes with
strange sort of Caps. After an hours hallowing their Holies by all this
multitude, and three times compassing about the enclosed square place, in which
(besides Tables for Viands) the Fire is made, the Chief Bonzii in an unknown
Language mumbleth over an Hymn, and lighting a Torch, does thrice brandish it
about his Head, (thereby signifying the Soul is without beginning, and without
end) and then casts it away. Two of his Children take it up, and after a triple
Ceremony (the Body being laid thereon) kindle therewith the Wood: On which they
hurl costly Woods and Oil, and so burn the Carcass to ashes. Which done the
Children, making Incense, adore their Father, as now assumed to the Heavenly
Society, and richly reward the Bonzii. Next day they return, and put the
Relics of this Corpse Ashes and Bones, into a gilded Vessel, which is hanged
in the House, there to receive the like exequies, and afterward with no less
Ceremony buried; every Seventh Day, and Seventh Month, and Seventh Year* his
Children renewing their Devotions. The poorer spend herein two or three
Hundred, the rich as many Thousand Ducats. In the Obits of great Persons, the
Lords and Men of Rank assemble 'emselves, and are called every Man by Name, to
do honor to the Image of the Deceased, with Incense, as in Sacrifices. After
so much wickedness of the Men, I think it will be time for us to leave Japan.

Our Trade being at an end at Nanguesaque, we departed from thence for Batavia,
on the 30 th. of December, and arrived at the Fort Zelandia, on the 9 th. of
January. After some stay, there being a Ship that was going for Siam, I was
commanded to go thither, and we arrived there on the 22d. of the same Month.
The Sieur van Muyden, Commander for the East India Company, in the Countoir of
that Country, caused 8 Elephants to be embarked on board us for Batavia,
whither he himself went with us. Eight days after our Arrival, the Fleet
departed for Holland, whither I had leave to return. As we had a good Wind, we
in a short time passed the Straight of Sunda, and two Months after our
departure from Batavia, we came in sight of Sancta Helena, where having cast
Anchor, we reposed for fifteen days. During the abode we made there, we killed
a great many wild Boars, Goats and Deer, which that Island is full of, We took
by fishing a prodigious quantity of Fish, which being salted and dried in the
Wind* s^rves commonly the Ships crew the rest of the Voyage. We likewise found
there Pome-citrons, and a certain Purgative Sorrel, which without being
disagreeable, produces the same effect with Seen.

After having thus refreshed our selves, we pursued our Course, whose end being
as happy as the beginning, we went and cast Anchor at Gouri on the first of
September, where I finished my Voyage.

FINIS.
Books Lately Printed, and Sold by Henry Rhodes. 1682.
THE History of the Glorious Life, Reign and Death of the Illustrious Queen
Elizabeth, By S. Clark. Price bound. 1 s.

The History of the Victorious Life Reign and Death of King Henry VIII. with
the Life of King Edward VI. Price Bound 1 s.

Pastime Royal, Or, The Gallantries of the French Court. A new Novel. Price
Bound 1 s.

Female Prince, Or, Frederick of Sicily, A new Novel. Price Bound. 1 s.

Roundheads, Or, The Good Old-Cause, A Play. By Mrs. A. Behn.

City Heiress, Or, Sir Timothy Treatal, A Play, by Mrs. A Behn.

With all sorts of New Plays.

In the Press, and almost Printed, Mademoiselle, de Scuderys Conversations.


