AN ASSIZE-SERMON Preached before Judge Twisselton and Serj. Bernard AT
CARLISLE September the 10th Ann. 1660.

AND Now Published and Recommended to the Magistrates of the Nation, as a Means
by God's Blessing to quicken them to a serious Pursuit of the Honorable and
truly Religious Design, for the Reformation of Manners, which is now on foot,
and Countenanced by the Nobility, Bishop's, and Judges, in the late Account of
the Societies for the Reformation of Manner's, and applauded by the Serious and
Religious Men of all Persuasions.

By R. GILPIN, Now Minister of the GOSPEL in NEWCASTLE upon TYNE.

LONDON: Printed for Tho Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three Crowns near
Mercers-Chapple; and Sarah Burton, Bookseller at Newcastle. 1700.

TO THE Right Worshipful, and WORSHIPFUL Sir WILLIAM BLACKETT Baronet, Mayor.
Sir ROBERT SHAFTOE Recorder. ALDERMEN of the Town and County of NEWCASTLE.
Sir RALPH CARR Knight. TIMOTHY ROBSON Esquire; NICHOLAS FENWICK Esquire; WILLIAM AUBONY
Esquire; WILLIAM CARR Esquire; MATTHEW WHITE Esquire; THOMAS WASS Esquire; JOSEPH ATKINSON Esquire;
GEORGE WHINFIELD Esquire; ROBERT EDEN Esquire;
EDWARD HARRISON Esquire; Sheriff.

Gentlemen,
THE Printing of the following Sermon, now almost Forty Years after it was
Preached, needs a longer Apology, than at present either my Leisure will allow,
or others perhaps will have Patience to read: To save therefore my self and
others from a needless Trouble, I shall only tell you, That these Notes were
buried among my Papers, and out of Mind, but upon a particular Occasion they
came to Hand. Upon a short view of them, I conceived they might be of some use
to quicken Magistrates in that Noble and Important Duty, of the Reformation of
Manners, which of late has been publicly countenanced and owned by many
persons of great Name, Noblemen, Bishop's, and Judges.

The Author of the Account of the Societies for Reformation, has with a
commendable Zeal, and many unanswerable Arguments, urged this Religious Design
upon all sorts of Men; and there seems not to be any necessity to add any thing
to that which is so excellently done already; yet such is the weakness of Human
Understanding, that even where the Conviction of Reason is so clear and full,
as makes new Arguments useless, yet through the Weakness either of Memory, or
want of due Impression, we are apt to let them slip. In this Case where
Arguments are useless, a Remembrancer may be necessary.

This Sermon was Preached at a Critical Time, as appears by its date; to speak
Boldly upon such a Subject at that time, seemed so hazardous, that those that
heard it, expected that I should meet with some Effects of the Judges angry
Resentments; but such was their Conscientious regard to the Matter that was
spoken, and such were their Convictions of the Truth and Weight of it, that
contrary to all expectation, they publicly recommended the Sermon to the
Consideration of the Grand Jury, and in private also gave me their Hearty
thanks.

The main Drift and Design of the Sermon is, to Excite Magistrates to
countenance the Practice of our Holy Religion, and to punish Vice and
Decauchery: Seeing then this is the thing that is now expected from
Magistrates, as their Duty which they owe to God, and to the Safety and well
government of the Country; why may not this be useful to them by putting them
in remembrance.

Many of the Reverend Pious Clergy of both Denominations, have preached and
printed Sermons for the promoting of a Reformation; this though preached long
before, yet is not printed so much out of due Time, but that it may come in the
Rear.

This Discourse I humbly offer to the serious Consideration of the Magistrates
of the Nation, and more particularly to you, whose Names are prefixed to these
Papers (as the present Magistrates of the Famous Town and County of Newcastle
upon Tyne, where I have lived many Years,) partly as a Testimony of my Respect
to your selves, which I am obliged to, for your civil Respects to me, and
partly as a Testimony of my best Wishes to the whole Corporation, for their
Spiritual and Temporal Prosperity, but chiefly to give you my Thanks publicly
for what you have already done, in prohibiting Tippling in Publick-houses on the
Lord's Day: It Is a good Beginning, and you have honored your selves so much by
it, that Judge Powell in his Charge at your last Assize, thought fit to take
Notice of it.

Honored Gentlemen! Give me leave to tell you, that a Reformation of Manners,
is a truly Religious and Noble Undertaking, you will hereby show that you take
God's part, and fight against the Devil's Kingdom: You may expect that the
Prince of Darkness will stir up his Instruments against you, but the Battle is
the Lord's, and if you faithfully plead his Cause, and put due shame and
disgrace impartially upon Debauchery and Vice, he will stand by you, and own
you, and your Names will be Honorable among all good Men.

Be strong therefore, and quit your selves like Men and good Christians, you
have many considerable Advantages on your side, besides the Divine assistance
and protection which is the Chief; you have not only the Advantage of Law, but
the Example and Encouragement of the most considerable Persons of the Nation;
you may promise your selves the hearty Concurrence of all the Serious Religious
Clergy, whose Office it is by all means to Promote the Honor of God, to whose
Service they have devoted themselves, and you may expect to see the Blessed
Effects of your Religious Endeavors, to your great Comfort and Satisfaction.

I shall only add this, The hearty Agreement and Concurrence of Men of
different Persuasions in other Points relating to Religion, in promoting of the
Practice of serious Piety, and in putting a Disgrace upon Vice, is the best
Means that was ever yet offered for the Agreement of all our Differences in
other Matters; this is what all good Men would be glad to see: But as the Case
stands, there is little Ground to hope or expect it, and the great Thing that
stands in the way, is the Perjudice which is deeply radicated in the Minds of
the contending Parties, occasioned by mutual Reproaches, Revitings, and
Passion, that our angry Contentions have produced against one another: This
Prejudice is now become so invincible, that except this holy Oil of Brotherly
Concord in this Matter do soften it, and beget a love in Men seriously
Religious, the Fire will not be extinguished: We are already agreed in the
Doctrinal Articles of the Church of England, and if we were as heartily agreed
too in the End of all True Religion, as in the Principles, a farther Progress
would be more feasible: This might be sufficient to beget a brotherly Love to
one another, and then we would more calmly hear, and more clearly understand
our mutual Reasonings about the remaining Differences, which would either
incline us to Condescension for Peace sake, or enable us to bear with one
another, so that all might keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace.
That such Effects may be produced shall be the Prayer of

Your Humble Servant R. GILPIN.

PSALM II. v. xij. Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way,
when his wrath is kindled but a little, blessed are all they that put their
trust in him.
THIS Psalm is a Prophetic Discourse of the Kingdom of Christ, showing what
should happen to it, and what should happen because of it, in all Ages. Herein
is set down; 1. The Opposition that is made against Christ's Kingdom. 2. The
Vanity of that Opposition. 3. The Application of both.


1. The Opposition that Christ's Kingdom should meet withal is the greatest
that may be, and that in these three Respects, 1. It is universal, made by all
Sorts of People, not only by the common Rout (whose Persons ordinarily disgrace
their Cause, and who (like the wild Ass) do carry their Bow in their Heels, or
( Parthian like) shoot their Arrows backwards): But King's and Ruler's also
appear in in this Opposition, who however unworthy, and ungrateful they are in
their Attempt to Justle that God out of all, that takes them up into his Throne
(as that of Revel. 12. v. 5. is expounded of Constantine) yet are they most
likely to prevail. 2. The greatness of this Opposition to the Kingdom of Christ
appears also, in that they who are engaged in it, do make it their Business to
drive it up to the greatest height, For 1. They summon up their whole strength
to accomplish it: And 2. The King's of the Earth themselves back this their
strength with Policy and Counsel, The Ruler's take counsel together, v. 2. And
not only so, but 3. They harden themselves in these their Ways with firm
Resolutions, they set themselves, etc. v. 2. and 4. They encourage themselves
therein with hopeful Imaginations, The People imagine a vain thing v. 1, and 5.
They whet their courage and resolutions with Rage, The Heathen rage, etc. v. 1.
3. The greatness of this Opposition is such, that it is accompanied with the
most unreasonable Demands imaginable, no less than this will serve; That God
must part with his Sovereignty, lay down his Scepter, repeal his Laws, and
suffer them to live as they list v. 3. Let us break their bands asunder, and
cast away their cords from us. This was the Opposition, now follows.

2. The Vanity of this Opposition made against the Kingdom of Christ: Which
appears in these Four things.

1. In its unlikeliness, v. 4. God sits in Heaven, above their reach, beholding
their undertakings as ridiculous, he laughs at their vain Attempts, as you
would do at Worms that should endeavor to storm Castles, or encounter Armies,
etc. 2. The Vanity of these Men's undertakings is made evident farther in the
vexatiousness of the disappointment they meet withal in the Prosecution of
these Attempts, God will fret and vex them, by carrying on all his Designs,
maugre the utmost of their Opposition, v. 5, 6. He will vex them with this, --
Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill. 3. The absolute impossibility of
Success, shows the Vanity of the undertaken Opposition; for, here is no less
against them, than 1. An irrevocable Decree, v. 7. A decree already declared,
and Promulgated, from which God cannot recede in point of honor; and 2. There
is Christ's Merit and Intercession against them, which God will not disappoint,
v. 7. Thou art my Son. v. 8. Ask of me and I will give, etc. which shows 3.
That there is also against them, God's Covenant with Christ upon that
undertaking, wherein he had engaged himself to see the Opposition brought to
naught, I will give, etc. v. 8. so that 4. The Vanity of their Attempt appears
from the speedy, certain, and irrecoverable Ruin of the Attempters: v. 9. Thou
shall break him with a rod of Iron, thou shall dash them in pieces like a
Potters Vessel. A Potters Vessel must needs break with a stroke especially of
an Iron rod, and being broke its thenceforth useless; and such is the Case of
these vain Opposers of Christ's Kingdom.

3. The Application of these two (this Opposition and the Vanity of it), is
directed only to King's and Ruler's, v. 10. Be wise now therefore O ye King's,
etc. not that others are unconcerned in it, but because 1. They are not so
easily persuaded to desist from so foolish an undertaking as the Vulgar are, as
having stronger Temptations and Judgments to prosecute this Opposition, than
others have: Being usually Jealous of Christ's Kingdom as of that, that does
too much streighten and limit them in their Pleasures, abridge them of the
absoluteness of their Authority, eclipse their Honors, and vex them with
Reproofs, and searching Convictions. 2. It is directed to them because they do
more dangerously oppose and resist, both in respect of themselves and others;
for, their Personal Offenses in this kind may become National Sins, and
consequently may occasion National Punishments. 3. This Application is
especially directed to King's and Ruler's, because their Authority and Example
(if they yield), has a great Influence upon others to bring them also under
Christ's yoke. The Duty that is here pressed upon them is, 1. General, to stir
them up to Wisdom, and Serious Consideration, v. 10. and 2. more Special,
considering them in their double Capacity of being private and public Persons,
1. as Private Men that have precious Souls to take care for, and accordingly
they are advised to strictness and sincerity of Holiness, v. 11. Serve the Lord
with fear, and rejoice with trembling: I thus interpret it, because these are
Duties that are incumbent upon Christians as Christians; and 2. under a public
Capacity, or as they are Magistrates, they are advised to have a care of others
in the management of their Office, and so they are advised to own and advance
Christ's Government and Kingdom, v. 12. Kiss the Son, etc.

The Text contains two Parts, 1. The Duty: and 2. The Motives to it.

1. The Duty which is contained in these Words, Kiss the Son; a Kiss is a
public Symbol and Testification 1. of Love, as the use of the greatest Part of
the World shows; 2. of Subjection, as appears by the Phrases of kissing of
Baal, and kissing the Calves. Kiss the Son, that is, testify your Love and
Subjection by submitting to his Commands, and promoting his Honor and
Authority, in all your Offices.

2. The Motives to this Duty are, 1. his Displeasure, if you refuse, Kiss the
Son least he be angry. 2. You are ruined if he be displeased: If he be angry
you perish. 3. The suddenness, and unexpectedness of the overthrow, while you
are in the way, in the height of your pursuit and hopes. 4. The easiness of the
dispatch, a little wrath will effect your overthrow. When his wrath is kindled
but a little, etc. 5. The happiness of Submission, Blessed are all they that
put their trust in him.

From these words I shall propound one Doctrine which is this. That,

Doct. Magistrates owe such Homage and Subjection to Christ, that in all their
Government, they must advance his Kingdom, upon pain of his Displeasure.

In the Explication of this Doctrine I shall show, 1. The Magistrates Debt, and
2. Their Duty.


First then, They owe Homage to Christ, that is their Debt, 1. because he is
higher than they, Psalm. 47. v. 2. He is a great King, the only Potentate, King
of King's, and Lord of Lord's, 1 Timothy 6. v. 15. The eternal, immortal,
invisible King, 1 Timothy 1. v. 17. The universal King of all the Earth, Psalm. 47.
v. 7. he has prepared his throne in the heavens, his Kingdom rules over all,
Psalm. 103. v. 19. The greatest Ruler upon Earth, in all his highest and
mightiest Titles and Power, is but a glittering gilded Potsherd; he is but
illustrious, mighty, most excellent, honorable Dust and Ashes, take the
highest Title the Scripture affords, as Psalm. 82. v. 1. where they are all
called God's, yet they are but God's Metaphorical, either analogically having
some similitude of God in their height above others, as high Mountains and
Cedars are called God's Mountains and Cedars; or representatively, because they
sit in his Throne, and do (as it were) represent his Person; for they are
notwithstanding such God's as are but Men, Psalm. 82. v. 7. and when they are
dead, their Ashes shall carry no more Prints of Honor than the Beggars that
embraces the Dunghill, nor shall be distinguished from common Dust. And if some
aspired higher, as Caligula, Domitian, etc. who arrogated Divine Honors to
themselves, yet God discovered their folly, by making good that threatening,
They shall fall like one of the Princes, or as Illyricus expounds it, like
those Tyrants that perish in their Cruelties: That dye as Boniface the 8th like
a Dog, and have Jehojakim's Burial, the burial of an Ass. If in the World petty
King's show Homage to the more Potent, as it was in the Heptarchy in England,
and under the Roman and Grecian Conquerours, much more then do the greatest
Rulers owe Homage to God, upon account of his Greatness; have you an Arm like
God, or can you Thunder with a Voice like his, if not, then bring presents to
him, Psalm. 72. v. 9, 10. They that dwell in the Wilderness shall bow before
him: The King's of Tarshish, and of the Isles shall bring Presents.

A Second reason to Prove that even King's and Ruler's owe Homage to Christ is,
Because all their Authority is derived from him: Their Authority is derivative
these two ways. 1. In Constitutione Regiminis, and 2. Institutione and
designatione personarum. 1. In the Constitution of Government it self: Dominion
and Rule is Christ's appointment, even in the State of Innocence, as Parens
observes, God gave Man Power over himself (by free Will) and over the
Creatures, and his Family too: Which (though some think that the State of
Innocence and Magistracy are inconsistent yet) carries some resemblance at
least of Magistracy; however since their Fall, as God appointed Sun and Stars
to rule Day and Night, so has he appointed Magistracy (as Stars in their
Courses) as a means of Order in the Universe: Hence it is called God's
Ordinance, in which Word there is a special Emphasis (it is Tolet's
observation), they are not of God as War and Famine are said to be of his
Appointment, but they are more especially ordained by Command and Promise: 2.
The Authority of Rulers is derivative too in designatione Personae: Thus he
appointed Saul, found out David, and choos'd Solomon, etc. Yea in unjust
Usurpations, though the Manner of attaining and managing be not a Deo
approbante, having not the Allowance of his preceptive Will: Yet they are a Deo
permittente, and according to his Will of Purpose: The Powers that are, Romans
13. (which points at Nero, for the Abstract cannot consist without the
Concrete), are ordained of God. Nature teaches all Creatures a thankful
Respect to them from whom they had their Being; the Rivers pay a constant
Tribute to the Sea, whence they all come, much more then should Magistrates own
that God that gave them as well their Natural Beings (for they are the Work of
his Hands as Men), as also their Political Beings, for they are the Children of
the most high as Magistrates, such a tributary was David, 2 Samuel 7. v. 18, to
22.

A Third argument that shows that King's and Ruler's ought to be Christ's
Homagers is, That as their Power is borrowed, so also it is ad Placitum (not
absolute and independent), and that two ways. 1. In regard of their Rules,
Laws, and Limits, which God has fixed for their direction, he is the supreme
Lawgiver, and they must take the Law from his Mouth, in the Essentials of Piety
and Justice: He has given them positive Commands, which they are not to
Transgress; In Circumstantials, and particular Emergencies, which although he
has left undetermined, yet even there he has given general Rules of Order,
Decency, Edification, and Salus Populi to walk by in their determinations of
Things, ad hic and nunc: 2. They are dependent on his Pleasure for the
Continuation of the Power in their Persons, he takes down one, and sets up
another, he can cut off the Spirit of Princes, Psalm. 76. v. 12. and can raise
up the poor out of the mire, and the needy from the dunghill to set him with
Princes, Psalm. 113. v. 7, 8. Pope Coelestin crowned the Emperor Henry with his
Feet, and spurned off the Crown again, as an Emblematical boast of his Power,
of making and unmaking King's; but though this was too much Arrogance for Man,
yet it is one of the Jura Regalia of the King of Heaven.

Fourthly, King's and Ruler's owe Homage to Christ, because as their Authority
depends on him, so it is also Ministerial in subordination to God's Ends and
Designs; the Magistrate is (...) Romans 13.4. the Minister of God, God's Agent
and Servant, his Esse as a Magistrate is alterius esse, a Servant entrusted by
his Lord, may have many encouraging Privileges and Advantages for himself, yet
the great End of his Employment and Advancement, is his Masters service and
profit; the Honor and Power of Ruler's are not terminated, neither wholly, nor
chiefly upon their own Persons, as if God designed only the gratifying of some
few Men above the common Rank of Mankind, giving these Authorities for their
Person's sakes, only to make them Great: No! His main End is, the Service and
Fruit that is expected from them both to God and Man, and the Dignity is
affixed to the Person, as an encouragement to, and a necessary Means of doing
that Service: They are but God's creatures and substitutes, for affecting his
Will in the Government of his Church in the World; to them therefore I may
apply that of the Apostle, Ye are not your own, your Places and Offices are not
given, but with Reference to your Service; then give Homage to your Master
whose you are, and for whose Ends you are employed; he is an unworthy Servant
that grows Proud and Insolent by his Master's bounty, and yet it is a common
Fault, as appears by the Prophet Jeremy, Chap. II. v. 31. When God had been no
barren Wilderness to them, but had given showers of blessings, they could wax
wanton, and say, we are Lords, we will come no more unto thee.

Fifthly, That Magistrates owe Homage to God, appears in that this Depositum is
given them in reference to an Account; and surely Homage is due, where Accounts
are unavoidable: Give an Account of thy Stewardship, will be a terrible Voice
to those Servants, who (upon a conceit of the Lord's delay) instead of keeping
the House in Order, have become the Master's of Mis-rule, and have eaten and
drunk with the Drunken: The Lord of that Servant will make him know that he
has not given to God, the things that are God's, whatever pretense he might
make of giving to Caesar the things that are Caesar 's.

Sixthly, Sometimes Personal Obligations from God calls for Homage, as of this
Nature are the Personal Qualifications of some for such an Employment, and of
this Nature too is the very Means and Manner of Advancement in some others;
when God by a strong Hand, and (as it were) from the Dead sets them upon the
Throne. Who am I says David, 2 Samuel 7.18. and what is my House that thou have
brought me hitherto? A Spirit of Magistracy may be an Obligation upon others,
as it was in Saul, who had another Spirit given upon his assuming of the
Magistracy; so their Success and Usefulness may oblige others, when they hold
up the Pillars of a shaking Land as David did; and others again may be induced
by the Eminency of their Service, as when they lay the Foundation of the Lord's
House, and also bring out the Head-stone with shouting, as Joshua and
Zerubbable; or when they are Instruments of some signal Deliverance, as Gideon,
Jephtha, etc. or become a Means to Reform the People (over whom they are
constituted) from their Wickednesses as Josiah did.

Thus much for Explication of the Magistrates Debt, we are now to take Notice
of the Second Thing that offered it self to our Consideration from the
Doctrine, and that is, the Duty incumbent upon Magistrates, which is, to
Advance the Kingdom of Christ.

The Reasons why Magistrates are thus bound to Advance Christ's Kingdom are
these;

First, It is God's Design all along to Advance the Kingdom of Christ, and to
this End, 1. He has given all Power into his Hand, Matthew. 28.18. All Power is
given unto me in heaven and in earth: John 13.3, Jesus knowing that the Father
had given all things into his Hands, etc. God has then committed all Judgment
and Authority to Christ to execute it, John 5.22. The Father judges no Man,
but has committed all Judgment unto the Son, and v. 27. He has given him
Authority to execute Judgment also, because he is the Son of Man, and for this
end Christ both died and rose again, and revived, that he might be Lord both of
the Dead and Liveing, Romans 14.9. 2. Upon this Account also God has promised to
enlarge Christ's Territories, in the Hearts of a willing People in the Day's of
his Power, even to the Heathen and uttermost Parts of the Earth, that all
People and Nations should Serve him, Dan. 7.14. 3. Hence also he has commanded
all to Submit to him, he has also a Name above every Name, Philip. 2.9. God
also has highly exalted him, and given him a Name which is above every Name.
v. 10. That at the Name of Jesus every Knee should bow: That is, that all
should express their reverent Submission and Obedience to him; bowing of the
Knee (being a Gesture of Respect) is put for all Acts of inward and outward
Obedience: They that interpret it of the Gesture of bowing at the nameing of
the word Jesus, do not only affix that to the Name, which is intended to the
Person (for otherwise they should bow at the Name Christ, Immanuel, etc.) but
also level the Place to a far lower Sense, and would put much less Honor on
Christ, than the Apostle intended. 4. For this End also ( viz. the Advancement
of the Kingdom of Christ), God has ordained Magistracy, designing it for an
especial Means of advancing Christ's Kingdom, and therefore it is the
Magistrates Duty to concur and comply with this grand Design of God, in
reference to the Advancement of the Kingdom of Christ. Which,

Secondly, If Magistrates do not, they neglect the main Work and Business of
their Places; for although it be questioned whose Vicegerents they are, whether
God's as Creator, or Christ's as Mediator, and though the extent of the
Magistrates Power in Ecclesiastical Matters be disputed, while Erastus would
give all to them, and Donatus take all from them; yet I say, however most Sober
Men agree, that the great End of Magistracy is the Advancement of Christ's
Kingdom, even as it is the End of Ministry: And therefore (...) (which is a
general Name is attributed to both, Romans 13.4. (...), etc. having relation to
(...) in the precedent Verse; so (...) is a Title of Magistracy; True! Though
Ministers and Magistrates have the same End, yet they differ in the Way of
Prosecution; the Magistrates cannot elicere actus Ecclesiasticos (as Preach the
Word, Administer the Sacraments, etc.) for that cost Saul the loss of his
Kingdom, and Vzziah a Leprosy; but yet he may Imperare and coercere, and
therefore that Good for which he is a Minister, is not only Natural for the
Preservation of Life, Civil for the Preservation of Estate, Moral to keep off
Exorbitances in Life and Manners; but also Spiritual for the Advancement of
Religion (as Paren's well observes): And indeed this is one of the Ends of our
Prayers for you, that you in your Stations may be serviceable in promoting
Religion, for so you have it, 1 Timothy 2. where Prayers and Intercessions are
enjoined for King's and all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable Life in all Godliness and Honesty; and consequently you come short of
the End of your Office, if you omit to take care for the Church of Christ; if
you neglect this, you are but empty Vines, Vessels wherein is no Pleasure,
sounding Brass and tinkling Cymbals.

Thirdly, Your refusal of this Care, is opposition and enmity against Christ,
there is no nutrality between Christ and the Devil, betwixt Religion and
Irreligion; Men in this Case must either be Friends or Enemies, Act for him or
against him, for where the Duty is necessary (as it is here) the wilful neglect
is Rebellion: In this Case that Proverb is True, Matthew. 12.30. He that is not
with me is against me. Not to be against Christ as a Teacher asserting Truth is
to be for him: Mark 9.40. He that is not against us, is on our part: Not to be
for him as a King warring against Satan's Kingdom, is to be against him.

Fourthly, Consider that if you be slow in promoting Christ's Cause, you
contract the Guilt of other Men's Sins, and that two Ways; 1. Non prohibendo,
for, Qui non prohibet cum potest jubet: And 2. You do it Exemplo, for if
Magistrates be Supine and Careless, People will easily see it, and think their
Example a warrantable Pattern for Imitation: Jerusalem and Samaria were Royal
Cities (where were the Thrones for Judgment) hence they were the Fountains of
Iniquity to the Land, and the Sins of the Land charged upon them, Micah. 1.5.
What is the transgression of Jacob? Is it not Samaria? And what are the high
places of Judah? Are they not Jerusalem?

Fifthly, If Magistrates advance not the Throne of Christ, they commonly prove
Furious against it, and Plagues of God's People; if this proceed from a
careless blockish Temper, then Judgment of it self will degenerate into Gall,
and the Fruit of Righteousness into Hemlock. Justice like Water, purifies it
self by Motion, when it runs down like a stream; if it be a standing Water it
Corrupts, and Corruption optimorum pessima. If this neglect proceed from Enmity
to Christ, then seeing they have the greatest Advantages in their Hands to do
Evil, they may establish Wickedness by a Law: They can push with the horn, and
tread down the Pasture with their feet, Ezekiel. 34.18. When the wicked bears
rule the People mourn, Prove. 29.2. Or, if it proceed from Apostasy, then the
revollers are profound to make slaughter, Hos. 5.2. And this happens not so
much from the Churlish and Cruel Dispositions of Men, as from God's giving them
up judicially to Rage against his Ways, either as a Scourge to his People, or
in order to their own Ruin: Hence it is noted, that the cruellest Persecutions
were set on foot by Emperors sometimes of the best Parts and most civil
Dispositions, as Antoninus Philosophus, Trajan, Severus, Decius, etc.
Magistrates are for the most Part like the Prophet's Figs, either very good, or
very bad, they are the Heads of the People, and all Diseases in the Head are
Dangerous: So when the Leprosy appeared in the Head deeper than the Skin, the
party was pronounced utterly unclean.

Sixthly, If Christian Magistrates do not Advance the Kingdom of Christ, what
do they more than Heathen Magistrates? Christ will have his Subjects to
outstrip the Heathen, as you may perceive by his arguing, Matthew. 5. Do not even
the Publicans so? Heathens have made Good Laws for Moral Honesty, and have been
just in the Execution of them, as among the Athenians Solon, the Lacedaemonians
Lycurgus. There were many Good Laws among the Romans, but of the Lacedaemonian
Laws Erasmus gives you this Account; Dixeris says he, speaking of their Laws,
Christianos, si pro Lycurgo Christum nacti fuissent Legislatorum. Nay you find
farther, that even among the Heathens, the Decij and the Curtij, etc. have
devoted themselves to Death for the Public.

A Seventh Reason why Magistrates should set themselves to Advance Christ's
Kingdom is, because People are denominated Good or Bad, from the goodness or
badness of their Ruler's; for 1. The more noble Part gives the Denomination, a
heap of Wheat and Chaff is called a heap of Wheat: And 2. it influenceth the
rest; I speak of external Goodness of Profession chiefly; though as a Means it
may be extended to internal: If Jeroboam be wicked, the Ten Tribes are so: And
to this purpose you have the Prophet Isaiah telling you, Isa. 21.26. That a
Restoration of Good Ruler's (for it speaks of the Qualifications not the
Species of Ruler's v. 23.) makes a City of Righteousness.

I have now done with the Explanation of the Doctrine, my next Work is to apply
it. And,

Here I must first address my self to the Reverend Judges, and the Magistrates
of this County, and because the time will not allow me to speak to you
severally; I shall direct my Advice to you all at once, that as God has lifted
up your Heads above your Brethren, so you would study to Advance his Honor and
Kingdom: Kiss the Son: Give me leave in compassion to your Souls, and in
discharge of my Duty (for surely I am not called either by God or Man to
Complement with you) to be plain with you in a few Directions: And surely if
you were in my stead, and heard God speaking to you, Son of Man tell the House
of Israel their Sin, else their Blood will I require at thine Hand, lift up thy
Voice like a Trumpet, spare not: If this were your Case, you would judge a
Necessity is laid upon me to speak plainly, and upon you to receive the Word
with meekness.

First then, Submit to Christ's Scepter as Christians and Men; Serve the Lord
with fear: How can it be expected that you will to any purpose submit to Christ
as Magistrates for the Good of others, if you do not submit to him as
Christians for the Good of your own Souls? In the Ceremonial Law the Snuffers
were of pure Gold, to show the Necessity of Holiness in them that are to be
Censurers and Correctors of others: Your Style and Titles show as much; you are
called God's, and should you be ungodly, you would make Men think, that you are
such God's as the Witch of Endor saw rising out of the Earth, which indeed were
Devils: If you live in Rebellion against the King of Heaven, you dishonor your
great Master, stain your Commission, and disable your Selves from punishing
others. For how unseemly would it be for Vice to correct Sin? And if Vice would
be so officious, yet how will you pluck the Mote out of your Brothers Eye,
while a Beam is in your own? And besides it would give the People just reason
to Lament over you with that of the Prophet, Our Silver is become dross, etc.
If you shall ask me now what I call Holiness? I answer, 1. Humility,
Conscientious walking with God, Self-denial, Prayer, hearing the Word,
Self-examination, Family Worship, etc. are undoubted Works of Piety. 2. The
Works of the Flesh are manifest, Swearing, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Pride,
Hatred, Sabbath breaking, etc. are certainly not Holiness. 3. To live carelessly
(though in the Practice of external Duties) after the rate of most Men, without
Conviction of Sin, Repentance, inward Communion with God, Love, Joy, and
delight in his Ways; not striving against little Sins, nor watching against
vain Thoughts: This is in no other Sense holiness before God, but as a dead
Carcass is called a Man. 4. To think any Service enough for God, secretly to
loath and hate the Strictness of God's Ways, etc. will show that you are not
acceptable Servants to Christ who has required all these things of you: Can
you deny, but that these are the Plain Commands of God? Or, will any Man say
that Great Men are not bound to these things? Be not deceived, God is not to be
mocked, Gal. 6.7.

If you will say, That Men that pretend to these things are but proud Hypocrites:
I answer, I will ask no stronger Conviction against you, than what may be drawn
from hence. The Objection shows, and grants the Necessity and the Truth of the
Thing I plead for: If others are Hypocrites, where is the Fault? Not in doing
these Things, for they are expressly commanded; but in doing them no better,
first then come up to these Things that others do, and then go beyond them in
sincerity of Performance. I pray Scorn not these Truths, the Great Judge is at
the Door.

My Second advice to you is, that you oppose not Christ's Kingdom. Now this may
be done two Ways. 1. By obstructing his Designs in the Means he appoints to
propagate it; the preaching of the Word is his Scepter, his Sword, his Chariot
of Salvation, the Word of the Kingdom, etc. it is opposed too by
discountenancing the Work of his Kingdom, the Practice of his Laws, these are
the King's high Way, caled the Royal Law by the Apostle James. Now Christ's
Design is obstructed: 1. When Men call for Darkness and puts out the Light. 2.
When they bind heavy Burthers and lay them upon the Shoulders of the Ministers.
3. When they forbid them the plain and conscientious Exercise of their Duty,
saying, Prophesy to us smooth things. 4. When they take the advantage of their
conscientious Dissatisfactions, to stop the Course of their Ministry, laying a
Snare on Mizpah, and spreading a Net on Tabor. If you should do thus, The Lord
grant he take you not at your Words. See how he threatens this Opposition, Hos.
5.1. Hear ye this O Priests, and hearken ye house of Israel! And give ye ear O
house of the King, for Judgment is toward you, because ye have been a snare on
Mizpah, and a net spread upon Tabor, etc. And in Isa. 30.10, 13. They say to
the Seers, See not, and to the Prophets, Prophesy not, etc. Therefore this
iniquity shall be to you as a breach ready to fall, swelling out in a high
wall, whose breaking comes suddenly at an instant. Consider also how suitable
the Punishment is to such a Sin, Hos. 9.7, 8. They had laid Snares for the
Lord's Prophets, and he punishes this iniquity by giveing them Prophets that
should be Snares to them: The days of Visitation and Recompense are come,
Israel shall know it even by this, He will give them Fools for their Prophets,
and Madmen for their Teachers. -- It follows, the Watchman of Ephraim was with
my God, that is, as some expound it, they never let him alone till he died, and
then he had rest; or as others think, he was with God in earnest Prayers and
Groanings: They put him to complain, Well! How does God avenge himself? Even
thus: They shall have Prophets that shall be a Snare of a Fowler in all their
Ways, to blind and delude them, till they bring on God's hatred and Judgment
upon them all. So also Mic. 2.11. He that will Prophesy of Wine and strong
Drink, he shall even be the Prophet of this People. Again, The Work of Christ's
Kingdom is discountenanced, when God's People are abused, reviled, scorned, and
hated for Holiness, for Praying, Hearing, etc. or when they are restrained
from, or interrupted in the Exercise of Religion, if you do thus, they will cry
to their God, or (to speak in the Language of Children) they will go tell their
Father, and when he examines the Matter, you will be found fighters against
God, and he will undoubtedly deliver them out of your Hand, he has assured us
of it, Psalm. 12.5. For the oppression of the Poor, for the sighing of the
Needy, now will I arise says the Lord, I will set him in safety from him that
puffs at him. Take heed therefore what you do, and give not any Occasion for
Men to read that of Romans 13.3. backward, saying, Ruler's are not a terror to
evil works, but to the good.

Thirdly, Set your selves strenuously against the Works and Kingdom of the
Devil; you have good Laws, which are as Banks against the Floods of
Ungodliness, look well to the Execution of them: Wickedness is Fruitful, it
needs no planting nor watering, it grows like Hemlock in the Furrows of the
Field; all that the Devil will ask of you is but to let him alone; all that
wicked Men long for is, that the Yoke may be taken off, that they may go to
Hell without control: See how the Land breaks forth Impieties, like the Frogs
of Egypt make the Land to stink; Judge of the Nation by this one County, in
this little time of Solstitium, in the Change of Justices, Wickedness that was
under restraint (for Sin is cowardly) is now become a staring, daring
Cockatrice: What Sabbath Breakings, and Drunkenness have we had of late? I
impute not this to any in Authority, look but into the Tempers of debauched
Wretches, and you will find that their hopes of Licentiousness, is the ground of
their Love to any Change of Government, Civil or Ecclesiastical, and the fear
of Restraint, the ground of their Dislike: When the King came in, then some
rejoiced that now they might Drink and Swear without the fear of the Stocks;
some of you that hear me know the Truth of this; but when he published his
seasonable Declaration against Debauchery, then as much as they were for the
King before, they could speak against him, as being a Puritan and Presbyterian:
These have been the Words of some; and indeed what better can you expect from
those that know no other joy but Drunkenness and Excess? That can delight in no
Thank-offering, but such as is fit to be given to some drunken God, that can
make no better use of the King's Name, but such as a Farrier makes of his
Drenching-horn, to force Drink down their Throats, beyond the Measure and
Desires of their own Stomachs? Rise up then in the Strength and Might of the
Lord against these Impieties: Break the Jaws and Teeth of Wickedness, spare
none of Amalek, great nor small; if you do (however privately it may be) the
bleating of the Sheep, and lowing of the Oxen will discover you to be no
Friends to Christ's Kingdom.

Fourthly, Make not your Power subservient to your Passions and Desires of
Revenge, this is not to do Christ's Work, but to serve your own Turn of him:
Remember not former Provocations, and when you come to Punish any that formerly
have Offended you, put no more into the Scale of Justice, then the present
Crime requires, this is a seasonable Advice, though hard and difficult to Flesh
and Blood, -- Manet alta mente repostum, etc. to this Purpose I might apply a
Story which we have of Themistocles, who coming into a School, asked what Art
they professed? They told him the Art of Memory; He replied, that the Art of
Memory was but an unprofitable Art, and that he had rather learn the Art of
Forgetfulness: To forget Things that might provoke our Fury and Passion, is
certainly a Divine Art, and the best way to attain it, in reference to what I
now put you in mind of, is not only to have the Act of Indemnity and Oblivion
ad unquem, if I may so speak, but to learn it by Heart: Let not Law and public
Justice be made a Pretense for secret Grudges and private Revenge, for this is
what the Psalmist calls, Psalm. 58.2. To weigh out the violence of your hands;
let not Men say of you, as Theodorus Gadareus, Nero's Tutor said of him, (...)
that you are Dirt kned with Blood: Will not the wronged cry out, the best of
them is as a bryar, the most upright is sharper than a thorn hedge, Mic. 7.4.
Read Psalm. 94.20. Shall the throne of Iniquity have fellowship with thee which
frames mischief by by a law: See what the Prophet threatens in this Case, Isa.
10.1. Woe unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, and that write grievousness
which they have prescribed, to turn aside the needy from Judgment, etc.

Fifthly, In your Administrations of Justice, let there be a decorum and
suitableness both to the Cause and to the Person: 1. to the Person, let Justice
run with an even Current, without partiality or respect of Persons: It was an
old Complaint, Dat veniam corvis, etc. -- and an Ancient Similie wherein Laws
were compared to Cobwebs, which take the little Flies, but not the Hornets:
Levi's impartiality, even to the disowning of nearest Relations when God
required it, Deuteronomy. 33.9. is your Pattern. 2. Let there be a suitableness to the
Cause, as that varieth, so must you let out severity or clemency, activity or
moderation. To Punish smaller Transgressions with the same Scorpions that you
would Punish greater withal, can never be justified by such a Heterodox Paradox
as that of Cicero, (...), all Sins are equal: To have Life and Activity about
the Mint and Anise, wholly neglecting the greater Things of the Law, is
reproved by the Mouth of Christ himself; as Justice must be your Robe and
Diadem, so that Robe though wrought of diverse Colors, must carry an equal
suitableness of Embroidery, and not like a Beggar's Cloak (pardon the
Comparison) one Piece good Cloth and another Course: The Scales of Justice must
not have a false Balance, or a Bag of deceitful Weights.

Sixthly, Let Christ be the Alpha and Omega of all your Employments, carry him
along with you in your Heart, set him before your Eyes, make him your Pattern,
consult with him as your Oracle and Lawgiver, let him be the Loadstone to your
Souls to draw them to him, for the Ends of his Glory; truly you will have little
Comfort in any thing you do, if you as Augustine said of Tully's Work's, find
not the Name of Christ in it, for of him, and to him, and through him are all
things.

I have done with my Directions, I should now press this upon you, but I shall
use no other Motive, than that of the Text, you must do this upon Pain of his
Displeasure, Kiss the Son least he be angry: After a few days are passed over
your Head, you must give up your Account to him, who is the Righteous Judge,
who will not be afraid of your Looks, nor regard your Persons more then the
Meanest, but will render to you according to your ways and doings: If you be
Guilty, you will tremble a Thousand-fold more before his Throne, then the
Guilty Criminals shall tremble before yours this Day; if it be found, that
while you were in the Throne you oppressed his Kingdom, he will then make you
his Footstool, and then Ten thousand times Woe to you, you had better never have
known your Honors and Exaltations; you will then find that any Trouble or
Molestation caused by you on the Innocent or Pious, shall be heavier on you
that inflicted it, than for those that suffered by you: When they shall be
comforted, and you tormented, Sol Justitiae qui quondam erat in signo leonis,
nunc in signo virginis, tunc erit in signo librae, as Abssabritius has it. His
meaning is, that God will weigh you in a strict Balance, and he can easily do
it if he be angry never so little, by the Breath of his Mouth they Perish, as
easily as a Bear can tear the Caul of a Man's Heart, Hos. 13.8. O that you
would consider this, and be instructed ye Judges of the earth; take Advice in
time, advance the Honor of Christ, and of his Ways in your selves and others,
and then he will Crown you with Glory and Immortality, for blessed are all they
that put their trust in him.

Before I dismiss you, I shall speak a word or two to the People.

You have heard how Plain I have been with the Magistrates, and I know People
love to hear them so dealt withal, and yet the Lord knows I have not done it to
make you Sport: Their Ingenuity and Religion will make them take it well: Will
you take it as well if I use the same boldness of Speech to you? I have not
time to press much upon you, I shall only charge you with these Four Things.

First, Do you also kiss the Son. If Magistrates must do so, much more you, and
this is one Reason why Magistrates are only mentioned in the Exhortation of the
Psalm, if their Greatness cannot excuse them, what can you plead for an
exemption from this Duty? Do not then oppose Christ's Kingdom, by your own
Disobedience and Contempt of his Commands, break off your Sins by Repentance,
be at last ashamed of Swearing, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Sabbath-breaking,
etc. neither do you Reproach others for taking more Care of their Souls, than
you are willing to take of your own: Make Conscience of Family Worship, attend
on Preaching, examine the Condition of your Hearts, and be Examples of Piety to
others: For this purpose I shall mention two Encouragements to you; 1. Thus
will Christ be a hiding Place and Sanctuary for you, and your Avenger: If
Magistrates should become as evening Wolves, yet God would awake for you; it is
the Conclusion of Psalm 58. which was penned for a Support against wicked
Ruler's, that God would so visibly stand up for his People, that a Man should
say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous, verily he is a God that
Judges in the earth. And Luke 18.8. Shall not God avenge his own elect, that
cry night and day, I tell you he will avenge them speedily. 2. A second
Encouragement is, that thus may God make your Ruler's Good, and give them as a
Blessing; the Reason why Saul was such an Oppressive Ruler, was from the Sin's
of the People, that provoked God to give them a King in his Wrath: The Reason
of David's miscarriage in numbering the People, was the People's Sin that
provoked God in Anger to Israel to permit his Fall, 2 Samuel 24.1. 1 Chronicles. 21.1.
In the Body Natural, the destillations from the Head upon the Stomach, are
usually from the Stomach first, which afflicts the Head before the Head trouble
it; so in the Body Politic, our Sin's provoke God to, leave our Ruler's to
Temptation.

Secondly, Let me charge you, That if Magistrates are so much entrusted with
Christ's Kingdom, you neglect not to Pray for them, you have very great Reasons
to induce you to it, and the Apostle Paul 1 Timothy 2. gives these three Reasons,
that should stir you up to this Duty even to wicked Ruler's; 1. Our own
Benefit, Encouragement, and Protection in the Ways of Religion, v. 2. That we
may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. 2. A second
Reason for it is, the Acce^^^^leness of it to God, v. 3. This is good and
acceptable in t^^ ^^ght of God our Savior. And 3. He endeavors to persuade
Men to this Duty, from the possibility of the Change of their Hearts, v. 4. In
that God would have all Men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth.

Thirdly, If then the Magistrates are God's Trustees, and Instruments, then for
Conscience sake let them have Respect in our Carriage and Language according to
their Places: Paul acknowledged his Failing in this, Acts 23.5. when he called
the high Priest whited Wall, the Expositions usually given here, are either
gross, as if Paul meant his Wickedness had brought a Forfeiture of his Honor
upon him, and so he would not acknowledge him as high Priest; or contradictory,
as if Paul who was no Stranger in Israel did not know the Person of the high
Priest, and yet acknowledged him a Judge, sit thou to Judge, etc. so that
if you will pardon me in a little singularity, I would thus expound it, (...)
non considerabam: I considered not; and thus you find, Acts 12.12. (...)
translated (as it cannot properly be otherwise) Considerans, Considering, or
when he had considered: So that Paul here acknowledges (...) Incogitancy, and
eats his Words as not warrantable.

Fourthly, Obey the Magistrates, and submit actively in all lawful Things, and
passively, when it comes to thi^ (...) you must obey God rather than Man.

FINIS.

