Effigy and uero Ritratto di Masianiello, comandante, in Napoli.


AN EXACT HISTORY OF The late REVOLUTIONS IN NAPLES; AND OF Their monstrous
Successes, Not to be paralleled by any Ancient or Modern History.

Published by the Lord Alexander Giraffi in Italian; And (for the rareness of
the subject) rendered to English, By I. H. Esqr.

Non est quod mireris praeterita,
Praesentia te reddent attonitum.
Live. Leave off admiring what before has past,
This present Age will make thee more aghast.
London: Printed by R. A. for R. Lowndes. 1650.

To the Right Worshipful the Governor, the Deputy, and the rest of the
worthy Company trading into the Levant*
SIRS,
THe Scene of this ensuing Story, was that Country where Princes are Merchants,
and with which you hold most correspondence; This, with those high respects I
have always professed to that Noble Society, and the employment which by
Royal Commission I once had to serve some of them, induced me to this address.

The Original was very lately compiled by an Italian Nobleman, and though it
be a small volume, yet it contains as stupendous passages, as ever happened on
Earth since Discord first entered into the World; And indeed were they not
fresh, and acted, as it were but yesterday, it would stagger any ones faith to
believe, that in so well a policed City as Naples, commanded by a Viceroy, and
three praesidiall Castles, so full of Nobility and Gentry, as no place more,
abounding with so many sober and politic Heads, I say, it would stumble any ones
belief, that a young fellow, a petty poor barefooted Fisherman, should draw
after him in less then three days, above forty thousand armed men, and shaking
off his linen slop, blue wastcoat, and red bonnet, should the fourth day ride
triumphantly upon his Coursier in cloth of silver, command all Naples, and
consequently near upon six hundred thousand souls, as absolutely as ever Monark
did; and all this by his own single Orders, which were of force enough to
plunder or burn any house, to banish the proudest Lord, or chop off any head,
without judicial Proceeding.

In this Narration, though short and small, you may see all the circumstances
hereof related with much exactness: Moreover, as in a little Ring embossed
with some precious Stone, one may behold the effigies of a great Castle, or
Mountain (by a rare contraction of the object) so in this small History of A
Ring.
Anello, which I present unto your eyes, you may discern the greatness of my
desires, that the world should witness how much I am

X. May 1650. Your humble and ready Servitor, James Howell.

NEVVES FROM NAPLES.
The Proem.
THat brave Napolitan Courser, no less generous then undaunted, who for excess
of mettle, (prancing and triumphing in his own liberty) would not suffer either
bit in mouth or saddle on back by any barbarous Nation or Foe for so many Ages.

He, who in so many warlike assaults full of Martial spirits did by his proud
neighing kick down the pride, and broke the courage of the great Hannibal,
giving him such thumps on the breast that drove him back to the banks of
Carthage after his glorious victories against the Romans, and other Nations by
him de^elld.

He who stopped that formidable Army of three hundred thousand Combatants under
King Gens^erious the Goth, after he had sacked and burnt Rome, forcing him to
bid a farewell to fair Italy.

He who with a bold tooth did so irreparably strike Bellisardus the Greek, that
he constrained him to take counsel of his feet, and betake himself to a
shameful flight.

He that with a mortal kick struck Alboinus the Pagan, King of the Longobards,
with an innumerable Army, having had the dominion of Italy six hundred years
and upwards.

He who triumphed over three most potent barbarous Kings, di Fontana King of
Afric, di Esdione King of Boe^ia and Carthage, and of Marchinato King of Syria
and Persia, taking pleasure to swim in the blood of two and forty thousand
Saracens, and never rested or drew back his foot till he got them all the
spoils of that fearful Army.

He who after three months of straight siege did force Henry the German
Emperor to retire himself shamefully.

He who being gamesom and full of heat, delighted chiefly to prance among arms
and armed men, and to whiten the sands with his foame, being already stained
with the blood of the enemy, and to trample upon unburied carcases.

This brave Napolitan Courser came afterwads by his misfortune (his ancient
liberty and innated bravery being lost) into the possession of strangers,
sometimes of the Normans, sometimes of the Swevians, sometimes of the French, with
the expense of a world of blood: At last he fell into the hands of the
Arragonians, and the most renowned House of Austria their Succe^^ors, who
looking upon him with a gentle look, and whether he was stroak'd with some magic
hand, or switch'd with some enchanted rod, he received from them the bridle into
his mouth, the saddle upon his back, and willingly took up the Cavalier to
manage him ever since.

These afterward by their natural sagacity feeding and nourishing him with
grains of many graces, and concession of privileges, made him ready to obey,
and delivered him to the government of their Hors-coursers, that being well
guided and instructed by them in the art of war, they might quickly make use
of him upon occasion of any enterprise.

Naples for the space of 203. years served the Majesty of this House with no
ill-minded gratitude and fidelity; she succor'd Alphonso the first with a
voluntary imposition of ten Carlines upon every fire throughout the whole
Kingdom for ever; they added five carlines more to Ferdinand for ever, and so
by degrees it mounted to 66. Carlines, which she pays to this day, and comes
to three millions of gold yearly.

She served the House of Austria afterward with more readiness, having
supplied Charles the fifth in ten donatives with five millions, Philip the
second with thirty in three and thirty donatives, and Philip the third and
fourth, from the year 1628. to this day with a hundred millions and more, for
which free donatives 'twas necessary to impose many taxes and gabells upon all
edible commodities, to the end that he might completely satisfy his desires.

And poursuing the same affection toward her King now regnant in the year
1646. and being desirous to present him with a new donative, without having any
regard to her own forces now much infeebled, a new design was found out to put
a new gabell upon fruits, which comprehended all sorts as well dry as green, as
far as Mulberies, Grapes, Figgs, Apples, Pears, etc. depriving her of her
ordinary nutriment: But making her live so seven months continually, she fell
down at last flat upon the ground by mere weakness, and then feeling her
deplored estate, and of the whole Kingdom, she took a new resolution to
disburthen her self not only of this, but of all other insupportable
exactions formerly imposed, and this she did not without welgrounded reasons:
For it is a clear case that there is engraven in the breasts of men by nature
her self a detestation of slavery, and how unwillingly they put their necks
into the yoke of another, specially when it becomes intolerable, when
exorbitant exactions are imposed upon Subjects whereby they are reduced to
extreme fits of desperateness. Ad extremum ruunt populi exitium, cum extrema
onera iis imponuntur; People ru^ to extreme ruin, when extreme burdens are
laid upon them, as Tacitus truly taught.

Hence it came to pass, that in the royal City of Naples, that Mass of
numberless peeple with their families being among other gabells much aggrieved
for that upon fruits, and not being able to endure it, and having made it often
known unto the most excellent Lord the Duke of Arcos Viceroy of that Kingdom,
by the public cries and lamentations of women and children, and the men of
Lavinaro, and other popular quarters, as he passed through the Market place to
the devotion of the most holy Mother of Carmine in the Church of the
Carmelites, situated along the said Market, and having petitioned him by the
means of the most eminent Cardinal Filomarino the Archbishop, and others, to
take off the said gabell; upon a Sunday as his Excellency went to the said
Church he heard a great buzz among the peeple, and little less then
threatenings, presages of the following commotions which succeeded afterward,
and promising to take quite off the said gabell, he returned with such
apprehensions of fear into the Palace, that he not only went no more to the
Carmine, but he would not suffer the most solemn Feast of S. John Baptist to be
celebrated, which was used to be yearly in Naples; and this was done of purpose
for preventing such an infinite crew of people should not assemble in one place.

In the interim the peeple much grumbling and muttering that the promised grace
was delayed, put fire one night to a baracca of powder in the Market place
where the said gabell was exacted, which was afterward repaired after this had
twice happened.

There wanted not from day to day most pungent and bitter invectives full of
popular grievances and of fiery protests against the public Officers, fixed up
in the most public places of the City.

This boldness increased afterward, and with this boldness an envy upon the
report that was had of the good success the revolutions of Palermo, and a good
part of Sicilie, Messina excepted, had for their grivances by force of Arms
from the most excellent Lord the Marquis of Velez Viceroy of that Kingdom, who
took off, or moderated most gabells, and gave afterward a general pardon for
all excesses, as for opening of prisons, murders, thefts, arming in the
Country, and all other offenses, etc, the tenor whereof was as follows: The
first Ban, or Act of Grace in Sicilie.
HIs Excellency in relation to the royal Patrimony by this present Act to be
always in force, does take off, and abolish to perpetuity the gabell of meal,
wine, oil, flesh, and cheese throughout all this City and Territory of Palermo
for ever, and that the Consulls for the Master ships are to have two popular
Jurats to perpetuity from this day forward, for the service of the peeple. In
Palermo this 21. of May, 1647.

The Marquis of Velez.
Subscribed by all the Ministers of the Patrimony, as also by the Civil and
Criminal Court, and by the Master Notary of the Kingdom.




The second Ban in Sicilie.
BEcause that this night the prisons of the Vicaria were broken open, and the
prisoners made to go out that were found therein, and his Excellency knowing
the said prisoners to be faultless, by this present Ban he pardons all and
every one of the said prisoners: And likewise his Excellency does acquit and
pardon them who were found left in the said prisons, and did not go out;
moreover his Excellency does give grace and pardon Sub verbo and fide Regia, by
royal Word and Faith to all the said prisoners, as well for the Delinquency of
flight, as for all other Delinquencies for which they were imprisoned. In
Palermo this 21. of May, 1647.

The Marquis de los Velez. Don Livio Pente President of Justice.





The peeple of Naples being thus allured and encouraged by the example of the
neighbor Kingdom, grew very envious to attain the same freedom, saying, And
what? are we less then Palermo? is not our peeple peradventure if they unite,
more formidable and warlike? Have not we more reason far, being more burdened
and oppressed? On, on to Arms, time is precious, it is not good to delay the
enterprise, etc. These, and like complaints made in diverse Conventicles became
now public: Whereupon the Lord Viceroy in high wisdom being very desirous to
prevent mischiefs, caused the six Quarters or Precincts of the City to meet
oftentimes, viz. The fifth part of the Gentry, and the sixth of the peeple, that
by all means there might be ways found out to take off that gabell or tax
upon Fruits. Which design though 'twas pleasing to all for the satisfaction of
the peeple, yet because it was prejudicial to some of the Farmers, there were
secret ways found to hinder the happy effect of the said business, but they
went about to dissuade the Vice-King from the accomplishment of his promise
made to the peeple, and either to please him, or for their own private
interest (which is more probable) they represented unto him, that a few poor
Tatterdimalians had made all that noise: therefore they induced him to repair
the Tollhouse for fruit that was burnt, which he did, but with a purpose to
take it quite off, or find some temperate way to satisfy the discontented
peeple on the one side, and the Napolitans, Nobles, Gentry and Merchants on the
other side, who had advanced upon the said gabell above six hundred thousand
Crowns upon the account of the Capital million, and eighty five thousand
Crowns of annual rent.

This way of temper was buzzed abroad to be some new Tax that was to be put upon
Corn and Wine; whereunto the enraged peeple replied, and protested that they
would never give way thereunto, but they reiterated their instances to have the
said gabell upon Fruits to be quite taken off, and not to put any other in
compensation of it.

As matters were thus perplexed, behold, an occasion did suddenly present it
self in an instant, the 7. of July, 1647. which made way to the total
execution of the desired purpose, as it shall be clearly declared very
punctually from day to day, and that with as much fidelity and truth, as any
pen can possibly promise upon this subject.

Sunday the 7. of July, 1647. The first Day.
A Young man about twenty four years old happened to be in a corner of the
great Market place at Naples, a spritefull man, and pleasant, of a middle
stature, black-ey'd, rather lean then fat, having a small tuff of hair; he
wore linen slops, a blew wastcoat, and went barefoot, with a Mariners cap, but
he was of a good countenance, stout and lively as could be, as the effects will
show. His profession was to angle for little fish with a cane, hook and line,
as also to buy fish, and to carry and retail them to some that dwelt in his
quarter; and such men are called in Naples Pescivendoli. His name was Tomaso
Anello of Amalfi, but vulgarly called Masaniello by contraction. This man dwelt
in the Market place, and under the window of his house there were the Arms and
name of Charles the fifth, very ancient, toward the left side of a fountain
hard by, which might be attributed to a mysterious presage that he should
renew, and set afoot, as he himself would say often very pleasantly, the
privileges which that unconquered Monarque granted to the City and People of
Naples. Besides there is a true observation, and it is about a hundred years
since, just in the year 1547. but in the month of May, as John Antonio relates
in the History of Naples* when there was another commotion in the government of
Don Petro de Toledo, by reason of the Tribunal of the holy Inquisition which
Philip the second would have introduced; another Masaniello, a Sorrentine and
Bandito Captain was chief of that tumult. But although the Nobility was then
joined with the peeple, that sublevation was not very hurtful, nor lasted any
long time. And if such an union had now bin, so much ruin had not happened to
King or peeple; for what greater contagion can there be to a City then a
disunion 'twixt her inhabitants? What destroyed Carthage? the two Factions of
Barchiniani and Hanoniani: What maintained war in France for 60. years, but the
dissension of the House of Burgundy and Orleans? What brought so much
desolation to England* and caused seven fearful battles, wherein 80. Princes
of the illustrious blood were slain, but the faction of the Houses of Lancaster
and York? And what ranvers'd and confounded the tranquillity of the Florentine
Republic but the faction of the Bianchi and Neri? In sum, the same that a
Fever is to a natural body, the same is disunion in a City or Kingdom. A City
is a ship, and divisions are the leaks, through which, while the Mariners fight
one with the other, the water enters and drownes all: The wise Pilot who steers
ought to stop those leaks, and make up the breaches of division, and reserve
himself without trusting any other for the helm, and specially not to place
there any capricious heads, or factious spirits, and to be sure to keep himself
still Lord and Patron of the vessel.

This Masaniello out of a kind of natural craft having observed the murmurings
up and down the City, took hold of the following occasion.

One day (which was some four days before the most holy Feast of Corpus Domini)
he went very angry toward his house, and passing by a Church where the famous
Bandito Perrone had fled for refuge with a companion of his, being asked by
these, what ayl'd him? he answered in great choler, I will be bound to be
hanged, but I will right this City; they laughed at his words, saying, a proper
Squire to right the City of Naples, Masaniello replied, Do not laugh, I swear
by God, if I had two or three of my humor, you should see what I could do: What
would you do? (said they) he answered, Will you join with me? why not? answered
they; give me then your faith, replied Masaniello, and you shall see what we we
have to do, so they having plighted their faith unto him, he departed.

A little after he fell into a great choler, because his fish was taken from
him by some of the Court, because he had not paid the gabell, he thought then
to make use of the occasion of the murmurings the peeple had then for the
gabell upon fruit, and being departed from Perrone he went up and down the
fruit-shops that were in that quarter, advising them that the next day they
should com all united to the Market with a resolution to tell the
Countrey-Fruiterers that they would buy no more gabell'd fruit.

In the interim that this noise diffused it self up and down the shops, the
Elect of the peeple Andreas Anaclerio being chosen that very day, betook
himself to the Market place where the fruits were distributed to the
shopkeepers, they cried out, they would buy no gabell'd fruit, the Elect
persuaded that at that time the gabell should be paid, and it should be
speedily taken off, so the tumult ceased for that time. Masaniello seeing
nothing was don then, he went up and down those quarters, crying, avaunt gabell,
avaunt gabell, for which some laughed at him, but others considered well of his
words.

Moreover, about this time a great number of boys being gathered together in
the Marketplace he told them, say as I do, Two torneses, to wit a baiocco for
a measure of oil, six and thirty ounces the loaf of bread, two and twenty the
pound of cheese, six granas for beef, six granas for pulse, nine granas for
veal, four granas the Greek, two granas the pint of wine; these words he made
them repeat diverse times, and being taught and bearing them in memory they
cried them up and down all the City, and in the face of the Viceroy, for then
there was paid for every thing as Masaniello had taught the children. Besides,
he gave them another lesson, which was this: Viva Dio, viva la Madonna del
Carmine, viva il Papa, viva il Re di'Spagna, e la Grasica, e muora, muora il
mal governo. Let Let God live, let the Lady of Carmine live, let the Pope live,
let the King of Spain and Grasica live, and let the ill government die, let the
ill government die. This and such like Doctrines being taught by Masaniello to
his Scholars, and cried up and down; caused much laughter and jeering at the
Master, they held him to be mad and foolish; but he told them, ye laugh at me
now, but you shall see shortly what Masaniello can do, let me alone, if I do
not free you from so many slaveries, let me be held infamous for ever, which
words increased their laughter the more. But he not caring for that, tended his
business, whereupon he enrolled such a number of those boys 'twixt seventeen
and sixteen years old, that they came to be five hundred, and at last two
thousand, insomuch that he could not only, make a Company, but whole Regiments:
He thus prepared them against the great feast of our Lady of Carmine, which was
near, of which Militia he made himself General, giving every one of them in
their hands a little weak cane.

The seventh day of July being come, which was a Sunday, upon which day the
Festival of our Lady of Grace was used to be in a Chapel hard by, and
commonly the feast was made by all the boys and common peeple about the
Market, with the meaner sort of the dwellers in the neighboring quarters, they
erected there according to custom a castle of wood, which was to be battered
with sticks and fruit, upon this occasion there assembled there abundance of
peeple of the meaner sort, and although the hour was com that fruits were used
to be brought to the Market to pay gabell, and the boys used to be there to
gather such fruit that fell upon the streets; but it chanced there came no
fruit at all, because the shopkeepers had mutined and agreed not to buy any
fruit, of purpose not to pay the gabell, as they were used to do, telling the
Fruiterers, that they should pay the gabell if they would, for the Shopkeepers
would pay none: this seeming very strange, they came from words to blows with
the Shopkeepers: And in regard of this difference there was no fruit then in
the market which were fresh, but a few of the day before; A tumult did arise
among the peeple, which being told the Lord Zufia Grassi^ro Regent of the City,
he ordered the forenamed Anaclerio the Elect of the peeple, that he should apply
himself to remedy that commotion; which he attempted to do, but all in vain, in
regard of the first and obstinate quarrel that was 'twixt the Fruiterers and
the retailing Shopkeepers; wherefore the Elect, not to displease the peeple and
Shopkeepers, gave sentence against the Fruiterers as Forreners, (most part of
whom were of the City of Puzzuolo) reviling them with words, and threatening to
bastinado them, and have them condemned to the Galleys.

Among those of Puzzolo there was a cosen of Massianello's, who, according to
the instructions given him, began more then any to incite the peeple, who
seeing that he could sell his fruit but at a low price, and after he had paid
the Gabell, there was scarce left as much as would pay for the Barque and quit
cost, he flew into such a rage, that throwing two great baskets upon the
ground, he cried out, God gives plenty, and the ill government a dearth;
therefore I care not a straw for this fruit, let every one take of it. The
boys eagerly ran to gather and eat the fruit. Masaniello, all this falling out
according to his expectation, rushed in among them, crying out, Without Gabell,
Without Gabell. But Anaclerio threatening him with whipping and the Galleys, not
only the Fruiterers, but all the peeple threw Figs, Apples, and other fruits
in great fury into his face. But this seeming but little to Masaniello, he hit
him upon the breast with a stone, and encouraged his militia of boys to do as
he did; which they did: But Anaclerio breaking through the crowd in a coach,
made have to the Church of Carmine, where finding a felluca, he embarked
himself therein, and so got toward the Palace, otherwise he had been torn in
pieces, or stoned to death by the boys.

Upon this success the people flocking in greater numbers as well in the said
Marketplace, as elsewhere, they began to exclaim aloud against those
intolerable grievances under which they groaned; so a mighty rumor ran up and
down the streets protesting to pay no more gabell, and crying out, Let the King
of Spain live, but let the ill Government die: The fury still increasing,
Masaniello being followed by an infinite company of boys and all sorts of
loose people, some with sticks, others with pikes and partisans taken from the
Tower of the Carmine, he leaped up upon the highest table which was among the
Fruiterers, and with a loud voice cried, Be merry dear companions and brothers,
give God thanks, and to the glorious Virgin of Carmine, that the hour of your
redemption draws near; this poor barefooted fellow as another Moses, who freed
the Israelites from Pharoahs rod, shall in that manner redeem you of all
gabells, from the first time that they were ever imposed: A Fisherman, who was
Peter, reduced with his voice from Satan's slavery to the liberty of Christ Rome
her self, and with Rome a world: Now, another Fisherman, who is Masaniello,
shall release Naples, and with Naples a whole kingdom, from the tyranny of
Gabells. From henceforth ye shall shake from off your necks the intolerable
yoke of so many grievances, which have depressed you hitherto: Nor to effect
this do I ^are a rush to be torn in pieces, and to be dragged up and down the
gutters of Naples: Let all the blood in my body spin out of these veins, let
this head skip from my shoulders by a fatal steel, and be perched up in this
market upon a pole, yet I shall die contented and glorious; it will be triumph
and honor unto me, to think that my blood and life perish in so glorious a
conquest.

Masaniello repeating often these and such like words inflamed marvelously the
minds of the peeple, who were disposed in their hearts to cooperate with him to
this effect, and to begin the work there was fire put to the house that was
next the Toll-house for fruit, both which were burnt to the very ground with
all the books and accounts, with diverse of the Farmers of the Customers goods
who were there put up.

This being don, the common peeple increased in such nombers up and down the
streets that every one did shut up his shop, every one being astonished at such
a sudden garboyle seeming rather to dream of such a one then see it: Whereupon
many thousand peeple uniting themselfs went to other quarters of the City,
where all the gabell houses were as those of fruit, of corn, of flesh, of fish,
of salt, wine, oil, cheese, silk, and all other either edible, or wearable
commodities and spared not one of them, but taking out of them all the writings
and books of entrance or issues appertaining to the said gabell; as also all
the furniture as well of the Farmers as others, and all things that were there
in pawn or otherwise, as Hangings, Chaires, Arms great quantities of moneys
with other rich movables all was hurled into a great fire of straw; benches,
forms, sedans with other stuff were burnt all to ashes upon the streets, In
which actions one thing was very considerable, that in plundring those household
stuffs and moneys not one durst meddle with the least piece of any thing,
because all should be dedicated to the fire, being the quintessence as 'twas
said, of their blood, therefore they would not have a jot of any thing preserved
from the fury of the fire. The peeple taking hereby more and more boldness and
courage because they found no resistance or obstacle, and the number still
increasing to the number of about 10000. they made toward the Palace of the
Viceroy, many of them holding upon the tops of staves, and pikes loafs of
bread, which was then sold very dear scarce weighing 22. ounces: The cry still
continued more louder then ever, Let the King of Spain live, and let the ill
government perish.

So the first Militia of Masaniello consisti^g of 2000. boys marched on, every
one lifting up his cane and tying a clout of black cloth on the top went along
the streets and cried out with delorous and loud voices, which moved many to
tenderness and tears. Have compassion upon these poor souls in Purgatory, who
not being able to endure the grievous burden of so many grievances seek how
they may escape away: O brothers cooperate with us! O sisters help so just so
necessary an enterprise, and so profitable for every body; In such doleful
tones going on from one street to the other, they came at last to St. James his
prison, where freeing all the prisoners they admitted them to their society.

But being com before the Palace and under the window of the Viceroy, they
began to cry out amain, that they would not be freed of the fruit-gabell only,
but of all other, specially that of corn. Hereupon the Viceroy came out into
the Balcone, and told them that the said gabell should be abolished, and part of
the corn gabell also: but the peeple bawled still that they would not be
releev'd in part, they would have the whole taken off, yet they cried out may
the King of Spain live, and the ill government die: And a good number of them
thinking to go up the stairs of the Palace to notify unto the Viceroy the
rest of their grievances, his Excellency commanded the German and Spanish guard
that they should not stir, but suffer them to pass and repasse freely,
nerethelesse the Viceroy being not altogether obeyed, because he was not heard
by them, some resistance was made by the soldiers but the peeple with canes, and
clubs only (a thing incredible to believe) and with huge cries made their
entrance demanding audience of the Viceroy, but he was got away, and they did
so revile and affront the Dutch and Spanish guard who were at the gate, that
they abandoned their ports, and took a fair pair of heels to their quarters:
Thereupon the peeple entered the Palace, and being com to the Hall door though
shut they burst it open, entering there without any rub, then they would have
entered into the great Chamber, but a guard of Dutch and Halbardeers were there,
as also some Spaniards who did what they could to resist their entrance, but all
in vain, because the peeple still thrusting on they were constrained to yield
their halbards and other weapons; Then going on at leisure they found easy
entrance into all the rest of the rooms, until they came to the last chamber
where the Viceroy was hid in a closet, and though they found the door doubly
bolted, yet by force of halbards and other instruments they forced their
passage, and the Viceroy hardly escaped killing, but the Duke di Castle di
Sangro Don Ferrant Corraciolo conveyed him away and so saved him from the
mortal blow which was intended. The Viceroy with a few gentlemen that were
about him finding they were not secure there, thought good to retire into the
Castle, where the Duchess of Arcos had withdrawn her self a little before
with her Ladies, children and kindred; but understanding at that hour that the
Ladies had taken up the draw bridge, the Viceroy took a resolution to sly into
the next Church dedicated to St. Lewis, where there was a Friery of Saint
Francisco de Paola, but he would first spy out of a window where the gross of
the peeple was, to let them know that he was willing to give them content,
dispersing little cedules up and down to that purpose signed by himself, and
sealed with the Kings seal, wherein he absolutely took off the gabel of fruit,
and part of that of corn; But the peeple being not satisfied hereat, they made
signs with their hands, and cried aloud that he would come down and speak with
them face to face; Hereupon the Viceroy went unto them to take off all
ombrages of distrust.

In the mean time that part of the peeple which remained in the Palace ran up
and down with much fury, they sacked the chambers every where, putting fire to
the Sedans, Balcones, Tables, Travesses, Windows, Scrines, and every thing they
found, yet they would not meddle (which was a thing to be wondered at in the
middle of such a fury) with the quarter of the most eminent Cardinal Trinultio,
who dwelt in the same Palace.

The Viceroy being com down to the rabble rout procured to put himself in a
Coach with two horses, and to secure himself within the said St. Lewis Church,
and he was already got into the Coach, but many of the peeple spying him they
stayed the Coach, and opening it with two naked swords in hand, they threatened
him unless he would take off the gabells, he promised he would if they would be
quiet, but this would not serve the turn unless he came out of the Coach and
show himself to the peeple, which he did, and then some respect was shown him,
and some kissed his hands, and upon their knees cried out most excellent Sir,
for the love of God disburden us once of these gabells, let us have no more
slavery, let us breath, His Excellence having confirmed unto them their
request, was devising how to get from out of their hands, for although he was
honored by many, yet he held himself not secure in such a confused multitude;
Therefore to divert the peeple, he threw among them some hundred of Zecchins of
gold which he carried about him for that purpose, this took good effect, though
many cried out aloud we have no need to be releev'd with a little money, but to
freed from the gabell, but while most of them were greedy to take up the gold,
his Excellence got safe and sound into the said Church where he caused all the
doors to be shut, and of the Monastery also.

The peeple perceaving this, and being much disdained that the Viceroy had
escaped from their hands, they went incontinently to the said Monastery, and the
first great gate being batterd down they thought to do so to the rest, crying
out still to be released of the gabells, therefore they desired his Excellence
would consign them a paper in writing under his hand and seal, wherein he should
promise so to do: And because the peeple should not pass further to do
violence to the Monastery notwithstanding that they still increased, he looked
on them from a window, and desired them to be quiet, for he was disposed and
ready to content them; but because the incredulous multitude had a conceit
still fixed in them that they should be deluded, they went still on to batter
down the other gate whereby they immediately entered the Monastery. While
business was carried thus, the most eminent Bishop Filomarine, who being very
zealous in his pastoral charge showed often to his Excellence for the service
of God and his Church, endeavored to appease the peeple, for the avoiding of
those irrecoverable losses which by his high wisdom and perspicacious wit he
saw hanging over the City: Hereupon he made a sign unto them with his hand,
that they would be quiet; but they replying, that they would have the instrument
for release of the gabells from the Viceroy, specially those upon corn and
fruits, his Eminence answered them, that he would make it his care to obtain it,
and so going out of his Coach he went in person to the second gate of the
Monastery, to hinder the pulling of it down by the furious rabble, and he had
his intent, for out of the great reverence they bore to their Archbishop the
fury ceased, but still they prayed that the gabells might be abolished; the
Bishop promised to bring them the Instrument signed and sealed, but least if he
parted from among the peeple the fury would recomence, he sent to that purpose
to the Viceroy being not able to com himself to mingle speech with him, that
he would send him the said Instrument, which he did, desiring him to deliver it
with his own hands to the peeple: The Bishop having received the said written
Instrument coach'd himself, and showed it to all the peeple which he drew after
him all along Toledo street, every one being greedy to know what it contained:
but what? The said written Instrument was no sooner read with a loud voice by
the Bishop, but the peeple cried out again that they were cheated, for that
Instrument contained only the taking of the fruit-gabell, and seven Carlins
upon wheat, but they would have diverse other gabells to be abolished: The Bishop
having delivered that written Instrument to the Capo del popolo to the chief of
the peeple, retired to the Palace peaceably.

Thereupon the peeple ran to the great Market place to give notice of the said
Bill to the rest who were met there more in number then they; and finding that
this was but satisfaction in part, it was necessary for the common defense of
the faithful peeple of Naples, to inroll some armed men to procure to a total
discharge of gabells: And many returning to the Palace, thousands of men and
boys, they would have again have attempted an entrance into the Church and
Monastery of St. Lewis, and being resolved to burst open the doors of that part,
where diverse Lords and Ladies were, the Spanish soldiers opposed them, and in
particular one very valerous Captain entertained the rabble with his sword, and
the soldiers with their Muskets till diverse of them were killd, but in the
mean while the Ladies had time to retire into the Friars cells, and the
Viceroy by the help of the Abbot of the Convent scald the walls till he came
to pizzo fulcane into the Monastery of Jesuits, whence putting himself in an
old Sedan carried by Spaniards, he transferred himself to the Castle of St.
Elmo.

Thereupon it being known for certain that the Viceroy was gone from the
Monastery, the peeple returning to the Palace resolved to disarm all the
Spaniards who were there in guard, but they delivered them drums and half pikes,
and all other instruments their swords and Muskets excepted; They went to all
the other Courts of gards dispersed up and down the City; disarming all whom
they met withal; Then went they to the Suburbs of Chiagia to the Palace of Don
Tiberio de Caraffa Prince of Bisignano who was Field master, and Colonel
General of the Battalion of Naples; desiring that great Cavalier, who by his
innated benignity had made himself beloved of all, and to be adored also by all
Naples; they desired that he would be pleased to be their Defender, and an
intercessor 'twixt them and the Viceroy for a total extinguishment of the
Gabells, according to the favorable privileges granted them, specially by
Charles the fifth: As they were expecting the Prince of Bisignano, some of them
going to the place where they exacted the Gabell of fruit at Chaggia; they put
fire to the house, and burnt every thing that was in it, as they had don in
other places: And the rabble still augmenting in that most populous suburb,
they divided themselves into two Squadrons, or rather into two Armies: The
lesser sort of boys did put in the middle the foresaid Prince who was a
horseback, and desiring them to be orderly, he said, let us go to take off the
Gabells, being conducted by the palace, and so along the Castle, and thence
through all the popular places till they came to the great market: The Prince
seeing there the peeple wonderfully increased to above fifty thousand persons,
he endeavored to quiet them; and to do this the more conveniently, he went to
the Church of the most holy Lady of Carmine, which is situate in that place;
and being got up in a high place, with a crucifix in his hands, he prayed,
exhorted, and conjured the peeple for the love of God, and of the most blessed
Virgin his Divota, to be quiet a while, promising them by oath to obtain from
the Viceroy what they desired: But finding that all this would do no good, he
entertained himself a while in that market, to have the more opportunity to
negotiate with the cape leaders of the peeple, and to persuade them to a good
accord, assuring that he would make it his own task to procure them complete
satisfaction. In the mean time many other new recruits of peeple coming from
other parts of the City, they went to break open the prison of Santa Maria
d'Agnone, and of S. Archangelo; whose gards not being able to resist, were
necessitated to yield and fly for it; the gates being thrown into the midst of
the streets, they made all prisoners go out, burning and turning to ashes all
the Books and Processes of prisoners which were found in the Offices. The same
they did in the prisons for the arts of wool and silk, and diverse other, as
that of the Archbishops, the Nunciatura, and of the great Court of the Vicaria,
to which two last they said to bear reverence as to royal prisons, and
because they had been in times passed Kings palaces; the said Prince being
their protector, and being come near those prisons, 'twas feared they would do
some mischief; but the Warders had time enough to fortify and strengthen their
gates, besides some being earnest for it, were dissuaded by the Prince of
Bisignano, that setting them at liberty being all foreners, murderers and
thieves, they would draw upon themselves great inconveniences.

They steered their course toward the Dogana or toll-house for corn, with
fagots on their backs, and fire and pitch in their hands, and the gates being
wrench'd, the said Prince being not able to take them off, though he labored
earnestly, they entered there with such a fury, that they put fire on all
sides; nor were they satisfied till they saw all not only burnt, but reduced
to ashes; as much corn, with great store of household stuff, and much money,
which the Ministers of the Dogana had in bank, being either their own, or in
deposito, or pawned, all was consumed in the flames.

This sacrifice being performed, they went up to the piazza of S. Laurence
Church, the Prince not leaving their company all the while, in regard of the
violent desire he had by degrees to quiet and overcome them; but being com
thither, and entered through the Church into the Cloisters to go up to the
steeple Tower to sound the great bell, that all men should put themselfes in
arms; The entrance was at first denied them by some who had fled thither for
sanctuary, who feared they had com to find them out, but two of them were
presently killed. Now, some of the peeple began to apprehend diverse fears; but
there was among them a Sicilian, who (as a person of good credit affirms that
was there present) appeared to be rather a Devil in humane shape, and one of
the greatest Furies that hell could have: It Is incredible with what boldness
and with what ardor this fellow animated all to battle, he reproached them of
their fears, he jeered their cowardice, he called them Cravens, Geese, Hens,
and poor spirited men; truly, the body and tongue of that wretch seemed to be
possessed by a whole Legion of Devils: but the justice of heaven found him
out, for h^ was killed from the said Tower by a Musket bullet in the forehead.

The said Prince finding himself weary after so many hours, and after so much
mischief don to the City, and being weak in regard of an infirmity which he
had, and grown fainty by reason of the heat of the season, and half choked by
the swarms of the common rabble about him, and casting about how to disingage
himself from the Labyrinth of that popular tumult, by a wise stratagem he
distributed the said peeple into diverse quarters of the City, with strict
prohibition that they should not sack nor assault any ones house: And his plot
took; for being thus divided, he might retire afterward when he pleased to a
kinsmans house of his hard by, whence having refreshed his spirits a while
there, he betook himself about the evening in a close Sedan into Castle nuovo,
blessing God that he found himself free from the tempestuous gulf of of that
implacable peeple.

The report afterward being dispersed abroad of the retirement of the Prince
Bisignano, and the peeple finding themselfs without a head, cried out for their
leader and conductor Masaniello, who accepting of that charge began more then
ever by sound of Drum to suscitat the peeple through all the City and Suburbs:
But for the evident danger of the infinite hurt that was like to ensue,
specially the day beginning already to darken, and night to approach, 'twas
thought fitting that some religious men should go out in procession through the
City, not only to appease the unbridled peeple, but to implore divine help:
The first were the most reverend Fathers the Teatins, out of two of those six
Churches they have in the City, viz. from S. Paul, and S. Apostles, there being
a hundred in every one of those to pass first through Toledo-street, and so
before the Palace to S. Lewis Church, wherein the most pure milk of the most
blessed Virgin is kept; and the other passing through other streets to the
Piazza of the great Market, went in to make long Prayers in the Church del
Carmine, and then retired, which offices of the holy Church was much
acknowledged by the Viceroy, who sent effectual relation thereof to the Conde
d'Ognate then Catholic Ambassador in the Court of Rome.

The Viceroy and the whole Nobility doubting that the rabble of the peeple
which elsewhere were increasing in great nombers, should go to St. Laurence
Church, and seize upon diverse things which belong to the City, and among the
rest of sixteen pieces of Ordnance, and other Arms kept in the Tower of that
Church, besides the sounding of the great bell to arms which hangs in the
steeple of that Church, and which uses to ring upon such occasion, therefore
there were sent thither some Compagnies of Spaniards well armed, as also others
for the guard of the said Church and Cloister of S. Laurence.

At two a clock after midnight, the Vice-King accompanied with much soldiery,
removed himself from S. Elmos Castle to Castle Nuovo, which sticks to the
Royal Palace, there being a bridge to pass between, there went also thither
Cardinal Trivultio, with many Officers and Cavaliers; and although it seemed
high time for them to think of chastising the Rebels, yet the Viceroy, like a
wise Prince, put back his thoughts to satiat the hungry peeple with bread:
Whereupon he caused most even Orders to be published that night, and to be
performed the next Monday, That bread should be at 33. ounces, 4. grains,
whereas before 'twas scarce 24. ounces; That the Gabel of Fruit should be
absolutely taken off: He ordered notwithstanding, That considerable gards should
be put about the Castle. The peeple did not flag a whit in their former fury
that night, but caused the B^ll of our Lady of Carmine to ring out thrice for
arming, and consequently great Companies flocking together, they divided
themselves into diverse quarters: Some went out to put fire to all the out houses
of Naples, where the Gabels were exacted, with Drums beating before them;
Others staying behind to prepare arms for the day following, they gave
themselves over to plunder the shops for Swords and Muskets, for Bullet, Fire
and Match: Others went among the Merchants and Lanciens, who without any
resistance furnished them with all sorts of Arms: And because one Master of a
shop would foolishly have made opposition with noise and threats, and which was
worse, by discharging a Mortar piece out of a window, which killed one of them,
they were kindled with such high disdain and fury, that putting fire to his
house, wherein there were diverse barrels of powder, did not only fly up into
the air it self, but carried with it eighty seven persons besides, and forty
four were hurt: To prevent such a disorder some other time, his Excellency
commanded, That all the powder in other places through the City should be wetted:
So the unbridled peeple passing every where with such an imperious authority
through the City, began to put an Army in order, and provide all things
necessary for it.

Monday, July 8. 1647. The second day.
THe vigilant and great Preparations that the night before the peeple had
generally made, caused, that although the day was not yet grown clear, and that
the glorious Sun was not com out of the womb of the vermilian morn, yet up and
down the City nothing was heard but drumms and Trumpets, and clashing of Arms,
nothing then but Colors displayed, choice Soldiers, furnished Swords, cocked
Muschets, Archibuzes, Lances, Targets, and that which was of more terror and
astonishment, besides the Citizens themselfs, the Country Swains appeer'd from
the Villages about with Plowshares, Pitchforks and Shovels, and ranged
themselves in a military way for common defense to plow glebes of flesh, and
water them with blood: In fine, the women were seen in great numbers armed with
fireshovels, and iron Toungs, with Spits and Broaches, and their children with
little staves and canes, encouraged the young men to battle: Now let it be
considered what such an infinity of Citizens, all armed, could do, who being
inviper'd as it were with blood in their eyes, cried out, Let the King live,
let the King our Lord live, let the ill Government dye: Out Gabels, out Gabels;
Let the Dogs dye, who being transformed to Wolfs, have devoured the flesh of
innocent Lambs: Let them vomit the blood they have sucked into the cinders of
their burnt wealth, the domestie and insatiable Leeches of the City; Let these
Wasps fly away, which have hitherto sucked the sweet honey of the Bees.

With such, and such like cries proceeding from the bottom of their breasts, so
that they stounded the very air, and were enough to soften the hardest Marble,
draw tears from the very Pummies, and sighs from Ice, they did animate one
another, they re-inforc'd the streets, guarded the Passages, they did unbowel
themselves to provide furniture for the War; Horror, Blood and Amazement
reigned in evry corner; the Keys were consigned from Minerva to Mars, Books
were neglected, Studies were abandoned, the Bar was solitary, the Chairs were
silent, the Ecclesiastiques sing Lachryma, the Law was quiet, Patronages were
despiz'd, Advocates were dumb, the Judges were idle, Tribunals were shut up,
the Arsenaths were only open, the Pikes had got the better of the Pen, force of
wit, boldness of wisdom, the hand of the tongue, Atages of the Gown. The whole
City did burn, and was inflamed with martial fury; Amongst which places there
raged with most implacable and warlike heat, being fullest of peeple the places
about the great Market, about Lavinaro, Porta Nolana, Convaria, Sellaria, the
Piaz of the Elm, preparing formed Squadrons with fireworks: Order was given to
all the other Precincts of Naples, which are 36. in number, to arm in like
manner, under pain of an irremissible burning down of their houses, which was
punctually performed: And there being want of powder, they went to a house
where some was sold to buy some, they sellers refusing to sell any without Order
from the Viceroy, they raged with such a fury, that throwing fired matches
into that house, they blew up the power into the air, and within above 60.
Inhabitants, who were afterward numbered, in regard their bodies remained many
days unburied: This success happened at Porta della Calce del molo picciolo,
and it caused such an Earthquake, and so fierce a one, through all the City,
that 'twas like that terrible shake which diverse weeks before that great Galeon
made, which was burnt, being not known to this day whether 'twas by chance, or
pure malice, in the very Port of Nables. But they were not a whit disheartened
at this disaster, but going to the Kings powder house out of the City, toward
Cap de Chino, in greater numbers then before, they went about to seize upon all
that Magazin of powder, had they not been prevented by the Laborers, who had
put the said powder in water for hindrance of the like mischance that happened
in the Port della Calce.

While the peeple made all these preparatifs the Viceroy was not wanting by his
wonded prudence to acquit himself exactly of his duty, although he was retired
into Castle nuovo with Spaniards, dispersed up and down for gards all along
that Castle, and in St Francisco Xaverio's street to the number of 400. He shut
up in the Royal Palace for his guard 1000. Almanes, and at the gates 800.
Spaniards, with 1000. Italians. He fenced all Pizzofalcone, which lies above
the Palace, and all the neighboring streets with good Fortifications, making
Ramparts of faggots, and raising other Trenches of earth about the gates of the
old and new Palace, and at the end of the street looking toward the said
Palaces. He commanded a great Piece of Ordinance to be put at the end of every
street toward the Stanto Spirito, the father Dominicans, and the Father
Minimes, another against the Cross of the Palace, another upon the assent of
Santa Lucia, and two before the great gate toward the middle of the new
Palace. And because the peeple knew there came a new Regiment of Germans from
Pozzolo by Order of the Viceroy, they went to meet them, and killed part who
made resistance, and the rest who willingly rendered themselfs were made
prisoners, all bound and lead into the City: The like was don to two Companies
of Italians, but by order of Masaniello they were released, and armed for the
defense of the City, and he sent the Germans to the Viceroy into the Castle
all laden with bread, fresh and salt meats, cheese and wine, with other
commodities; and 'twas a pretty sight to behold, that peeple go along the street
dancing with meat in their hands, and bottles at their mouths, making mows all
along.

It happened upon Monday morning, that the Spanish guard, for some insolences
they had receavd imprisoned two mean fellows, and the peeple fearing they
should be executed, they rise up in such a manner, that by Archibuz and Muschet
shots hurting many, and killing some of the said guard, they threatened, with
howlings, and unusual schriches, to tear in pieces all the Spaniards which were
in Naples, if those prisoners were not delivered them; wherefore to avoid such
an inconvenience which certainly had happened, they were yielded up safe, sound
and free.

That morning bread of a very hansom fashion, and of unusual weight, was sold,
insomuch that whereas before a loaf of bread was but little more then 22.
ounces, 'twas now 11. ounces more, in all 33. Therefore one may well conjecture
what joy the peeple conceav'd at that: All peeple, both men, women and
children, Citizens and strangers, went crying up and down the streets; Let the
King of Spain live, let the most faithful peeple of Naples live; let Grassa,
let Grassa live, and let the ill Government dye.

It seemed expedient for the Viceroy, being retired as was said before into the
Castle nuovo to dispatch that Monday morning, by some Lords of the Collateral
Council, and others of the Council of State, a Note unto Masaniello, who was
then Cape or Head of the peeple, wherein he granted as much as was demanded the
day before, which was the taking away of all kind of Gabells: But the peeple
would not be satisfied with this, but sent to tell him, that they would have
further contentment, viz. a Restitution of the privilege granted them by King
Ferdinando, and Frederic, and by the Emperor Charles the fifth, all which by a
public Act, the Viceroy, the Collateral, and Council of State, with all the
Nobility, should oblige themselves to observe.

They would that the Votes of the Gentlemen of the Piazza's should equal them of
the peeple: That the peeple should nominat the chief Clark of the Market or
Grassiero of the City, all which was promised; and mean time there was chosen
by the peeple the Lord Cornelio Spinola for Grassiero. It should pass for a Law,
that never any new Gabells for the future should be imposed without the
intervention of the Capo popolo, who should be a Lord by Title, as it was
anciently, when the Prince of Salerno was Capo popolo; That he should be named
by the peeple, and the Elect likewise made by the Capistrada to be all chosen
by the peeple, without any dependency, or having any recourse to the Viceroys
for the future.

They stuck not to demand, that the Castle of Sant Elmo should be put into their
hands, but they proceeded not very far in that proposition.

His Excellency perceiving the Treaty of Peace to be still delayed, and the
people to be so implacable, and pleasing themselves with that kind of loose
living, would lend no ear to any accommodation of Peace, he judged it expedient
to do some favors to the Duke of Mataloni, and Don Joseph Caraffa his brother,
and make them go out, the one out of the Castle of Sant Elmo, the other by
making him com from Benevento, that joining with other Lords and Knights they
might go up and down the City to persuade the peeple to conformity and
quietness, which was don, for many Lords did ride up and down the streets in
diverse quarters, and in particular the Prince of Bisignano, Caraffa di bell
nuovo, Il principe di Monte Sarchio of the house of Avalos, the Prince di
Satriano Ravaschiero, the Duke di Castle di Sangro Don Ferrante Carraciolo, the
Prince della Rocella, the Lord Don Diomede Caraffa, the Lord of Conversano,
with other Lords, dwelling in the Piazza of the great Market, where there were
infinite store of peeple: They signified unto them, that his Excellency the
Viceroy was very ready to give them all satisfaction.

But they answered, That they desired no more, but that the Privileges of King
Ferdinando should be made good to the City, which was confirmed by Charles the
fifth of happy memory, who by Oath promised the City of Naples, at his
Invectiture to the Kingdom had from Pope Clement the 7. to impose no new Taxes
upon City or Kingdom, as well He, as all his Successors, without the consent of
the Apostolical Seat, and being so imposed, they should be well imposed,
otherwise the City might rise up with sword in hand, without any mark of
rebellion, or irreverence to the Prince, for the maintenance of her Liberties:
Now in regard that most of the Gabels ever since, some few of small consequence
excepted, have bin laid without his holiness consent, it was just that they
should be all taken often, and that the peeple should have the Original of the said
Privilege, which was within the Archives of the City, which is in the Church of
S. Laurence: Those Lords and Gentlemen understanding all this, they went back
to Castle nuovo to impart all this to the Viceroy, who presently convok'd the
peeple Collateral Counsel, with that of State, as also the sacred Council of
Santa Chiara to consult what Answer should be returned unto the peeple.

In the mean time the Archbishop, according to his accustomed vigilance and
paternal zeal to spiritual peace, as also to the temporal quietness of the
people committed unto him; as likewise for the Devotion and Vassallage he
professed unto the Catholic King, to the Service of his Royal Person and State,
Ordained, That the most holy Sacrament should be openly exposed in many
Churches, to invite all comers to implore at such an exigent divine assistance.
This was don nella Capella del Tesoro, where the Dome is, where the miraculous
blood, and the holy head of San Gennaro, the glorious Protector of Naples, was
laid out: Moreover all orders went in solemn Processions up and down the City
as the Dominicans, Franciscans, those del Carmine, the Augustins, the Jesuits,
Capucins, Teatins, and others, who gave some general edification.

That day mighty diligences were made by the peeple who should be their Chief,
that by their authority they might make their address to the Viceroy, and
obtain what they desired; and in regard that among others which rid up and down
the City the Lords della Rocella were of the chiefest, and in regard they also
had their Palaces in the great Market; Therefore they made motions to the said
Lords, That they would please to employ themselfs in behalf of the peeple to
find out the foresaid Original Privilege of Charles the fifth: The said Lords did
promise to do so, and for the execution thereof they went to Castle nuovo,
accompanied by many peeple, where his Excellency commanded them to be admitted,
and to enter, the concourse of peeple remaining without all the while,
expecting not without much anxiety an answer from the Viceroy.

At the same time, and to the same purpose, the Lord Prior was sent for from S.
Laurence, with a great train of peeple, and the multitude was so great, as if
his horse had bin carried in the air, out of the lively hopes they had to find
the said Privilege: But the Lord Prior finding it would prove a difficult thing
for him to find it, as also to be suffered to enter into the Stanzas of S.
Laurence, by a turn which he gave in a straight street, going off his horse,
and faigning to withdraw himself upon some business, he got away in the
twinkling of an eye, with some of his servants, by an incredible way of art and
velocity, retiring himself into the Church of the holy Apostles among the
Fathers Teatins: This administered cause of extraordinary murmuring and
discontent to the peeple, who thought themselves baffled and deluded by him,
who they expected should have bin their kind of Defendor and Advocat, although
there want not some who affirm, that the Lord Prior had brought them a kind of
Paper in a sheepskin, giving out, 'twas the Original out of a mind of the great
Charter of Charles the fifth he had to quiet them: But because when the peeple
showed it to their Satrapons and Council, and being told them that it was a
counterfeit one, they fell into such a fierce disdain, that if he had not fled,
that good Lord had met with death, as they write, it happened some hours before
to the Prince of Monte Sarchio.

The Duke de Roccella in the mean while was returned from the Castle, attended
by much peeple, to the great Market place, where the gross of the multitude
was, carrying with him a Copy of of the Privilege desired by the peeple: and
because he had heard of the dangerous success the Lord Prior was like to have,
he durst not say it was the very Original, but he clearly told them it was a
true and real Copy, the Original not being to be had for the present. Hereupon
it was received at the beginning with some applause, but being read, and read
again, and found imperfect, it raised a mighty coffeehouse in the hearts of
the peeple, who cried out they were mocked, cozened and betrayed by the said
Duke, as they were by the Prior, and so falling into a mortal hatred of all the
Nobility, they raged against them, threatening them ruin and revenge, and having
the said Duke della Roccella in their hands, they clapped him in prison in the
Monastery del Carmine, by appointing a famous Bandito called Perrone to be his
Keeper, who finding himself once chained in the same Church, was put at liberty
by the peeple; but this man being an ancient friend and a Confident of the
Dukes, did labor the business so effectually with the peeple, that he obtained
the Dukes freedom, obliging himself to restore him into their hands upon all
demands; so the Duke having remained a day or two in his Palace, retired
afterward to his Country houses.

There was appointed for one of the principal Heads of the peeple to be about
the person of Masaniello a Priest, by name Iulio Genoino, an old and well
tempered man, who had been the peeples Elect during the Government of the Duke
of Ossuna, a person well practiced in the Affairs of the Court, and who always
endeavored the advance of the peeples good, but he could not bring it then to
pass, in regard the said Duke was revoked to Spain. This man found himself at
the beginning of these Tumults in the prison of S. James, which was opened
partly for his sake, therefore to gratify his good will always toward them,
they exalted him to this charge; To him they added for a companion the foresaid
famous Bandito Perrone. These two being joined with Masaniello gave out a list
of 60. and odd houses of such Ministers and others, who had meddled with the
farming of the Gabells, or had sold, let out, advised, or cooperated any way in
the Custom Houses of the said Gabells, having enriched themselfs, as was given
out with the blood of the peeple, therefore they deserved to be made examples
to future ages, therefore their house and goods shall be burnt to the ground;
which was don accordingly, as more shall be said, and with so much order,
integrity, and neatness of hand, that he hazarded his life who should touch any
the least thing to carry it away: Thereupon one taking but a little Towel was
killed, another for the Crouper of a horse had 50. lashes on the back, and
diverse others for stealing but small trivial things, after they had made their
confessions to their ghostly fathers, were hanged by the public Executioner in
the Market place by the Command of Masaniello. He was held unworthy of pity, and
to be no well-wisher of the peeples good, who commissiated the ruining or
burning of any of those men's houses or goods, and who seemed to rescent it,
were esteemed no better then Accomplices to those public Thieves: Whereupon one
man having unadvisedly, and by natural compassion, only pitied the burning of
the rich furniture, house and goods of the Duke of Caivano, calling them by
chance, povere rob, poor goods, as they were a burning, he had much ado to
escape away through a little wicket, while the peeple cried out, Where is this
infamous Rogue? where is he? Let him be found out, and we will bray him in a
Mortar.

But to proceed more orderly in the Relation of the burnt Palaces, let it
suffice to know, that the first was Gieronimo Fetitias, one of the Farmers of
the Corn Gabel, situat in the quarters of Porta Nuovo, near the houses of the
Lord Mornili: There the peeple being flocked with faggots and pitch, and
getting into the house, they threw out of the windows all kind of household
stuff, as all sorts of Plates, Dishes, Stools, Tables, Chairs, Carpets,
Tapistries, and all sorts of Utensiles, with great store of Money, Chains and
Bracelets, breaking the windows wider for that purpose; all which were brought
to the Market place, and hurld into a great fire, where they were all burnt to
cinders, with huge outcries of the peeple round about, who said, These goods
are our bloods, and as these burn, so the Souls of those dogs who own them
deserve to fry in hell fire.

This first act of the fiery Tragdy being ended, they went next to the house of
Felice Basile; This fellow at first was a poor Baker, who carried bread up and
down the streets of Naples, but in a short time, tampering with the Gabells, he
became very rich, and having friends at Court; He dwelt nere the Spirito Santo,
where the peeple being met, and having plunderd his Palace from top to bottom,
they hurld out at the windows and bulcones all the household stuff, Writings and
Books, with other rich Curiosities, and there were 23. great Trunks nomberd to
be thrown out into the streets, and some of them being broke open, there appeer'd
wondrous rich things, as cloth of gold, and Tissues, with costly Embroderies,
that dazzled the eyes of the beholders; all these they took, with a Cabinet
full of Perl, and other precious stones, which were all hurld into the
devouring Element, without saving as much as a rag, nor durst any take up as
much as a pin, unless it were to help the throwing of it into the fire.

These two burnings lasted five hours, then they passed to the Palace of
Antonio de Angelis, a Counselor, who had bin Elect of the peeple in the time
of and he concurred with that Viceroy to impose many new Gabells: This man being
admonished by many of his friends to secure his goods, and his Palace from
firing, he neglected their advice; And because the day before they had taken
down his gate only, he thought that their fury had terminated there, as being a
sign they had no further malice unto him; besides he made account that they
would bear some reverence to his long robe: But he reckned without his ^ost, his
infortunat destiny blinded him so, and so stopped his ears, that he would not
listen to wholesome cautions. Whereupon the rabble being com before his house,
they furiously entered, and finding ^t full of all kind of costly furniture to
admiration, they presently destinated all for the fire, leaving not a jot
unburnt, and that which was of extraordinary consideration, and the more to be
pitied, was, that the Pleas, Writings, Charters, Patents, and Processes of
diverse poor and rich men were all consumed; there was a Library of curious
Books, and many thousand Crowns found therein, there was two Coches, four
beutiful horses, and two mules, all burnt, and they threw bottles of oil into
the fire to make it flame with more violence: In his Pantry, Larder house, and
Kitchen, there were d^licat provisions, and diverse Chests of sweet meats, and a
boy having taken but a piece of Bacon which fell by chance, he was ready to be
torn in pieces by the multitud; there were 10000. Crowns in good silver burnt,
besides vessels of Plate, double gilt. The fire of this house was so great,
that though it was in the night time, yet evry corner of the street was as
clear as if it had been noon day.

Thence they ran to the house of Antonio Mirabella, another Counselor, and a
Napolitan Cavalier, in the suburb of Mayds, and they did the like to him, where
they left not one stone upon another, but consecrated all to the voracious
flame, which lasted above three hours.

At six a clock they passed to the Palace of the forenamed Andrea Anaclerio,
who had been affronted and stoned by the boys at first, being the Elect of the
peeple, but finding no great matter there, because he had wisely removed his
goods the Sunday before, presaging some violence, they in a furious disdain
applied fire to all the four corners of the house, which made a horrible flame,
to the terror of all the beholders, which lasted four hours, till Monday night
being passed, the Sun returned to enlighten the following morn of March.

But while the peeple consumed with fire the houses, goods and wealth,
beforesaid, of those public Theefs, as they termed them, there burnt in the
breast of the Viceroy an ardent desire to put a period to these fearful
Combustions, and to hasten an accommodation of all things: Hereupon the
Collateral, and Council of State and War had a sad serious discourse of these
calamities, and 'twas resolved at last, that his Excellence should command four
Companies of Foot to reinforce that squadron which was already in the Castle
all along, and 'twas don accordingly. Hereupon there was a legal Instrument
printed, wherein there was an abolition of those Gabels, and a general pardon
granted: As soon as this Instrument was printed 'twas sent into the great
Market, that all peeple beholding and reading it, might return to quietude and
conformity: But it took no effect, because that the general pardon being found
imperfect, nor specifying as much as the peeple would have, but containing
diverse matters subject to cavillation* Therefore all went off the Kings Ages
again, and the Treaty was dissolved, to repair which, because the Viceroy
perceav'd the Nobility to be already hateful to the City, and therefore unfit
to quench the fire, but rather make it greater, therefore he purposd to make
use of two of the prime Advocats of the peeple, and much esteemd by him, who
were Andrea Martellone, and Onosico Palma, therefore the Viceroy having
commanded them to come unto him, he committed unto their care and prudence, and
that with a great deal of heat and earnestnes the appearing of the peeple with
large promises of Remunerations. They executed what was imposed upon them with
much efficacy, but it produced no fruit, and being returned to the Viceroy,
they said 'twas impossible to assuage the fury of the peeple, unless they had
delivered them the Original of the gran Privilege that Charles the fifth granted:
This being understood by the Viceroy, as from the beginning he had ardent
desire to content the peeple, specially in this point so much importuned, he
caused all diligence to be used, that the said Charter of Privilege should be
found out: Thereupon he dispatched some of the Nobles, Elect of the City,
together with Don Joseph Maria Caracciolo a Teatin, to the Church of San Lonuzo
to this effect, which Joseph was a Subject of great valor, and learning,
besides his high birth, and a most earnest Co-operator at all times, specially
at the conjuncture of these Revolutions, and much devoted to the Service of his
King and Country.

In the mean time Masaniello made it known to all the Merchants in the name of
the peeple, and Corporations in the City, That they should be ready with arms*
in hand for the service of the peeple; a great part of his Train went a
horsback, and some a foot, to the houses, as well of Gentlemen, as other
persons, of what estate or quality soever, to search for arms, which were
delivered him, though with an ill will, both by all Noblemen and Officers, there
being found in all places many thousands of Archibuzes, Carabins, Muskets,
Pistols, and such like arms, as also nine pieces of Artillery which a Merchant
had in his house, and which were given him in pawn from the Court for some
thousands of Ducats, whereof he was Creditor; They took two Canons more out of
a ship, assaulted by them in a new Gally, which was disarmed in the Mole, which
being armed, was sent to the said vessel to deliver those Pieces, else they would
set her a fire; so the Captain being forced, delivered seven Canons, all which
they placed at the mouths of the principal streets of the City: And having
understood that Mazzola a Genoway Merchant had in his house good store of arms,
they entered his house, where they found 4000. Muskets, which they distributed
up and down the Populass, who dwelt in the quarters of Santa Maria il Parete.

The Archbishop seeing, that notwithstanding all proffers of accommodation the
Comotions advanced evry hour with more fury, it came into his head that he
himself would go abroad in procession, accompanied with the Teatins, and those
of S. Hieroms, of the Congregation of the Oratorio, the the same Monday; but
doubting it would not be so pleasing to the peeple, he would first feel their
pulse, doing this with a great deal of prudence; the grounds of his doubt was
this, that when the evening before, and the same morning the said religious
Orders went out in a procession at way, the peeple did not much like those
processions, in regard, that notwithstanding they were made with a good intent
to appease the tumults, yet this being for no other end then to establish the
ancient Grassa in the City, they seemed to marvail, and did tacitly grumble, to
what purpose should so many processions be made now, that they were busy to take
off the Gabels, and rid the City of all excessive Impositions, and such
Processions were not made then, when, generally against the consent of the
peeple, they were imposed: Therefore the Archbishop, before he would put in
execution his designs, sent to the Impositers of S. Paul, and of the Apostles,
both of them being Teatin Churches, who coaching themselfs with some
conspicuous secular Priests, eminent for their lives and birth, who were
particular Elect, viz Don Carlo de Bologna, and Don Diego de Mendoza, they all
went to the Piazza of the great Market to observe the humor of the peeple, how
they would like such a procession, the Bishop having no other aims herein, but
the service and satisfaction of the City, yet he would know their inward
inclinations herunto. The said Fathers and Lords being gone to the Market place,
they put in strict execution what they had in charge from the Archbishop but
they found true what his Eminence had formerly doubted, as 'twas told them by
some of the chief of the peeple, who yet thanked very much the Archbishop for
his pious Endeavors to favor them, not doubting a whit of his zeal and love to
the City: But touching such a solemn extraordinary procession, they humbly
advised his Eminence not to do it, because the Priests and religious men in
those broken times might happily receave some encounter or disturbance, which
might prejudice the reputation of the Church, by reason of the great multitudes
of armed men which were evry where, yet for no other end then the advancement
of the public good: Therefore they pray his Eminence that he would expose in the
Church the holy Host, and inorder public Orisons for 40. hours.

The Fathers and Gentlemen being returned to the Cardinal Archbishop, related
unto him what they had proposed, and what answers they had, therefore his
Eminence not thinking it expedient to put his former thoughts in action against
the will of a tumultuary peeple, he inordred the said Prepositors, and all
chief Heads and Rectors of Churches, as well secular as regular, that the
blessed Sacrament should be exposed, and public and private Prayers made, to
recomend unto his divine Majesty the woeful condition of City and Kingdom; which
was punctually performed evry day until the death of Masaniello.

When the Archbishop had sent out those seasonable Orders, it being now night,
his Eminence went to Castle Nuovo to confer with the Viceroy, and try whether
any accommodation could be pitched upon to free the City from those imminent
dangers which hung over her, doing this with the greatest efficacy that cold
com out of the breast of a Cavalier Patriot, and of a zealous Pastor,
associating unto him a little after to the same purpose the most illustrious
the L. Altieri, Apostolical Nuntio, for the time in that Kingdom. There retired
into the said Castle likewise toward the evening diverse Ministers, as well of
the Gown, as other Officers, Lords and Cavaliers as well to treat with the
Viceroy concerning the same business, as also to withdraw thither for their
greater security then they could be in their own habitations. And this is as
much as happend the second day, which was Monday.

Tuesday, July 9. 1647. The third day.
THe Nepolitan peeple were so heated in their desires, and so animated to
battle, and to the destroying of the houses of public Ministers and Partisans
of the Royal Court, as also of Lawyers and Farmers of the Gabels, that no
bounds were sufficient to stop their arrogance and fury: As a strong currented
River having burst down the banks and dikes which kept her within her chanel
can hardly be brought in again to her wonted regular stream, in the mean time,
while the fearful Countryman labors with earth, stones, clay, wood and iron to
mend her banks, she pursues her raging exorbitant course, dilates her self over
fields, spoils the corn, undermines the trees, enters boldly into house and
cellar without controulment, and so does a world of mischief. The numerous
peeple of Naples might be said to be such a River, swelling with disdain and
choler against the public Officers of the Gabels, and rushing over the wonted
banks, which were the Laws and Royal Authority of her Prince, the reverence to
the holy Church, the fear of Justice: But she was not only like an unruly
mounding River, but like a tempestuous Sea, figured peradventure by the
Evangelist S. John, in his book of divine Mysteries, where he says, That with
the waters of the Sea there joined living waters of fire, whence it is called by
him, Mars mixtum igne: The Viceroy, the Archb^shop, the Nobility, the Lawyers
labored to make up these banks and breaches, yet all would not do, but the
River was as impetuous, extravagant and violent as ever.

Hence it came to pass, that the glorious Sun scarce appeer'd in the Orient to
illuminat the City the third day, but the furious peeple ran with swift pace to
the Palace of one Valenzano, formerly a very poor Plebean, and afterward from
a Petty Clerk in the Do^ana came to be a Farmer of the Gabel of Corn, and so
enriched himself extremely; He dwelt out of Saint Carlo, and it is incredible
what a world of goods, very precious both for the quantity and quality, were
found in his house, which were all reduced to ashes; there were two boxes full
of gold found in the cupboard of a window, which were taken and dispositated
upon account in the Kings bank.

Hence they passed to the Palace of the Duke of Caivano, toward the little
gate of Santa Chiara, where all his Writings, and public Books, he being
Secretary of the Kingdom, with all his Library, and infinite store of rich
Movables and Utensils were found, all which were burnt in two great fires, and
the Palace harassed to the ground: What rich Coches, Sedans and Couches, with
rare vessels of Argentry, and Jewels of all kinds, were consumed in this
Palace? There were also great store of curious pictures found there, the profane
were burnt, but some holy pieces were sent to diverse Churches, but reserving for
the flame the frames of them, although they were very gallant and rich, which
course they observed in all other places: The flame of this fire was so great,
that it reached to a Monastery of Nunns hard by, of the Order of S. Francisco,
so that they cried out they were all destroyed; It took in a Library of Books,
the leaves whereof flew up aloft, that some words were legible in the air,
among which there happened one leaf to fall upon the ground from the said
Cloister, which treated of the Nobility of the ancient Dukes of Milan.

I should be over tedious if I should describe all the desolations and ruins
which those fires did cause, with the quantity and quality of the goods; I will
briefly tell you, that the same cruelties, termed by the peeple just revenges,
were used in all those houses whereof Masaniello gave a Catalog to destroy and
ruinat: These were Bartolome d' Aquino, the Duke John de Caivano, Gio: Battista
Bozzacarino, all three of Chiaia, John Andrea Tuonavoglia, who dwelt out of the
gate of San Gennaro, the President Cinnamo Sopra Gresu Maria, the sons of
Mastrodatti, Iuseppe Sportello Farmer of the Corn, President Gieronimo
Cacciotolo, Caesar Loprano against the little Hospital, John Zaralios, who being
an Officer of the Pen, came by his favor at Court to such huge wealth, that he
made himself Duke of Osturis, a principal City in Puglia, with sixty thousand
Crowns annual rent, dwelling in Toledo street, whose Palace was one of the
proudest and most magnificent of any in Naples, built by himself from the very
foundation; Francesco Pallavicino all Mortelle, Geronimo Nacatella of
Polysippo, and Andrea Capano his son in law, Agostin de Iulijs, Giacomo Frezza,
Petrillo di Florio, Bartholome Balzamo, Donado de Bellis Cashier of the Gabel
of Corn, and many other persons had their rich Movables and Furnitures, with
their Argentry and Jewels of great value, all consumed to ashes.

In the Palace of Aquino a Chiaia there was an inestimable Wardrobe found
proportionable to a Kings, which was all destroyed: And Luprano having conveyed
all his goods which were most precious to the Monastery of the Hospital of the
Padri Zoccolanti, and Basile brought his Jewels and Moneys to the Conservatory
of Santa Maria di Constantinopoli, and Zavaglio brought the flower of his goods
to the Monastery of the Nuns of the conception nere his Palace, yet Masaniello
came to know of all this, and therefore commanded the said Monasteries to (...)
and bring forth all those Furnitures under pain of burning, but being terrified
by the peremptorines of the command, they brought all forth, which were
immediately consumed to ashes, and some Coches with the horses alive, which were
found out by the rabble, having bin hid out of the way in sundry places by
their owners.

While the peeple went thus revenging themselfs of their pretended adversaries,
those two Original Privileges of King Ferdinando, and Charles the V. both
which the peeple did so earnestly thirst after, were found out, and so they
were brought to the Viceroy by the chief Elect of the Nobles, and by the
foresaid Don Giuseppe Caracciolo a Teaten, which labored extremely in the
business: Hereupon the Viceroy did not let slip one moment of time, or the least
advantage to com at last to an accord with the peeple, promising them still all
posible satisfaction, the Cardinal Archbishop of Naples did the like, who, with
all his might and main, and by the help of his Gentlemen, by going also often
himself in person to diverse places did not spare pains o^ fear danger; But the
peeple finding that the Treaty for a peace went still on with delays, did
begin to declare, That they would be masters of San Lorenzo, and of the Tower
thereof to sound to a War at any time the great Bell, as also to secure a Port
which they suspected might prove very offensive to their Quarters in the great
Market by Canon shot, besides they would have the use of the Artigliery, and
other Arms of the City, which were stored up therein; To which effect about
10000* peeple being got before the place all armed, and having begirt the
Monastery of the Friars on all on all sides, they put themselfs in a posture to
fight ranging themselfs in Files, being resolved to do something: The Convent
was then forsaken by the Friars, some Novices being only left, and some of the
ancient'st, the Duke of Siano son to the Regent Capece Latro, Gio: Baptista
Cicinelli, Don Tomas Aquaviua son to the Erl of Conversano with other few
Gentlemen being there retired with 60 Spaniards sent the Evening before by the
Viceroy, for garding the steeple, were there shut in.

The assault was given, and some Archibuses flew off, and a great many faggots
were set afire, and they prepared themselfs to batter down the Tower in the
first place with a huge piece of Ordinance brought thither of purpose: The
people within and the Spanish guard it self apprehending some fear made signs
that they would yield upon Articles, whereupon the Gates were opened and the
Soldiers sallied forth which were there for a guard as well Spaniards as
Italians, with express order to leave behind them their arms, granting them
only their lives and clothing which they carried about them; so that the
peeple entering there, they seized upon all the arms, as P^ques, Muskets,
Archibusses, with 18 pieces of Ordinance, put in there for the service of the
City To the Militia that came forth Masaniello ordered, that after they had
eaten they might be at liberty, and presently he commanded the great Bell to
sound to arms, but with a public protest without any intent of rebellion, but
for the service of the peeple, which sound lasted a good while, as well to show
the victory they had obtained, as also to assemble the peeple to new attempts.
And seeing that the Charter of Charles the V. did not yet appeer neither in
that place where it ought to have bin kept, which was among the Archives of the
City, where all ancient Writings are us^d to be preserved, they grew very
furious, and drew forth other goods to be burnt, among which was the present
King of Spains picture, which they not only preserved, but bringing it forth
they exposed it to public view, under a rich Canopy, with much reverence,
crying aloud, Let God live, let our King live a thousand years, and let the ill
Government dye: They placed one great Canon at the little gate of S. Laurence,
and another at the greatest gate of S. Paul, levelling at that Piazza of S.
Laurence, they placed to under the Piatza of S. Biaggio, two alla Selleria, two
upon the Market place, two at the Port of Capua, two more at Porta Nolana, and
the rest in other places, designing a sufficient number of men for the guard of
those places; and to secure themselfs from the assault of all enemies, they
distributed in evry place a sufficient proportion of powder, of bullets, of
match, and other instruments, to serve the Artillery, and other sort of
fireworks if need required.

Among those Companies of Combatants which went abroad that day, there were a
great many women with Archibuzes upon their sholders, and other sorts of arms,
with their she Captains, Alterezes and Sargeants, they appeer'd like so many
Amazons, and 'twas a rare sight to behold, so that the ancient time of Nero
seemed to be renewed when he besieged Rome. The Companies went on, and in the
midst of two Soldiers a woman well clad, and not ill favored, went with the
Arms of his Majesty upon her head, and with a writing in great letters round
about it, Viva il Re, and il fidelissimo popolo di Napoli; Let the King live,
and the most faithful peeple of Naples; she went with a naked sword in her
right hand, and a Poynard in her left: There followed after an incredible number
of she Archibuziers, and others armed with Pikes, Lances and Halbards, others
with clubs and staves, with faggots upon their backs, to put fire to the houses
of Traitors and public Thieves of their Country* lastly the little wenches of
four or five years of age went with little batoons and sticks in their hands, a
spectacle strange to behold. There came other Troops of women from diverse parts
of the City in good order, carrying wood and sulfur upon their back to fire
where occasion required: And because there were Citizens enough in the gross of
the Army about Masaniello able to make their party good against any power, the
rest were ordered by him to go to defend their own quarters and homes: There
were some Banditi that had mingled themselfs with these Companies under a
pretext to serve the peeple, but their design was, as 'twas found afterward,
to take Booties, or to plot some Treson.

The Viceroy was not furnished with provision, nor would they suffer any eatable
thing to pass to the Castle, a Felluca was taken, which thought to have
brought him provision; The Couriers were stayed, who brought him Letters from
diverse places; and he might be said to be in a manner besieged with all the
Gentlemen in the Castle, the peeple having both Land and Sea in their absolut
possession.

The Archbishop being returned to the Castle to confer with the Viceroy, and
the rest of the principal Ministers, the last remedy by means of that reverend
Bishop was applied to make a final Agreement: So the Viceroy delivered into his
hands the Original Charter or Privilege of Charles the V. with a Promise in
writing, subscribed with his own hand, to observe it firmly, desiring him to go
to the great Market place to have it seen, and published in the Church of
Carmine.

When the Bishop had the true Privilege in his hands he felt an extraordinary
fit of comfort, not doubting but his beloved sheep would be now altogether
quieted, which certainly had happened, had not a secret Treaty of Matalone, and
Don Gius^ppe Caraffa his brother, against Masaniello, and his followers, bin
discovered, which put all things again out of square.

The Bishop therefore being com to the great Market place, and received by the
peeple with mighty reverence and honor, he entered into the Church of Carmine,
complemented by multitudes of peeple more then the said Church could hold: The
said Charter was read with a loud voice, and understood by all with a kind of
Jubilee of contentment; yet there wanted not, by the secret practice of the
Devil, some who, having still rebellious spirits, suspected the truth of that
Charter, and that it was not the Original, but a suppositious one: whereupon
suspecting themselfs to be deluded by the Bishop, they began to cry out, yea to
threaten him by telling him, Will your Eminence also deceave us? At which
instant the Bishop stood in evident danger of his life: The Bishop desiring to
penetrat the cause of those whisperings, asked Masaniello what was the matter,
who told him. Most Eminent Sir, this peeple suspect that this Charter is not
the true one, and that your Eminence goes about to baffle us, but I do not
believe it, and I will turn against them in your defense, or kill my self,
knowing well how punctually honorable your Eminence is. The Bishop answered, My
dear son, these Privileges and Charters are the very same which Charles the V.
subscribed, and which the peeple desire* But because you may be sincerely
satisfied of the truth of my proceedings, let us do this, find me an
intelligent man whom you will* and I will deliver it him, leaving it in his
hands, and for a sign of the truth I will not stir hence, till this business
clearly appeer, that you may know, that I hold you my sons as much as the
Gentry, and as your Pastor and Father; I would spill my blood most willingly for
my peeple, as also for the peace and quietness of my dear Country. At which
words Masaniello grew very quiet, and with him the tumultuous peeple: So they
sent for D. Iulio Genovino a most sagavous man, who knew as much as can be
known of the affairs of the City and Kingdom by his long experience, being 80.
years old, and having bin 19. years a prisoner, during the time of another
Revolution happened in the Government of Ossuna. Masaniello therefore made the
Privilege to be delivered to that man, that he might study and review it, as he
did all the night following with most exact diligence, all which time the
Bishop departed not from the Church of Carmine: And it was by the disposition
of God Almighty, and the most blessed Virgin, that this happened, for that very
night there were 36. Houses of Cavaliers to be burnt, amongst whom in the first
place was the Duke of Mataloni, the Duke of Medina las torres, the Prince and
Prior della Rocella, the Prince of Cellamare Chief Postmaster of the Kingdom,
Cornelius Spinola, Carlo Spinelli, Don Ferrante Caracciolo, Carlo Brancaccio
the Counselor, Don Francesco Capece Latro, Francesco Tomacello, and the Houses
of diverse other were to be a Sacrifice, and by the sole endeavors of the Bishop
they escaped it: Though these forenamed had been the principal heads and
Authors of the disorder happened the year before in the procession of the
relics of San Genaro, yet the Bishop as a pious Pastor, and common father,
rendering them like a perfect Christian good for evil, prayed more in the
behalf of these then any other, specially for the Houses of Medina, and
Mataloni. Wherefore Masaniello perceaving the goodness and integrity of the
Bishop, and sounding out his praises with full mouth to all the peeple, it made
them desist from the firing that was intended, declaring that he had absolutely
forborne it at his instance.

It happened, that the same day and time that his Eminence was to reason with
the peeple in the Church of Carmine, another general whisper was or'e-heard:
For after the Charter of Charles the V. was read, that which the Viceroy did
subjoyn was also read, which was, That he confirmed all the said Charter by
abolishing all the Gabells and Impositions, and that he pardoned all the peeple
for whatsoever they had don, and acted in that Commotion, and he promised to
obtain such a pardon from his Catholic Majesty for any act of rebellion that
might have happened: When this was heard, you would not believe how greatly the
peeple were moved, whereupon they began to cry out with a loud voice, That they
never committed any act of Rebellion, but to have always bin most faithful
Vassals, and would dye so toward his Majesty, who (and they raised their voices
to a great height) they prayed to live a thousand years: The thing they only
desired was, that the Privileges made good unto them by King Ferdinando, and
Charles the Emperor, might be made good unto them now: Thereupon thinking they
were gulled and betrayed, they would give ear no longer to any accord, as also
because in the said Confirmation his Excellency did not specify, that the whole
Kingdom should be so disburdned, without the necessary Clause of the Apostolical
Assent, as they had made instance; and therefore, without being a whit
satisfi^d, they desired that the War might be prosecuted, until they might have
complete satisfaction; yet the Bishop labored still to divert them from such
thoughts, by reading unto them the Note following sent him from the Viceroy.

My most Eminent and Reverend Lord,
THe most faithful peeple of this most faithful City prayed me to confirm their
Privileges, and in regard of the affections and high love which they have
always showed to his Majesty's Service, I granted their Petition; and because
instances have bin made unto me, that for the greater authority it should be
published in a pontificial way, I desire your Eminence so to do, and it will be
a favor unto me, and a comfort unto the peeple. God guard your Eminence many
years, according as I desire. Datum 6 July, 1647.

The Privilege is a dispatching, and those of the most faithful peeple shall
bring it to your Excellence. So I rest the greatest Servant of

Your most Reverend Eminence, El Duque de Ercos.


But the peeple not lending an ear to all this, thinking the Bishops promises
to be lame and imperfect, and being earnest to pursue the War as is said
already, till there be a Condescension to all their Reasons, they went on in
engrossing their Militia through all the parts of the City, and by putting in
order diverse Companies which very numerous, having 400. or 500. in evry one.
The dominion was such, that the very women, armed in great numbers, some with
batoons on their n^cks, some with naked swords in their hands, some with a sword
in the right, and a dagger in the left, and with knifes on their sides, went
strutting up and down the streets as so many Amazons, before the Royal Palace,
and elsewhere, having one man before for their Van, and another behind for their
Rere, crying out still, May the the King of Spain live, but the ill Government
die.

Upon the report of these Comotions in Naples the Spaniards which were
quartered in the nere adjacent Villages were coming to Naples, which being
known by the peeple, by (...) Scouts which they kept abroad, they sent a party
to meet them, where they disarmed them all, and sent them back: There came also
500 Germans sent from Capua, who were billeted there by the Governor of that
City, but when they came nere the gates the peeple rushd out, and stripping
them of their arms for their own use, they brought them in, and giving them some
refreshment, they kept them a good while in the Court of Guard, making very much
of them for the innocence they found in them. Such a terror was struck into
evry one, that if a boy said to a shopkeeper, For how much sell you the quart
of wine? for example sake sell it but for so much, and no more; and so for
fruit, and all other things, all obeyed: They went at first to put fire to the
goods of Cornelio Spinola a Genoways, who had resided in Naples above 20.
years, negotiating with the Court, and having farmed the Gabels, and much
peeple being found within for his defense, they went to him by way of
stratagem, saying, They were com to treat with him to make him their Grassier:
He excused himself at first, saying, that he was not proper for so great a
Trust, being a stranger* and they assuring him, that by long habitation he was
become a free Denizon of the City, he accepted of it, whereupon he said, I have a
million for the service of the King of Spain, and the most faithful peeple of
Naples. An Order came forth that day from Masaniello, That in all those houses
where there were Pieces of the King and Queen of Spain, they should be thrown
out, and the Arms of the most faithful peeple of Naples set up under Canopies.

The Bishop about the evening dispatched to the Viceroy Father Francisco Maria
Filomarino, a Capuchin, who was his brother, with other Gentlemen, praying him
that he would by all means yield to all Pretensions, and give entire
satisfaction unto the peeple, if he desired to prevent the mischiefs that were
like to ensue. When the said Filomarino was com into the Castle, he began to
treat with the Viceroy in the Bishops name, with a great deal of affection and
earnestnes, in so much that by little and little they went overcoming all
difficulties, so there were high hopes that an absolut Accommodation would ensue.

In the mean time Masaniello gaining power more and more over the peeple,
because he was found to be of a great spirit and hardines, he rendered himself
by degrees the most belovd, the most respected and worthy of esteem by all that
possiby could be, notwithstanding that in such a confused multitud of so many
thousands of peeple there were so many Doctors, Merchants, Notaries, Scriveners,
Proctors, Physicians, Soldiers, and very worthy Artizans, and an infinite number
of others that were men of Judgment, Wit, Wealth, Volour and Experience, and
the meanest of them superior to him in Condition: But from Tuesday, and all the
time forward, when he went in the name of the peeple to negotiat with the
Bishop touching the present Affairs, his Eminence remained astonished at his
Spirit and Parts, which got him daily more and more credit amongst the peeple,
who cried him up thereupon the Chieftain, or Captain General, so that all were
willing to transfer unto him solemnly, as absolut Patron, the Supreme Command
over all the peeple, and to obey him accordingly. Whereupon in the middle of the
Market place there was a stage erected b^ him, where from that time forward the
said Masaniello clothed in white like a Mariner, and in his Company other
Counselors of the peeple, among whom Genovino, and that famous Bandito
Domenico Perrone, taken out of the Church of Carmine, as formerly said, by
order of the peeple, had the first places; They gave public audience, receiving
indifferently from all sorts of peeple, as well Laics as Ecclesiastics, who
adhered unto the popular party, Petitions and Memorials, pa^sing Orders, and
decreeing Civil, Criminal, and Military Sentences upon all Causes, by
arrogating to themselfs the sole Supreme Authority, and D^spotical Command over
all the City, Villages and Families, making account that all the armed men that
were ready at Masaniello's beck were no less then 150. thousand Souls, without
inclusion of women, boys and children, who were of an incredible number, among
whom one would com to visit her husband, another his Father, some their sons,
others their kinsmen or friends, declaring that if need were they would raise
another Army for the defense of the Peeple and City. And this is as much as
happened the third day.

Wensday, the tenth of July, 1647. The fourth day.
THe Napolitan peeple did not seem satisfied to publish unto the world the
extreme disdain they had taken against the chiefest Authors of the Gabels by
outward firing and Combustions, but they did still ruminat in the night, what
further revenges were to be taken in the day.

Hence it came to pass that upon Wensday betimes, when Aurora had hardly
ushered up the Sun into the Orient, Masaniello ordered That upon pain of death
the Brigade of his lifegard, which were in number about 7. or 8000. persons,
that they should repair to the Palace of the Duke of Caivano, who was thought by
the peeple to be one of their chiefest Enemies, therefore command was given to
pass through the street of the little gate of Santa Chiara to plunder again the
said Duke, because notice was had of goods of far greater value which were not
yet discovered, the Soldiers herupon as swift as lightning went, in obedience
to Masaniello's command, and re-entred the house, where battring down a door,
they found two chambers full of the richest Tapistry that could be seen, with
sundry sorts of other costly Movables, then they descended into the gardens,
and battered diverse marble statues and fountains, grubb'd up the flowers and
trees, broke down the balcones, and put fire to evry thing both in house and
garden.

There went some hundreds of that Soldadesca to the Palace of the Duke of
Mataloni to burn it also, and destroy it from top to bottom, purposing to sow
the ground with salt afterward; but finding it well fortified with one hundred
armed Banditos, who were within, they went back to have a recrent of strength,
and to return thither toward the Evening to execut their design: So passing
again to Chaia to the Palace of the young Duke of Caivano Don Francesco Barile
to get the residu of his fathers goods, preserved happily by him, they rushed
also into that house, and did miserable spoil to evry thing that came in their
way And as they were doing this, peeple of all sorts, men, women and boys
brought them faggots, with pitch, oil, sacks full of straw, and other helps,
making hideous noise up and down the streets, as if they had bin stark mad, and
crying, There is but this little straw left in our houses, and it shall serve to
put fire into the kennels of these dogs, who have imposed, sucked, and
swallowed such Gabels from us, and saying this, they would let down the sack of
straw, and throw all into the fire* Other women would bring in their arms their
children, and putting little fired matches into their hands, they would make
them throw them into the fire, crying out, These poor lambs shall also take
vengeance of these Theefs for the bread they have taken out of their mouths, so
with hurling exclamations and cur^es they went up and down* yet sometimes with
these interjections of prayer; Viva Iddio sem^re, and il nostro Re, and
ruvoiano questi carri: Let God live for ever, and our King, and let these dogs
dye the death: The sight of all which things would have mollified an Adamant,
and drawn compassion out of the very Rocks.

While the peeple went thus to evaporate their high discontentments and deep
hatred against the pretended enemies of the public good, the Bishop did very
strictly negotiate with the Viceroy for a final accord, by the intervention
of some choice instruments whom he had sent thither of purpose, for 'twas not
fitting he himself should remove from the Church del Carmine, because he
prevented thereby the horrible firings and spoils which were threatened to be
also made thereabouts; he employed besides into the Castle three Gentlemen of
special parts, who were Caesar Gerardini a Luquese, a Gentleman who was Master
of his Chamber, one of a lovely conditition, of much vigor and prudence; the
second was Don Gennaro Quaranta, and Guiseppe de Rossi, both Neapolitan
Gentlemen, whereof the one was Vicar-Generall of the Nunns of Naples, a Subject
of high learning and goodness of life: And that Wednesday morning the business
was at so hopeful a pass, that a motion was made to make a solemn Cavalcata to
the Church del Carmine by the Viceroy, and where all the Nobility should attend
him, that the capitulations of peace might be publicly read there, and
afterward a Te Deum solemnly sung, to give God due thanks for his graces: This
was intimated to Masaniello, who consented thereunto, yet he commanded the
peeple to be still vigilant, and to stand upon their guard, and every enrolled
soldier to have his Arms ready, and to stand firm to his post and not to stir
th^nce upon pain of death: As these things were in agitation and fully
intended, the Viceroy ceased not to send messages ever and anon unto the
Bishop, desiring him to assure the peeple that they should have all possible
satisfaction, and it lay in his Eminences hands in chief to maintain the Crown
of that Kingdom, with the life's and being of all the Nobility throughout
Naples; therefore he had sent him the day before the ancient Charters of King
Ferdinand, and of Charles the fifth, confirmed by the Royal Council
Collateral, and the Council of State held of purpose for that effect, wherein
there was a general indulgence or pardon granted unto the peeple of Naples for
any offense whatsoever committed, the tenor whereof was as follows.

Philip by the Grace of God, King, etc. Don Roderico Ponce de Leon, Duke of
Arcos.
WE by an everlasting privilege do grant to the most faithful peeple of this
most faithful City of Naples, that all Gabells and impositions be extinct and
abolished which were laid upon the City of Naples, and the Kingdom, from the
time of the Emperor Charles the V. of happy memory until this hour. Moreover
we grant a general pardon for any offense whatsoever committed, since the
beginning of this present revolution to this point of time, as also for every
offense and inquisition passed that related to the said revolution.

Given in Castle nuovo 10. of July 1647. El Duque de Arcos. Donato Coppola
Secretary of the Kingdom.



This being received by the Bishop, he procured suddenly by discreet ways to
induce Masaniello to convoque all the Captains, and chief commanders of the
peeple together to hear the reading of the said Capitulations of the accord so
much desired by them. The Charter of Charles the Emperor being already
acknowledged by Don Giulio Genovino, and presented unto them by the Bishop, as
true and original, therefore there were more then hopes, nay 'twas held a thing
beyond all doubt that an agreement would follow: But mark, while the peeple were
all assembled in the Church de^ C^^mine there being infinite multitudes which
stayed without not being able to enter, because the Church was full already,
being there com to hear the Articles read which they seemed to desire with that
anxiety, behold a new chance happened (and God forgive him who was the cause
thereof for he bore the punishment a little after) which put all things out of
square, and was able to put the whole City to fire and sword: The chance was
that there entered into the gate del Carmine which leads to the Market place, a
great number of Banditi at least 500. all armed a horsback, giving out that
they came for the service of the peeple sent for by the forenamed Bandito
Perrone as he attested himself before Masaniello, and the substance of the
fact was true, but the end whereunto it tended differed much, because that he
confederating with the Duke of Mataloni and D. Guiseppe Caraffa his brother,
had an aim not at the service, but the destruction of the peeple, which was
first to kill Masaniello their leader, with diverse others of the principal
mutineers about the great Market place, and other circumjacent pr^cincts, as
'twas afterward discovered and shall be told hereafter.

The said Banditi being made to com before Masaniello, they were receiv^d with
great demonstrations of love, but while they were there in his presence,
Perrone made a motion, which was, that the said Banditi should go a horsback
through the City, and take their quarters a part, which things he held to be
very essential, and conducing much to the service of the peeple, whereunto
Masaniello replied, that 'twas bootles to do this, ^ut 'twas sufficient if
divided they stood a foot ready at his commands: Perrone persisting in his
opinion said often that by all means the Banditi should be a horsback:
Masaniello suspecting some sinister practices of Perrone in giving this same
counsel, caused that he ordered more peremptorily they should go a foot, and
that they should not budg from one corner of the Market which he would assign
them for their quarter. The Banditi being much disquieted in mind, because they
had not their intent toward the execution of their design, as they parted
there were seven archibuz shots made at Masaniello, yet they missed him all,
but some bullets burnt part of his shirt and so fell to the earth, all which was
esteemed a miracle of the most holy Lady del Carmine, whose medail he carried
about his neck hanging down to his breast. Every one may imagine how much this
act might have moved the peeple to fury, but there only happened confused dark
rumors and whisperings for the present; but afterward they fell upon those
Banditi and discharged 300. musket shots at them, wherein they killed about
thirty, two whereof fell down before the great Altar, three in the Vestry, one
under the very seat where the Archbishop was, and thither he had fled for
safe-gard; and the rest in diverse parts of the convent, diverse also were hurt,
but the heads of the slain were set up upon poles in the Market place; and some
of them scaping away into diverse places from the crowd, fled into Monasteries,
but most into Maria della Nuova de Zocolane. Perrone was presently apprehended,
and fettered by Masaniellos order, and to be proceeded against as shall be told
speedily. Then they went in quest of one Antimo Grasso a man as notorious as
facinorous, who was one of the chiefest of the plot, who was found, and
murdered in the same chamber where the Bishop was, which was one of the stands
of the General. He received the shot in the window of the said chamber
whilst perceiving himself to be pursued by death, he sought to fly into the
cloister, which precipitat flight confirmed the jealousies the peeple had of
him. The Bishop was at that time in most evident danger of his life,
nevertheless without being a whit moved or losing one crum of courage, he
confessed and gave absolution to the said Antimo Grasso before he breathed his
last.

The noise was so great, and the shots so many, and the tumult so high in the
Monastery, the gates being opened and pulled off the hinges, that all the
Friars trembling with fear thought they were all dead men, and many of them
confessing one to the other with crucifixes in their hands, and other images,
expected no other then sudden death; yet nevertheless the Archbishop did not
give over, but with a notable magnanimity worthy of a Prelat did encourage
them, distributing his pastoral benedictions among them up and down with many
sweet words of comfort.

The peeple were much moved to see the holy Church so polluted with blood, and
profaned with slaughters, therefore those dead bodies were carried out into the
Market; and the peeple went to find out the rest of the Banditi who were hid in
diverse places, whereof diverse were killed, and the rest got over the walls to
save their life's. Some were ta'n^ alive who revealed the treason intended
against Masaniello set afoot by the Duke of Matalone, either for revenging of
the affront he had received the monday before, or to perform his promise made
to the Viceroy, hoping thereby to disanimate and so disunite the peeple, their
head being cut off.

Here upon the peeple not only dwelling about the Market place, but in other
places, having notice given them that the said 500. Banditi came of purpose by
the machinations of the Duke of Mataloni to make away Masaniello, and that
Perrone was a chief instrument to bring this about, Masaniello commanded the
said Perrone to be killed, but to be first put to the torment to draw out of
him the trace, order and manner of the plot, with his accomplices, which being
don, many things were discovered tending to the prejudice and life's of the
peeple. He confessed in particular, that he and the rest of the Banditi were
sent by order of the Duke of Mataloni, not only to murder the said
Masaniello, but also by a mine already made to blow up the I Will of the House of
Masaniello, with the contiguous Houses under which there were already twenty
eight barrells of powder put; and therewith the whole Convent of Carmine, under
which there were also a mine laid with great store of gunpowder, having to
this effect received from the said Duke a bill for himself and his accomplices,
who were engaged in the plot of fifteen thousand crowns, which accordingly was
found about him: so much Perrone confessed and no more, and though 'twas
enough, yet he confessed not all, which was discovered afterward by others:
Having confessed all th^s, his head was chopped off with a brothers of his, and
they were pitched upon pikes in the Market place to be a spectacle to the world.

'Twixt the Banditi who were taken alive, and not shot, one of them desired his
life of Masaniello, and he would discover unto him some conjurations far greater
and more general then Perrone confessed, or Grasso either, which if he
detected, his life was promised him, provided his discoveries proved true:
Hereupon he revealed that the night following, presupposing that the foresaid
five hundred Banditi horse had formerly had good success, there were many
Troops of Horse to second them, and they were to set fire to certain mines
under the great market place, at such a time when it was fullest of people, and
trod by armed men, which commonly according to their former custom* was used to
be about three hours in the night, at the striking of which hour they were to
give fire to the mine, which consisted of fifty cantaras of Powder and more,
amounting to fifteen thousand pounds, or thereabouts, and spread up and down
through the bowels of the said Market place, which had made fly into the air
all the peeple then present, and blown up the edifices circumjacent, with the
Monastery and Church del Carmine, insomuch that there had perished at lea^t
besides the destruction of the holy buildings and profane, about one hundred
and fifty thousand souls: A case of infinite compassion, justifying any other
bloody revenge which the peeple might have taken for such a barbarous and
unheard of cruelty: when the mines had taken effect, the Banditi were to
disperse up and down, joining with some of the Gentry whom they had brought in
with them, and fall upon the rest of the common peeple, and put all to the
sword; this being understood by Masaniello, he ordered that with all possible
diligence those subterranean places should be searched that were revealed by the
said prisoner, which being found true and real, he pardoned him his life, but
with perpetual banishment from the City and Kingdom under pain of life; the
said powder being taken up from all those places under ground, did serve for
provision to the peeple for many days, for they had scarcity thereof.

It was discovered also by the confession of other Banditi, being put upon the
rack, that by the machinations of Duke Matalone, and his brother Perrone and
Grassa, having the chief hand therein, that the waters which by aqueducts
served the City of Naples were poisoned, as also the corn, which after much
diligen^^ being found to be true, specially in those Cisterns which receive the
rain water, as in the Sellaries, the public Markets, and other places inhabited
by the meaner sort of peeple, for it was proved that two poor children had died
by those waters; therefore the Aqueducts which conveyed those waters being
broken open, notice was given by sound of Trumpet and Drum, with Bills fixed in
all quarters of the City, that none should drink of those waters that passed
through the Formale, which was the common Aqueduct. At the same time by order
of Masaniello were dispatched many companies of armed foot and horse through
all the City, and the Suburbs, to take the rest of the Banditi, who were
retired for sanctuary to diverse Churches and Monasteries, specially in Sancta
Maria della Nuova, where a great number got shelter, and it was bruited abroad,
that Don Guiseppe de Caraffa was com also thither for favors which he had
received from the Viceroy from Benevento to Naples: He placed also at the same
time diverse gards at the gates, that the Cavaliers should not get out to join in
bands against the peeple, which was much feared, out of the confessions which
were drawn from the foresayed Banditi; therefore an exact search was made for
these in all the Monasteries throughout the City, where diverse were found, and
being dragged out they had their heads chopped off, and put up upon poles up and
down the streets. And because there was a report ran that the Duke of Matalone
himself was hid at St. Efrem, one of the Capuchins Churches, a great squadron
of armed men went thither, with ravenous resolutions to drag him out and
execute him; But a little before having got timely advice by a spy, he got out
in the disguise of a Capuchin Friar; and although the peeple went all the ways
to overtake him, yet they could not do it, in regard that he was got before
upon a swift Coursier toward Benevento; the peeple being much enraged at his
escape: But whosoever of his servants, pages, laquays, music boys, or any
other that belonged unto him came into their hands, they presently murdered
them. And because the rage of the peeple after the said Duke of Mataloni, was
bent next against D. Guiseppe Caraffa his brother, there went 4000. persons all
armed to the foresayed Monastery of Santa Maria della Nuova of the Zoccolanti,
where he had secured himself, as also his brother Father Gregorio Caraffa Prior
de la Roccella, who being assisted by God for his innocence and innated
goodness, became a Prophet to himself, and to his brother Don Guiseppe, of the
approaching danger that did menace their destruction, he exhorted and conjured
him to get away with him, and to transfer themselfs to a place of greater
security: But he, not giving ear to the exhortations of the Prior, but
yielding to his hard destiny, he remained alone in the said Monastery, the
Prior taking leave of him with tears in his eyes; who being scarce gone, the
foresayed rabble surpised the place, and rushing in with extreme rage, though
a great while they could not find him, he being hid in the secretest place of
the Monastery; whence he got means to give notice to the Viceroy of his
desperate condition; and therefore to amuse or divert the rabble, he desired
him to let fly two pieces of ordnance (but without bullets) among them; and it
might be, that being so terrified, they might return to the town to take new
counsels, and so he might have opportunity to make his escape. This note being
sowed 'twixt the sole and the shoo of a poor converted Friar, he gave him a
good reward to go with it to the Castle: But what? the bearer had scarce put
himself upon his way, but being stopped by some malicious spies, he was searched
from head to foot, where they found the said note, and so they fell upon him
most furiously, and chopped off his head.

Caraffa hereupon having lost all hopes of preserving himself, for the
certainty the peeple had got that he was in the said Monastery, and for the
hot eager malice wherewith they pursued him, he resolved to attempt an escape,
being told by the Friars, that the brutish peeple would search all the cells,
dormitories, with any other places public or private within the Monastery, as
also the altars themselfs, Churchyards, and every corner of Church or Convent:
having don so in sundry places, and chop't off the head of whomsoever they
found; But to do this with less danger he put off his Friars weeds and
apparelled himself with a secular habit, wherein leaping out of a window of the
Monastery over against a shop where a Silkweaver dwelt, he recovered himself
with four of his confidents all habited like Friars into the next house where a
mean woman dwelt, and hiding himself there under a bed, he prayed her (with
large promises of reward) to conceal him; but the ill-natured and base woman
promising her self a greater reward from the promiscuous crew, discovered him,
and delivered him into their hands, with the other four of his retinue, among
whom when they had seized upon him, they dragged him along the little Piazza of
Ceriglio, notwithstanding that he had promised twelve thousand Crowns in good
gold if they would suffer him to escape: and although some began to hearken to
such a proffer, yet the greater number would not, but barbarously cried out
with loud exclamations, kill him, kill the Traitor; at which words, among
others which slashed him with daggers and stillettos, a young fellow, son to a
Butcher hard by, with a great knife cut his throat, and chop't off his head;
which being done, it is incredible what exultations of joy and triumphing there
was among them, as if they had taken off the head of the great Turk, and cut to
pieces the whole Ottoman Empire: so his head being fixed upon the top of a
pike, and under it one of his feet and half a leg, with this inscription
underneath, which was written in huge characters that they might be the more
legible: Questo e Don Peppo Caraffa rebelle della patria, and traditore dell
fidelissimo popolo. This is Don Peppo Caraffa, a rebel to his country, and
traitor to the most faithful peeple. And because at the same time the heads of
the other four who were of his train were chopped off, and put also aloft upon
poles, though lower then that where Caraffa's head was, to make it appear the
more eminent; and having put his Porter in the midst of four more, and tied
about his temples a royal crown of lead, in this posture they made him go up
and down the market place, dragging all along the bodies of those five, till at
last they threw them upon a dunghill among stones and filth. This being don,
they cried out, Viva Dio, and il nostro Re mill' anni, and muoiauo gli
traditori del fidelissimo popolo. Let God live, and let our King live a
thousand years, but let the traitors of the most faithful peeple die the
death. With such funestous preparatifs, and in such an ignominious procession
was the body and head of Caraffa presented to Masaniello, who was there present
all the while, and commanding his head to be brought nearer unto him, he
plucked him often by the hair of his mustachos, disgorging many base
opprobrious words, and making a kind of speech unto the peeple touching the
justice of God, which comes surely, though slowly, to punish the guilty, and
uses to make a compensation for the slownesse with the greater security,
making application of the doctrine of that wise man, who without studying could
by the mere light of nature say; lento quidem gradu divina procedit ira, and
tarditatem supplicii gravitate compensat.

Masaniello having terminated his speech unto the people, commanded that all
the heads of the Banditi, and other facinorous traitors that were taken in the
Monastery of the Zoccolanti, and in the Ceriglio, should be distinguished from
others, and placed by themselfs, and fixed in the great Market place, but the
carcass of Caraffa should be tied to a beam athwart, and his head should be put
in a grate of iron with his foot nailed underneath, and fixed without the porta
di Gennaro, through which the passage was to the Palace of Mataloni, putting
above that grate of iron, and under his carcass in the market place the
foresayed words in large legible Characters. Don Peppo Caraffa Rebelle della
patria, and traditore del fidelessimo popolo, all which was punctually
executed, the peeple still bawled aloud let traitors die, let traitors die; and
nothing was heard up and down the streets in every corner, but shrikings, and
howlings with horrid curses, which made a hideous noise in the air.

At this spectacle of Caraffa the fear of the Cavaliers increased so much, that
they expected no other thing then to be torn in pieces, seeing them lay hands
so inhumanely upon such that were used to make that City tremble at other
times, as also the whole Kingdom of Naples: And the foundation of their fears
was the greater, because that after the discovery of the plots made by the
Banditi, the peeple rise up and multiplied more fast then ever, for that very
night there were numbered 114000. armed persons, without black caps, and the
gentletlemen that adhered to the peeple, with diverse other, as the Catalog was
seen in the hands of Don Georglo Sersale. As also of the doubts they had that
the Viceroy himself had a hand in that conjuration of the Banditi, and to make
him resolve to grant them whatsoever they desired, Masaniello commanded that no
refreshments or provision should pass into the Castle, where he and his
Duchess* with the Collateral Counsel, and Counsel of State, with the
greatest part of the Kings Ministers, servants and Officers resided, as also
into those quarters where the Spaniards were billeted, where they permitted
neither bread, or wine, or snow to be carried, but only a few roots, and herbs.

He commanded also, because he intended to choke them with thirst, as well as
to famish them with hunger, that all the Aqueducts should be cut off: Whereupon
the Viceroy seeing himself in so scurvy a condition, dispatched a letter to the
Archbishop, that he would make known to the people his sincere intentions
toward them, and that he was not only a mere stranger, but most averse to the
practices of the Banditi, and their abominable conjurations; For proof whereof
he might assure them that he used all humane industry that could be imagined,
to apprehend those Banditi, and deliver them to the hands of the peeple, to do
with them what they pleased; such were the protestations of the Viceroy to
clear himself of those ombrages he found the people began to have of him. The
Tenor of the General to the Archbishop was as follows: Most Eminent, and
most Reverend Lord.
THe news of the distrust of the peeple, with that accident of the Duke of
Mataloni, put's me in a great deal of care, for I desire no other thing but the
satisfaction of the peeple, and the contentment of the City; therefore I
thought good to let your Eminence know that if I had any of the Banditi in my
hands, I would deliver them to the power of the most faithful City, or any
other that disturbed our quietness. Your Eminence may please to let this be
known, and command that notice be sent me of what passes, and how your
Eminence fares, whose most Eminent person God preserve for many years. From
the Palace this 10. of July 1647. Your Eminence may please to perform
whatsoever I offered the most faithful City in the behalf of his Majesty and
my self. My Lord, what, has lately happened leaves me full of wonder; I offer
to your Eminence by the life of the King, that any of the Banditi whom I can
lay hold on I will immediately send them to the most faithful peeple, to whom
I would be right understood* for I desire nothing else but quietness.

So I am the greatest servant of your Eminence* El Duque de Arcos.




The Archbishop did acquaint the people by virtue of the foresayed letter, with
the right intentions of the Viceroy toward them, which helped to mitigate in
part the ill talent that was conceived against him; yet notwithstanding
Masaniello did publish a rigorous Ban, that all as well peeple, as Cavaliers,
should be ready at the sound of the public Bell under pain to have their houses
fired; for the suspicion continued still, that there was a plot for more
Banditi to invade the City, and to join with the Spanish and German Militia to
surprise her; but whereas Cavaliers were mentioned in that Ban, 'twas to make
an ostentation of their power, rather then to make use of any of them, for they
did not confide in them. There were vessels full of earth and stones placed at
the head of every street, and upon the approach at night Masaniello commanded
for the watch of the City, and to prevent all robberies, that Forts and
Bastions should be raised at the mouth of every street, not only where the
peeple, but where the Nobility did inhabit, which was performed with such speed
that 'twas mavelous, for before half an hour of night all that vast City was
found barricadoed and fortified, with barrels full of earth, faggots, timber and
stones, so that but one could pass at a time, and that with some difficulty: He
commanded also that all the houses and Palaces, as well of Cavaliers, as of
Citizens, as also of Monks and regular Orders, under pain of having their
Monasteries burnt, should put out lights toward the streets out of their
windows and corners, as also that stubble, and other combustible things should
be put on fire to clear the streets, that in case the Banditi entered the City,
they might be more easily discerned by the light of those fires dispersed up
and down the streets: all this was executed with punctual and exact celerity
by all, as far as the Regents of the Chancery, as by all the Gownmen, Nobles,
Cavaliers, Regulars, and by all conditions of peeple, being all very much
affrighted by the sad tragedy of poor Caraffa, and 150. heads of the Banditi,
all which was don in less then the space of 6* hours, which were seen fixed
upon diverse poles up and down the streets; They were also terrified at the huge
number of 150000. men all armed, and being ready to obey the beck of
Masaniello, who as he had been another Cola di ^enza, did no sooner signify
his pleasure, but it was don in a minut, in such a manner, that if he said
bring me the head of such a one, or let such a Palace be burnt, and the house
of such a Prince be plundered, or any other the least thing commanded, at the
very instant without any doubts or replies 'twas put in Execution, a glory that
no King or Emperor yet enjoyed: And to put a period to the tragical acts of
this day, he declared by the dreadful noise of Drum and Trumpet the Duke of
Mataloni to be a rebel to his King and Country; and whosoever should bring him
in should have thirty thousand Crowns in gold, and his head should ransom one
hundred and fifty Banditi, and ten thousand Crowns were were added for a reward
to him that should bring him alive; so he sent Companies up and down to find him
out, but Masaniello employed his own brother to find him out at Benevento with
a considerable strength of Horse and Foot.

Thursday the 11. of July, 1647. The fifth day.
It Is well known, by that which Pliny and Tiraquello do affirm, that in the
Olympic Games, it often fell out the Judges did give the palm and prize in
doubtful combats, not as much according to the virtue and valor of the
combitant, as for the favor and applause of the peeple; one may deservedly
think then that Masaniello, although but young, and of a very low birth, but
having the empty gale of popular applause blowing upon him, and of such a huge
mass of peeple as are in Naples, obtained the truncheon of general command
over them: But the wonder is the greater, that so base a creature (I will not
say, a Fisherman, but a Fishermans boy, nor a complete man, but a youth in a
manner) should draw after him such swarms of peeple, and the second day to be
attended by the civillest and discreeter sort of men; the third to make himself
absolute Commander over them, and the charge of Generalissimo, every one
showing obedience to his commands accordingly; the fourth and fifth day by his
sagacious orders, ready dispatches, and oportune expedients: and above all, by
his spiritfulness, efficacy and capacity in negotiating businesses of so great
importance; he was held to be of such wisdom and counsel, that he raised a
kind of admiration in all men, and particularly in the mind of the Archbishop,
who more then any other had occasion to try his capacity and treat with him,
and by the rigorous justice from the first day of his reign, to the last end of
his usurped dominion which he exercised, as also for his precipitated
barbarismes, as we shall touch anon, the ugly horrors and astonishments he
struck into the whole City; he had with an unspeakable boldness which seemed
wonderful to the present, and will seem incredible to the absent, not as a
Plebean, or some abject fellow, but like a kind of great martial Commander,
having threats in his looks, terrors in his gestures, and revenge in his
countenance, subjugated all Naples: Naples the head of such a Kingdom, the
Metropolis of so many Provinces, the Queen of so many Cities, the Mother of so
many glorious Hero's, the Rendevouz of Princes, the Nurse of so many valiant
Champions, and spiritfull Cavaliers, this Naples by the impenetrable judgments
of heaven, though having six hundred thousand souls in her, saw her self
commanded by a poor abject vile Fisher-boy, who raised a numerous Army
amounting in few hours to one hundred and fifty thousand men; he made trenches,
set Sentinells, laid Spies, gave signs, chastised the Banditi, condemned the
guilty, viewed the Squadrons, ranked their Files, comforted the fearful,
confirmed the stout, encouraged the bold, promised rewards, threatened the
suspected, reproached the coward, applauded the valiant, and marvellously
incited the minds of men, by many degrees his superiors, to battle, to
burnings, to plunder, to spoil, to blood and to death: The whole City, yea,
the Spaniards themselfs stood astonished, that in so great and so confused a
multitude of infinite numbers of armed peeple, he could proceed so regular in
his orders, and that they were so exactly observed, that there was never seen
nor known the like, that he should be so observant to Ladies, so respectfull of
the holy Church and her Officers, that all the while he would not suffer any
outrage to be offered them, except only in Sancta Maria della Nuova in the
quest of Mataloni, that among such a world of tempting rich goods which there
were burnt up and down, he would not suffer the value of a pin to be converted
to private use.

The first order that was published by Masaniello upon Thursday morning
betimes, was, that all men should go without Cloaks, Gowns, wide Cassocks, or
such like, which was generally obeyed not only of the common sort, but of all
the Nobility, of all the Churchmen, and Religious Orders, and 'twas a
mavelous thing, if not rather ridiculous, to see the Dominicans, Carmelites,
the Regular Canons, Jesuits, Teatins, Priests, and all sorts of Regulars, yea
the Canons and Dignitaries of the Cathedral Churches, the Chaplains of the
Archbishop Filomarino, of Cardinal Trivultio, of the Viceroy, the Apostolical
Nuncio, and of all the Bishops residing then in NAPLES, and if we give credit
to the relation of many, their Eminences themselves went without upper garments
all the while that Masaniello reigned, every one submitting to so vile a fellow.

He commanded also that all women, of what degree or quality soever they were,
should go without fardingalls, which was also obeyed; and that when they went
abroad they should tuck their petticoats somewhat high, that it might be
discerned whether they carried any arms underneath; it having bin discovered,
that under such long robes sundry sorts of arms have bin brought to the Banditi
and other enemies of the peeple: And besides, the night before there were many
papers thrown up and down, wherein there were inklings given of some notable
design against the peeple. That morning also all the streets were entrenched,
and the Cannons from the Magazing of San Lorenzo were brought down, and set
upon carriages, and placed in diverse parts of the city which lay most
advantageous, and companies both of foot and horse were dispersed up and down,
well armed, to be able to withstand any force.

Masaniello commanded also that all Caval^ers under pain of life should deliver
their arms, as also all noble personages, to the hands of such Officers as he
should send with commission accordingly; and that all their servants should also
give up their weapons for the service of the peeple; which they did, though
with a very ill will; for, they plainly perceived the design of this
disarming, which was not only to make them unable to make any opposition, but
to expose them to the mercy of the furious people their enemies.

There was also that day an Excize put upon all edible commodities, and at what
price they should be sold: There was also by command of the said Masaniello in
sundry of the most eminent places of the City, diverse frames of pictures set up
of Charles the Emperor, and of his Catholic Majesty Philip the fourth, now
regnant, with the Arms of the City of Naples drawn underneath; and when the
soldiers passed by any of those places, they cried out, Viva il Re di Spagna,
and muoia il mal governo, let the King of Spain live, and let the ill
government die.

While that morning the commands of Masaniello were published and executed
every where throughout the City, the Archbishop who from Tuesday morning kept
himself within the Monastery of del Carmine, to be able to negotiate with more
convenience with Masaniello, and with other heads of the peeple, he was not
wanting to publish the true intent of his meaning, and of that of the Viceroy,
and the fervent desire he had to put in execution the last accord thereby to
appease this high popular fury, which every day, every hour, yea, every moment,
was the cause still of greater hurt and ruin; therefore having sent into the
Castle Father Filomarino his Capuchin brother to that effect, he employed that
morning Caesare Gherardini the Master of his Chamber to induce the Viceroy to
satisfy the peeple, and to give his assent to what was demanded, assuring him
of the inclination that the said peeple had to a peace, so that all depended
upon him, otherwise going thus arming daily more and more, and madding up and
down the streets, he could not but prognosticate a total and irreparable ruin
to City and Kingdom: The Viceroy received the Embassy of the Archbishop with
unspeakable contentment, and to show his readiness and uniformity of thoughts
with the said Archbishop, he writ unto him again a most affectionate Letter,
wherein demonstrating the ardent disposition he had to public tranquillity, he
referred himself to every thing that his Eminence had don, and would ratify
whatsoever he would promise, ex nunc pro nunc, to the end, that all delays
might be cut off by carrying and returning Propositions and Answers from one
side, and the other, so much in prejudice of the public good of the City: the
Letter was in effect as follows.

Most eminent, and most reverend Lord,
THe News which the Master of your Eminencies Chamber brought me, have
administered to me much contentment, and they were conformable to the hopes that
I have always had to see all matters occommodated by the operations of your
Eminence, to whom all shall be attributed; I pray continue your wonted
diligence that hitherto you have used, that we may see this mighty business
come to perfection: and because we may not be subject that what is once agreed
upon may be entangled, the only remedy will be, that whatsoever you shall
promise to this most faithful peeple, I will make good; and as I desire that
nothing may be credited but what shall be sent from your Eminence, so I shall
not give faith to any thing, but what shall come from your hands: God guard your
Eminence for many years.

From Castelnuovo this 11. of July, 1647. I kiss the hands of your most
reverend Eminence, and rest, The greatest of your Servants, El Duque de Arcos.


The Archbishop having received from the Viceroy this ample Commission and
faculty to do what he held expedient, he caused to be called unto him into the
Church del Carmine, Masaniello with his Counselors, Genovino, and Arpuia, and
reading unto them the said letter, with much dexterity and eagerness he
forced himself to represent unto them the tenderness of the Viceroyes
affection toward the peeple, and his own most ardent desires to give them all
possible satisfaction that might afford them a plenary contentment: Therefore
they by a reciprocal correspondence of affection, and for the universal
quietness of the same peeple were bound to condescend unto, and consummate the
whole business, by conforming themselfs to an accommodation; On these
persuasions twenty of the chiefest Rulers of the peeple being present in the
Church del Carmine, and a great number of the most civil sort of peeple, they
all promised by firm asseverations to his Eminence, that for his love, and to
correspond with the love of the Viceroy, they were most ready to finish the
accord: Therefore there should be a care taken forthwith to make the
Capitulations. The Bishop rejoiced extremely for the assurance the peeple gave
him that day to conclude the accord so much breathed after; and to give
beginning to distinction of Articles, the Viceroy thought it expedient to put
them together, who also did so greedily thirst after an accommodation; and this
he did by the agency of Guiseppe de Rossi a Minor his conventuall Theologue,
and such advice being very grateful to the Viceroy, he answered the Bishop
with another letter, recommending unto him with the hottest tenderness that
could be, the expedition of the business, which could permit no longer delay,
referring (to which end) to the substance of the letter formerly sent him by
the master of his chamber; the copy of the last is this, wherein he touched at
the detension of certain Galleys arrived at the port, but it should be far from
prejudicing or distracting the Treaty any way; or to hinder the satisfaction
that was intended to be given the most faithful peeple, as hereafter shall be
mentioned.

Most Eminent, and most Reverend Lord;
THe Theologue whom your Eminence sent unto me, told me that to day should be
put in execution in the behalf of the most faithful peeple that which is
capitulated, and that I would detain the Galleys: I send this order open,
because they may be detained in any place where they shall be found, to day we
hope we shall get out of this care by the intercession of your Eminence, whom I
return to pray, that no a^^aies be admitted, but that matters be transacted
according to the paper which the Master of the Chamber brought from your
Eminence, whom God preserve many years. From the Palace 11. of July 1647. So I
rest,

Of your most eminent reverence the greatest Servitor, El Duque de Arcos.


The Theologue brought this general Commission just at the time when the
Archbishop was very busy in distending the Capitulations of the peeple for an
accord; which being dispatched with greater celerity then was believed, wherein
there easily aypear'd a concurrence of divine assistance, by the intercession
of the most glorious Virgin del Carmine, they were sent forthwith by the hands
of Father Filomarino the Capuchin by his Eminence unto the Viceroy, that his
Excellence should sign them with his own hand, which was don, and it being
notified by the said Father, that the desire of the peeple was to have the
said Capitulations legally authorized by public act, and subscribed not only
by the Viceroies hand, but the Collateral Council royal, together with the
Counsel of State, all was readily assented unto. Therefore another letter was
sent in more earnest terms then any of the former, wherein the Archbishop by
efficacious instances did desire his Excellence would operate to bring to a
period that solemn ceremony so much panted after by the desires of the peeple,
representing unto him the imminent dangers that otherwise would ensue, and were
visibly hanging over City and Kingdom, to the disservice of God and the King,
the holy Church, and the Citizens, to the discomfort of women, and whereon
depended the life's of so many innocent babes, as also for the advantage and
boldness the enemies of the Crown would take for to undermine it, and to
embroyle (as in former times was practiced) so flourishing a Kingdom,
notwithstanding its fidelity and constancy of loyalty known to all the world,
specially to the always sacred and Catholic House of Austria: The Viceroy
replied, that he would willingly and most cheerfully ratify and confirm all
things in the name of his Majesty, and not any their privileges, but the
general Indulgence or pardon already promised, with assurance that for the
future he would most rigorously punish all the Banditi, or any other perturbers
of the public peace, esteeming all that most faithful peeple for his Majesty's
dear children, and the most beloved vassalls of all his crowns, and should be
respected so always by himself. I thought good to display this in Italian for
such who do not well understand the Spanish, but the letter of the Viceroies
wa^ punctually to this following effect.

Most eminent, and most reverend Lord;
BY the hand of your Eminence the pretensions of this most faithful peeple of
Naples have been settled; I have granted them the great Charter or privilege
which they desired that was in the time of Charles V. which I dispatched in form,
and I again approve and ratify whatsoever that privilege of his Cesarean
Majesty contains in the name of his now Catholic Majesty Regnant: And touching
the general pardon, let it be drawn up according to their own fancy, I will
confirm it, both touching matters passed; as also for the the future: Moreover
I will punish the Banditi wi^^ all severity, who were called in by any one
whatsoever, and with greater rigor then formerly, as the chiefest pertubators
of the public peace; but finding that the conclusion of this business still
suffers delays, and inconveniences arise thence every instant, I thought good
to represent again and again unto your Reverence all this, that as being the
Father of the whole City you would intimate unto the most faithful peeple, that
from these protractions may arise, that the enemies of his Majesty may lay hold
on an occasion to disquiet this f^orishing Kingdom, and sow new divisions in
every corner, a thing which this most faithful peeple must needs be sensible
of, and it behooves them so to be; which peeple have showed them always so
zealous in his Majesty's service; I earnestly desire that all consultations may
tend to their good: Moreover your Eminence may please to intimate, that all the
inco^vences that shall grow by not taking speedy resolution to the service of
God, to that of the Kings, to the holy Church, to the Citizens, to women and
innocent children, all this shall be put to their account who shall delay the
accomplishment of that which is ^lready pitched upon, since for my part I am
ready night and day in the name of his Majesty to put every thing in execution:
besid^s I ^ave done al things that were possible in the behalf ^f this most
faithful peeple, whom his Majesty does ^steem for his sons, and the most
beloved of all his Monarquie, and I would treat them so, desiring their ease and
quietness. I put all things in your ^minences hands, whom God preserve many
years. 11. July, 1647.

Since I had written this letter I understood ^our Eminence is not in the
Carmine, I pray be pleased to return thither, and treat with the most ^^ithfull
peeple accordingly, and by our grave au^^ority to let them fully understand,
how infinitely (...) imports to put in Execution what is agreed upon, and to
cut off all delays, it will be a work wort^y of your Eminences care; I will add
no more but that I am the greatest Servitor of your Reverence,

El Duque de Arcos.


As soon as the present Letter, and the subscribed Capitulations were delivered
unto Father Filomarino, and brought back by him to the Bishop, they were
consigned by him to the power of the peeple, it being solemnly appointed, that
after the said Capitulations had bin publicly read in the Church del Carmine
in the presence of the whole peeple, Masaniello should go in company of the
Archbishop to the Castle to speak with the Viceroy.

About ten a clock the same day the repor^ being dispersed that the Accord was
finished and that Masaniello was to transfer himself t^ the Castle to speak
with the Viceroy in per^son, 'twas incredible what a multitude o^ peeple
gathered together in the great Marke^ place, besides those numbers that fill'^
the Church of Carmine, where the Archbishop sitting under a great canopie of
sta^^ hard by the great Altar in a stately chair, t^^ Capitulations were read
from the Pulpit by Notarie, where stood also on foot Masani^ello apparelled in
cloth of silver, togeth^^ with his Counselor Genovino, and Arpa^ the new
elect of the peeple: This was o^ Don Iulio, Genovino's old acquaintance the
time of the Duke of Ossuna, who at the b^^ginning of these tumults found
himself the government of Teverola, an inhabitant of the City of Aversa, and
was sent for purposely by Masaniello.

The Capitulations being read and understood, and received with ^nexpressible
joy and applause, Genovino went up the Pulpit, and with a loud voice said
these words: My peeple, these are the things which you have so long desired,
and endeavored to be procured ever since the Government of the Duke of Ossima,
but could never be had; but now by Gods special grace, and the blessed Virgin
of Carmine our Lady, we have ^btained them; Let us Iubilize for so high and
signal a blessing, let us triumph for so ^lorious a victory, let us give Heaven
due ^hanks for so dear a trophy, thundering upon ^his blessed occasion Te Deum;
to which ^ymne he himself giving the beginning, he ^ame down from the Pulpit,
and the mu^^c was pursued by two Quires, accom^anied with the deep sound of
Organs, and the sweet quaverings of diverse mu^^call Instruments, which filled
with such ^ jubilee and joy the hearts of all peeple, that a good part of the
Spectators out of tenderness did fall a weeping for excess of ^^ntentment.

Te Deum being sung with that ravishment the Bishop did prepare himself to
accompany Masaniello with his company toward the Palace to visit the
Viceroy; but (...) make this Caval^ata more splendid, and wit^ greater
magnificence and decorum, Masaniel^lo had commanded before under pain of firing
that all Masters of Families should hang the^^ windows, walls and balcones with
the riche^ silk-pieces and tapestries they had; besides, tha^ care should be
taken to have all the street^ cleanly swept which lead along to the Castle
'Twas mavelous that this thing was (...) sooner spoken, but executed by all
sorts (...) persons, as well Nobles, Cavaliers, Ecclesi^^sticks, as Merchants,
Citizens and Artizans: (...) one Gentleman disdaining to obey the co^^mands of
such a base fellow, he was persw^^ded by a well-weigh'd discreet friend of
(...) to conform, and not contract with so pow^^^full and popular a man, urging
unto him (...) examples of some Spanish Grandees (...) complied with the time,
and so became co^^queror as it were of the fury of Masan^^^^lo, from whom by
his disobedience had happily brought fire and ruin (...) himself.

Masaniello dispatched presently a (...) of his to the Castle, to acquaint the
Vice^^^ of his intention to com to parley with (...) desiring to know his
pleasure therein; the Viceroy made show to like the message and the visit,
therefore he answered, that he might com when he thought good, for he would
gladly see him.

Masaniello having shaken off his Mariners vest, which was no other but a
shirt, a wastecoat, and a linen pair of breeches, he clad himself with cloth
of silver, with a toti^g plume of Feathers in his hat all white, with a naked
sword in his hand, and mounting in this posture upon a prancing ginet, he
marched toward the Castle, he went before the Bishops Coach, attended by fifty
thousand of the choicest of the peeple, whereof the^e were ^om Foot Companies,
some Troops a horseback; upon the right side of the Bishops Coach did ride Mateo
d'Amalphi Masaniello's ^rother clad in cloth of gold, with rich sword and
dagger suitable, and upon the left side ^here rid the new Elect of the peeple,
Fran^isco Antonio Arpaia, and immediately near ^he Coach came in a Sedan the
prime Coun^ellor of the peeple, Don Iulio Genovino: the ^urther the Cavalcata
advanced, the more did peeple increase of all degrees, ages, sexes, and
occupations, wherewith all the streets were ^hronged, great acclamations and
applauses were sent up to the air, wherewith every ones ^eart did overwhelm
for the different state of plenty and freedom which they were like to have from
that condition of penury and subjection they were formerly plunged in; the cry
was in every corner, Viva il Re di Spagna, viva il Cardinal Filomarino, viva il
fidelissimo popolo di Napoli: Let the King of Spain live, live Cardinal
Filomarino, let the most faithful peeple of Naples live: with such
acclamations they entered the Castle, where before the Fountain Medina there
went to meet Masaniello in the Viceroy's name the Captain of his gar^ a
horseback, but without arms, saluting him i^ the name of his Master, and giving
him the welcome to the Palace, where his Excellenc^ expected him with much
desire: Masaniell^ returned him the salute, and 'twas observed though not with
as much courtesy, yet with a^ much gravity and few words, which being don,
Masaniello stopped, and made signs the peeple should go no further, there being
twen^ty thousand peeple already entered, and 'twa^ admirable to see how
immovable they a^ stood, and with what incredible silence: The Masaniello
lighted off his ginet, and began to speak in a loud, yet gentle tone as
fo^loweth:

My deer and much beloved peeple, (...) us give God thanks with eternal sound
of Jubilee, that we have recovered ou^ former liberty; who would have though^ we
should have come to so fair a pass? they seem dreams or fables, yet you see
they are truths and real story; let infinite thanks be given to heaven, and to
the most blessed Virgin of Carmine, and to the paternall benignity of the most
reverend Bishop our Shepherd; Well my peeple, who are our Masters? answer with
me, God: and the peeple answered accordingly, and with ready echoes took the
sound from their General Masaniello; this being don, he took out of his bosom
the Charters of King Ferdinand, and of Charles the Emperor, with the new
Privileges confirmed by the Viceroy, by the Collateral and Council of State,
and with a louder voice then before, redoubling his words, he said; Now are we
exempted and free from all Gabells, we are eased of so many weights,
impositions are taken away and extinguished; now, now is restored that dear
liberty in which rests the happy memories of King Ferdinand, and of Charles the
Emperor: I for my own particular desire not any thing, I do not pretend any
thing but your public good; the most reverend Archbishop knows well, my right
intentions told him often, and confirmed by Oaths, and as from the beginning of
our just resentments for the desire his Eminence had to see the peeple quieted,
I was offered 200 crowns a month out of his own purse, all the time of my
life, provided I should proceed no farther in the pretensions desired by us, but
should be an instrument to accommodate all things; I ever, though with many
thanks, refused that offer. Moreover, if I had not bin tied by the strong tie
of a precept to his Eminence, and terrified with the thunder of
Excommunication, I would not have apparel'd my self as you see me, I would nev^r
have shaken off my mariners weeds; for I was born such, such a one I lived, and
such a one I mean to live and die. After the fishing of public liberty which I
have made in the tempestuous sea of this afflicted City, I will return to my
Hook and Line, not reserving to my self as much as a nail for my own dwelling:
I desiring no more of you, but that when I am dead, you would every one say an
Ave Maria for me: do you promise me this? Yes, yet every one answered, we will
do it but 100. years hence: Masaniello replied, I thank you: And let me desire
you not to lay down your arms till a confirmation com from Spain of all these
privileges from the King our Liege Lord. Trust not the Nobility, for they are
Traitors, and our enemies; and upon this theme he enlarged himself in such
spiteful and acrimonious terms, that for modesties sake I omit them. He went
on saying, I go to negotiate with the Viceroy, and within an hour you shall
see me again, or at least to morrow morning; but if to morrow I be not with
you, put to fire and sword the whole City; do not you pass your words unto me
to do so? and why not? Yes that we will, they answered all resolutely, you may
be sure of that. Well, well, replied Masaniello, though what has hitherto
passed has not much pleased the Viceroy, yet his Majesty will find that he
has not lost any thing by it; only some of the Nobility our enemies have lost
by it, who will return to their former beggary, ravenous wolfs, who bought and
sold our bloods, never regarding the glory of God, the service of his Majesty,
or the common good of City or Kingdom. Now the temples of the Spanish Monarchy
shall be adorned with the most precious Crown that ever she bore upon her head;
that which shall be given him by us hereafter shall be all his, and not as in
former times; for when we gave him any treasure, it vanished away, and was half
drunk up by his Officers.

Having spoken thus much and more, he turned at last to the Bishop, saying,
Most eminent Lord, bless this peeple: The Bishop reached out his cap out of
the coach, and making two signs of the cross on both sides, he gave them his
pastoral benediction.

And thinking to go on with his Cavalcata, the number of peeple was so great,
that it filled the whole Castle, and so hindered the passage. And because going
to treat of peace, 'twas unseemly that such a confused company of peeple should
go along, Masaniello upon pain of life and of rebellion, command^d that no body
should make one step farther; whic was inviolably observed with mavelous
obedience. He advanced therefore a horseback first, and the Archbishop in his
coach with Arpaia, and Genovino, and Masaniello's brother: Being come near the
palace, where there was a strong trench guarded by companies of Horse and Foot,
and all the Balcones and windows being lined with armed men, Masaniello passed
furiously into the trench, and the Bishop after him with other horses and
coaches; and being entered into the Court, as they went up the stairs the
Viceroy was there ready to meet the Archbishop, who brought in Masaniello to do
him reverence, which he did, and putting himself at his feet, he kissed them in
the name of the peeple, thanking his Excellence for the grace he had don them
touching the Capitulations granted them, saying he was com thither that his
Excellence might dispose of him as he pleased; whether he would hang him, break
him upon wheels, or put him to any other kind of death: But the Viceroy made
him rise up, saying, he never knew him to be culpable, or that he had offended
his Majesty in any thing; Therefore he might be merry, for he should be always
well regarded by him, and with these words they say he often embraced him;
whereunto Masaniello replied, That he never had any ill designs in all his
life, but all were bent to do his Majesty service, and unto his Excellence,
whereof he called God to witness, and saying this, being come up to the
innermost rooms of the Palace they discoursed a little alone; Then came in the
Archbishop, and they all three consulted about the affairs of the City then
current, and the present estate whereinto 'twas fallen.

In the mean time there were diverse whisperings in the Court below, among that
huge concourse of peeple which was gathered together in such numbers, from all
parts and corners of the City, besides those that were first assembled in the
great yard of the Castle, which were so thick, that one might have trill'd a
bal upon their heads: the murmur did arise from some jealousies that Masaniello
might be arrested, or at least some hurt done unto him, therefore the Viceroy
thought it expedient that he might be publicly seen in an open Balcone with
the Archbishop and himself, which was don accordingly, whence Masaniello facing
the peeple said, lo, I am here, I am alive and free, Peace, Peace; at which
words the peeple exceedingly rejoicing cried also Peace, Peace; a little after
all the bells rung in the Churches circumjacent, as in the Churches of St.
Lewis, of the holy Spirit, of the Cross, and Santa Maria del Angeli, but he
not liking that ringing, commanded they should ring no longer, which was obeyed
accordingly; Masaniello told the Viceroy, now my Lord you shall see how obedient
the Napolitans are, so he bade them cry out, Viva Dio, Viva la Madonna del
Carmine, viva il Re di Spagna, viva il Filomarino, Viva il Duca de Arcos, viva
il fidelissimo popolo di Napoli: Let God live, let the most holy Virgin of
Carmine live, let the King of Spain live, live Filomarino, and the Duke of
Arcos, with the most faithful peeple of Naples, and with every Viva that he
cried, the peeple followed him, and at last he cried Muo^a il mal governo, let
the ill government die: This being don as the first proof, he tried a second
upon the peeple, and putting his finger upon his mouth there was a profound
universal silence, that scarce a man was seen to breath; afterward, for a
last proof of his authority, and the obedience of the peeple, he commanded with
a loud voice out of the Balcone wherein he was, that every soul there present
under pain of rebellion and life should retire from that Court, which was
punctually and presently obeyed, as if they had all vanished away, not one
remaining behind, insomuch that the Viceroy was amazed at such a ready and
mavelous obedience.

Many discourses being passed in the Palace 'twixt the Viceroy, the Bishop and
Masaniello, they appointed among themselfs that the Capitulations should be
printed which were demanded of the peeple, and subscribed by the Viceroy, as
also by the Collateral, and the Council of State and War, and that the Sunday
next following the Viceroy accompanied with all the Tribunalls should go to the
Dome in person, where the said Capitulations should be publicly read, and
sworn unto by solemn oath, to observe them for ever, as also to procure that
they should be confirmed by his Catholic Majesty: After this the Bishop went
down with Masaniello* having taken their leave of the Viceroy to take Coach: So
afterward the Viceroy did ratify all, as desiring nothing more then that by
his moderation and prudence the confusion should cease, and the City freed from
Bandit^, from plunderers and facinorous men; Hereupon he commanded his
Commissary general of the field, to be always at hand to receive his Orders,
which was obeyed exactly.

After this parley Masaniello swayed with more dominion then ever he did in
quality of absolute Monarque over the City, as well in civil as warlike
affairs ad modum belli, with uncontrollable independent authority till his head
was chopped off. When he parted from the Castle the Viceroy bestowed on him a
rich chain of gold of 3000. crowns value, putting it about his neck with his
own hands, although he had refused it diverse times, but afterward receiving it
by the advice of the Bishop, he was declared at the same time by the Viceroy
Duke of St. George, by a renunciation made him of that title not long before by
the Marquis of Torrecuso: and for the last seal of complement, Masaniello
prostrating himself at the feet of the Viceroy, he kissed his knee, after which
embracement, he said, Son go in peace, and God bless thee; whereupon having
taken his last leave, and going down, the Archbishop brought him into his own
Coach, going thence to Toledo street where the Archipiscopall Palace stood, in
which journey 'twas a pleasant sight to behold every window hung with rich
tapestries, carpets, curtains, and hangings, and the streets full of great wax
candles and torches, it being now one hour in the night, and the bells ringing
out in every Church that had any through all the City.

As they were com to the Archbishops Palace, while he was in discourse to
entertain Masaniello, a noise was spread abroad, that a great number of Banditi
were come against the peeple; the Marquis of St. Ermo, who was of the Family of
the Caraccio^^, entering the same time into the Town, being returned from his
Country Houses with some horsemen, which made the jealous peeple think they
were Banditi; so that there wanted but a little that the Marquis had not been
torn into pieces with all his company: But discovering himself what he was,
and being known by diverse, they went to acquaint Masaniello with all, who was
yet with the Archbishop in his palace, and the first that went was the
Marchioness of Saint Ermo, Aunt unto the said Marquis; which she did as well
to speak with Masaniello, as to desire the Archbishop to interpose and inform
him of the truth for the security of her Nephew; Masaniello had scarce
understood the substance of her desires, ou^ taking her by the hand he told
her, Lady Marquis, the least hair of his head shall not suffer; so he commanded
some of the peeple who were there present, to acquaint the Commanders and
Captains of the Militia up and down the City with his pleasure herein.

After this Masaniello thinking to return to his house in the Market place,
the Bishop desired to make use of his Coach, wherein putting himself with
Genovino and Arpaia, together with his brother, they departed.

By reason of the rumors which were spread that night, as is said already,
that a great number of Banditi should invade the City, all the peeple remained
armed, and very vigilant, for by command of Masaniello diverse bells were
sounded to that purpose, specially that of St. John of Carbonata, that of the
Market, and that of St. Augustine; the lights were also doubled that night in
all the windows, and fires kindled up and down in most streets, which made the
City as bright as if it had been at noon day: there were also triple gards
placed at every gate, who asked the names of all such that passed and repas^'d,
and examined them strictl^.

Friday the 12. of July, 1647. The sixth day.
THe condition of the coward is so vile and abject, that he trembles at every
thing that suddenly hap'neth, the least puff of wind that blows, the least
bird that chirpeth, the ^east bough that shakes, the least leaf that wags, the
least vermin that stirs does so affright him, that it fills his members with
fears, his face with palenesse, and he seems to have a fit of an ^gue, or is
like one shaking with extremity of ^old, and oftentimes if he hear any noise,
or ti^eamar, he betakes himself to his heel^* his feet proving his best
Counselors.

Such apprehensions of fears seemed to have been got into the hearts of the
Napolitans, both of the Gentry and Commonalty, the one ^earing enemies from
abroad, the other those within the City; The one stood in fear of the ^ate
usurped power the peeple had got, the peeple did fear designs, plots, and
stratagems from the Nobility and Gentry over whom they ^ad so much insulted.
Every troop of popular Squadron seemed to the gentry to be a whole Army, on the
other side any strange face that entered into the City seemed unto the
suspecting jealous peeple a Trojan horse, that would vomit out arrows and
thunderbolds, and close entrapping enemies: Hence it came to pass that so many
of the Nobles and Gentry abandoning the town, and getting into the Country,
made the Country all over to appea^ like a flourishing populous City, for not
prostituting their honors and reputation, with the^^ rich movables to the
diabolical fury of a tu^multuous unbridled rabble: But the peepl^ drew
sinister arguments from this retiremen^ of the Nobility, for they suspected
that the withdrew into the Country out of a dangerous design to join with the
Banditi, whereo^ they had an illfavour'd example upon Wed^nesday before, in the
person of the Duke o^ Mat^loni, and his brothers, besides the publ^^ noise
which flew up and down upon the wings of fame before that project was
disc^^ver'd. God forgive them who introduced (...) pestiferous an abuse.

There was taken that Friday morning a Fe^luca with six Mariners, and four
short* coat^ completely armed, one of them carrying great packet of letters,
who being bound (...) brought before Masaniello where his Squadro^ was, the
^ayed letters being carried upon (...) top of a pike, and 'twas found they came
from the Duke of Mataloni to his Secretary, and though nothing could be
inferred out of them in prejudice of the most faithful peeple, yet
nevertheless in regard of the mode of writing which was dark, and in ciphers,
and because of the former practices and malevolence of the said Duke,
Masaniello caused those six to be dragged to the rack, thinking they would detect
some new stratagems: the Mariners also were strictly examined, but upon their
innocent answers they were released, but for the other, after they had been
tortured with the ^ack most piteously their heads were chopped off.

It being blazed up and down every where that Masaniello did exercise the
office of Captain General of the peeple, and that it was confirmed unto him
the night before by ^he Viceroy, he was therefore the more feared and obeyed:
he elected another Tribunal in Toledo street, with provision of all
instruments that were required to execute Justice, and he placed there a
Lieutenant for him, who ^^at very day condemned four Banditi more ^ith short
cassocks, such as the Coursers of the ^unciatura use, which four were beheaded
upon the new Scaffold which he had commanded ^o be there erected, which struck
a great terror (...) the Coursers called in Naples Sco^^otelle.

The same morning though Masaniello had put off his cloth of silver suit, and
taken again the habit of a Mariner, yet was he obeyed and feared by eve'ry one:
he began betimes to give public audience in the Marketplace, not upon a bank,
but out of a window of his own house which looked into the Market, whither they
used to reach him memorialls and Petitions upon the ends of Pikes which were
infinite, he being with an Archibuz in his hand ready cocked, which was o^
great terror to every one who came to negotiate with him; and the more, because
the^^ were eight or ten thousand men in continual watch before his door:
there were also thousands from other places, who came (...) receive their
commands from him, and to publish his Orders, which ran all in these word^
under pain of rebellion and death; insomuc^ that it was a thing beyond all
wonder to (...) so many Commands, Bans, Commissions, an^ Orders published and
affixed to posts an walls, subscribed Thomas Anello, d' Amalp^ Capo, and
Capitan Generale del fidelissimo pop^ di Napoli, Thomas Anello of Malphi Cap^
and Captain General of the most faithf^^^ peeple of Naples: All which Orders
(...) executed with mavelous promptitude (...) exactness, a thing incredible
to the abse^^ and scarce credible to the beholders who we^^ upon the place,
that a wretch extracted out of the dregs of the peeple should in five days make
himself Patron of five hundred thousand souls, that he should bridle such a
spiritfull City as Naples, and have at his beck of all sorts two hundred
thousand Combatants, who all acknowledged him for their Generalissimo, that he
should have absolute dominion both by night and day, with the disposing of all
things according to his pleasure and fancy: Among other Orders issued by him
the said Friday morning, these following were of the number. Under pain of life
every one should cut off his great lock, and wear no Perriwigs, declaring he
had commanded this, because many Banditi were found habited like women with
Arms underneath; he renewed the Orders of the day before touching Priests and
religious men that they should not wear their upper habits; That all Friars or
religious men that were found not to be of the City should be brought before
him, to be examined whether they were true Friars, or Banditi so habited: That
upon the sounding of two a clock within night every one should retire to his
lodging, and after that time whosoever was found upon the streets should die
irremissibly without mercy. That that Friday being passed, every one should
rerire to his own shop, and that at every post four men should be for a guard,
who should have a Carlin given them, 2. measures of wine, and 20. ounces of
bread every day, and that they should change every other day, by which reckoning
in City and Suburbs the gards might amount to thirty thousand men.

And because from the beginning of the revolution many Lords, Cavaliers, and
Officers were retired with great prudence to diverse Monasteries and Convents,
as also sundry Ladies to the Nunneries, one of the first Friday Orders by
Masaniello was that every one upon pain of life should return to their houses,
and incontinently every one was constrained to submit unto, and obey this
command as far as Duke, Counts, and Marquises, Regents and Officers, else they
had exposed themselfs to the fury of the merciless rabble.

There was another command issued out, which was a most rigorous one, that not
only the Natives, but Forreners should set upon their gates the Arms of the King
of Spain on the right hand, and the Arms of the peeple on the other, and 'twas
suddenly put in execution by foren Lords, and Ministers, and Spanish Regents,
as well as by Napolitanes.

Besides the hundred and odd Banditi heads as was said before, which were
exposed t^ to the public view of the world in the common Market place, diverse
other Delin^quents were put to death this day, and acco^^ding to the quality of
their offenses, some were hanged, some beheaded, some set upon wheels, and others
shot to death. The Friday morning betimes he caused one to be baked alive in a
furnace, bacause he made his bread lighter by some ounces; and in the evening he
caused another being culpable of the same offense to be shaved close head and
beard, and so sent him to the Castle to receive the rest of his punishment, by
the Viceroy: He caused a Vintner to be hanged because he had killed a
Centinell: He caused a Sicilian to be beheaded, because he had taken fifteen
Carlines to murder a man: He caused a boy to be apprehended, who brought news
that there were four thousand foot, and sixteen hundred horse upon their march
toward Naples, which boy he sent to the Viceroy, who remanded him, and so was
hanged for an Impostor: He had seven Secretaries, and ten Ministers to punish
whom he pleased; In so much that he was feared, obeyed, and served with as much
exactness, readiness and terror, as ever any vassal obeyed the Gran Turk.

All the Banditi, and Priests of a lewd life, who by his order were taken, were
suddenly slain; and if his commands were not instantly performed, he stood with
a musket in the window, which he did make show to discharge often, but would
not. There was a good horse sent him of the value of 400. d^^kats, and he he
sent presently to the Kings stables, saying, 'twas a horse fitter for his
Majesty. He sent also the Viceroy with the said horse all sorts of provisions
for his stables. He found hid in an odd place in gold, silver, and other money
near upon a hundred thousand crowns, which he commanded should not be squa^dred
by any means, but reserved for the King; He offered the Viceroy five millions
if need were: There were mighty presents made unto him by Cavaliers, but he
would not receive the value of one farthing, saying, God deliver me from the
Cavaliers, that I may have neither peace nor truce with them. He sent a
Spaniard who had murdered one, to the Viceroy, that he would see him punished;
the Viceroy remanded him, and desired that he might be hanged in the market
place. He caused the same day two Banditi to be shot to death at Porta Medina,
for being accomplices with the Duke of Mataloni, who though he hated him in
perfection, yet he would not put his palace a fire, fearing there might be some
mine underneath, as also for an intention he had to make it a conservatory for
poor maidens.

By command of Masaniello many armed men were dispatched through all the city
and suburbs, to do their diligence to apprehend any servant, or any of the
family and kindred of the Duke of Mataloni, and of Don Guiseppe his brother:
Hereupon diverse accomplices were brought before Masaniello, whereof some were put
presently to death, others imprisoned, that being well examined, and put on the
rack, there might be knowledge had where the Duke was, and where he had hid his
goods; for none were left in his palace; as also to know other particulars.
Among these a slave of his was lighted upon, who was leading two horses very
fair ones, who fearing he should have been suddenly slain, said that he would
say what he knew or could if they spared him his life, which being promised him
he discoverd, that touching the person of the Duke he went at first to
Benevento, and afterward to Calabria he knew not whither, but touching his
goods and furniture they were hid in certain Churches, as Santa Maria de
Miracoli. Santa Maria della Stella, as also in the Monastery of the Augustines;
whereupon the said slave was not only pardoned, but well rewarded, well clad,
and feasted by command of Masaniello, unto whom he gave also the staff of a
Captain.

All this being known by Masaniello, he caused the said Churches and
Monasteries to understand, as also all other religious places and Nunneries,
that whosoever had any of the goods of the Duke of Matalini, who was such a
traitor to the most faithful peeple of Naples, they should without any excuse
whatsoever, or any delay produce them all under pain of having their
Monasteries set a fire: Hereupon the Superiors of those Churches and Convents
being shrewdly terrified, they took out all the goods of the Duke of Mataloni
which were conserved in those places, amounting to a vast quantity, and of high
prizes and value, for they were rated at five hundred thousand Crowns, so that
three hundred Porters were employed to fetch them out* Moreover, there was
found there four thousand Crowns in ready money, and all being brought before
Masaniello, he commanded that all his movables and goods should be put in a
Magazin apart hard by the great Market place, and that none under pain of life,
should touch the least rag, but the moneys should be employed to pay the
soldiers; afterward from the Monastery of the Conception of our Lady (amongst
which Nuns were hid the goods of Zavaglius) were taken by 70. Porters all the
said goods of very great value.

He commanded also that a research might be made in those houses that had their
goods and furniture burnt formerly, to see wheth^r any more were remaining
peradventure, nor was it in vain that he fell upon this design, for there were
much more found when the second inquisition was made, that were hid in sundry
dark places: nor did it avail a whit the unfortunate Masters of those goods to
have thrown them into wells, privies, grotzes, and other places under earth;
but they searched all those subterranean places, and found out great
quantities, specially Zavalios house, where they lighted upon many vessels of
silver, and bags of gold and silver, which they took out, as also out of the
Palace of the Duke of Caiuano; they searched the least corner every where both
above and below ground, as they did likewise in the house of the Counselor
Navarreta, who had hid his treasure under an Altar: they pried into the very
privies and jakes in the house of Counselor d' Angelis: they rushed into
Churches, Convents, and Hospitalls to find out the goods of Caesar Lubrano; in
some they set a fire their friends and kinsmens goods and spared none whom they
thought had inrich't themselfs by farms of any kind of gabell.

Masaniello also commanded a band of armed men to go to the Country, and
demolish also there the house of the Duke of Caiuano, and burn to cinders all
the furniture and goods that were there depositated, which was done
accordingly; the Palace of Mataloni which was in Cha^a, with whatsoever there
was therein, was pitifully set on fire; nay, the ^abble took his picture, with
that of his Fathers, and made them hoth pass the flames; but first they
mangled them most horribly, thrusting them thorough with their swords, plucking
out their eyes, and cutting off their noses and heads; and being returned to
the great Market place, they hung another picture of the Duke of Mataloni under
the body of Don Peppo Caraffa beforesaid, which was tied about a great beam,
and writ a Motto underneath, This is the Duke of Mataloni, Rebel to his
Majesty, and Traitor to the most faithful peeple; and the beam was supported
with new pillars, whereunto the body of Don Peppo was tied, and the effigies of
the Duke, with his brother Don Guiseppe, who was also hung up in picture, and
this was in the same place where the unfortunate Prince de Sanza was beheaded,
of whose so much lamented death, procured him by the Duke of Medina de la^
Torres, the said Mataloni and the house of Caraffa was thought to be the
chiefest cause; but afterward when the innocence of his cause was known, his
Catholic Majesty re-established his son in all his possessions, renewed his
Titles and Honors, with all the Demeans, Rents, and Heriots, which son dying
without children, and the estate falling to the Count of Castillano his Uncle
and Fathers brother, he was so far esteemed by his Catholic Majesty, that he
gave him a Company of Spanish Infantry, which is a very rare favor to an
Italian Cavalier; and now he has the fourth office of Trust, except the
Vicegerencies of Naples and Sicilia, with the government of Milan, that any man
has in Italy, which is the Stradico of Messina, which is a most honorable
charge; that town being the cape of the Sicilian Kingdom and Metropolis
thereof, and withal a Fort of much jealousy, being the key of that Island,
and the outer wall of all Italy, which Office is executed by the said Prince
with much praise and emulation to his enemies, for his sincere remarkable
fidelity, and rectitude in matters of justice.

After this, further commands were given by Masaniello to burn the goods of
diverse other Officers, and particularly of the Kings visitor; yet this command
was revoked by the effectual intercession of the Archbishop Filomarini; as
also it being ordered that Regent Zuffias should run the same fortune, but the
execution was suspended, and no man knew why, unless 'twas because certain
Troops of Horse were quartered at his house, which was entrenched round about.

The Viceroy all this while seeing himself ^s it were, beleaguered in the
Castle, and deprived of provision, and all sorts of victuals and refreshments,
he sent to make instances ^o Masaniello, that he might be furnished
accordingly, whereunto he condescended very readily, thereupon fifty Porters
were sent unto him laden with bread, wine, snow, fruit, flesh, Poultry,
sweetmeats, and all other things that were eatable. All peeple went up and
down the streets with as much security, and all kind of shops were opened with
as much freedom, and as little fear both by night and day, as if there had bin
no soldiery at all in the town, or occasion of outrage, so great were the
apprehensions of fear and terror, which were imprinted in every ones heart, of
the rigorous and inflexible justice exercised by Masaniello.

There arrived in the port at that time thirteen Galleys of the squadron of
Naples, and the General Gianettino Doria having sent notice thereof to the
Viceroy, with desire t^ land some men there for provision of refreshment for the
Galleys: the Viceroy inordered that he should make his address to Masaniello
which being don, he immediately commanded all sort of fresh victuals, with a
supply of moneys also to be sent the General, but with this proviso, that the
Galleys should go farther (...) the port, and that none should set foot ashore*
either soldier or passenger, no not the General himself, because he intended
to freight and send a Felluca of purpose to this end.

Because the night before Masaniello sent to the Viceroy, that he much wondered
he could not see Cardinal Trivultio all this while; a petulancy which was held
ridiculous in him. The said Cardinal was advised by the Archbishop to give him
a visit, for Masaniello was com now to that height, that he expected observance
from every body, yea from the Princes of the Church; Therefore to prevent some
rude affronts and outrages peradventure which vulgar brains are subject to
offer, the Cardinal transferred himself from the Castle to the great Market
place to visit Masaniello, which he did, by giving him the title of
illustrissimo, the most illustrious; but the first words which Masaniello told
him were laughed at, which were, The visit which your Eminence gives me, though
it be late, yet it is dear unto me. Immortal God, what could a crowned Prince
say more! it is true, that height of honor and power, with the pride of authority
and command, will raise the spirits of the vilest man. So his Eminence having
complied with his respects to his most illustrious Lordship, when he departed,
he commanded two files of Musketeers to guard and conduct him to the Castle.
The Cardinal Trivultio was scarce gone, but diverse gentlemen came from the
Castle with diverse Regalos, and presents to Masaniello from the Viceroy; much
thanking him for the refreshments that he had sent into the Castle, and they
brought him some complements also from the Duchess the Vice-queen, who desired
to know how he did, and that for her sake he would make use of those things
which were sent, and among other things there was a rich suit of apparel sent
him* a strange Metamorphosis of Fortune, and so capricious and rare, that these
things will seem incredible, and mere Romances to future ages, though all be a
true and real story.

This is as much as happened the sixth day, which was Friday.

Saturday the 13. of July, 1647. The seventh day.
HE who desires the true way to overcom and to conserve what he has overcome
let him procure by all means the obedience o^ the peeple subject to his
command, and let hi^ observe that memorable a^t of Epaminondas: most glorious
Captain among the Thebane^ who being counseled by the Oracle not to attempt a
war against the Greeks his enemies because the stars were conjured against him
for them; He being as sagacious as he was generous, by an ingenious stratagem
he escaped the influxes of heaven, and advanced himself in despite of the
malignant stars, to victory and triumph. The Stratagem was this; He writ in a
table these words, Si ducibus obedietis, haec sunt Oracula, Victoria. If you
obey your leaders these are Oracles, Victory. Upon the other table he caused to
be engraven, Si ducibus non obedietis, exitium, if you obey not your leaders
destruction. These Oracles being presented to his soldiers, and finding thereby
that their victories depended upon their obedience to their Captains, with an
unwonted courage and extraordinary obedience, bursting into the enemies
quarters, they came back triumphant.

It is no wonder then that Masaniello already pronounced and sworn Captain
General of the Napolitan peeple, was advised that there was no other means more
effectual and sure to overcom, and triumph over any Projects traced against
his person or the peeple, then a punctual obedience, which was showed him from
the first instant of his command, and which he so exacted, that the least act
of disobedience was punished with death, as being ^eld a capital crime and
irremissible; judging that at the beginning of his government, this obedience
was more necessary unto him then ^he bread that he did eat, for the maintaining
and continuance of his new authority: Hence i^ ca^e ^o p^sse, that it being com
to the ears o^ Masani^llo, that upon Friday night before some went up and down
the streets to sound the Shopkeepers, and compose them to see their slavery,
the first thing he did at break of day was to publish by sound of drum and
trumpet* and fasten orders upon posts and walls through the principal streets,
that upon pain of life those seducers should be revealed; and some of them being
found out and appeach'd, they were all hanged upon gallowses, set up before
those shops where they committed the offense. The^ were gallowses set up also
in diverse other places of the City, whereon diverse were executed that day: among
others two vassalls of the Duke of Mataloni, who were discovered to have
brought some letters in the soles of their shoes, which because they were
written i^ ciphers, were imagined and adjudg'd to contain matter of rebellion,
or some sinister Counsels and incitements to sedition, merely upon these
suspicions only, for no body could understand the said letters, or prove any
thing ou^ of them; they were hanged up nere porta Capoano. In fine his commands
were executed without any expostulations or examination at, which transformed
all men to wonder, to se^ such a vulg^r fellow so suddenly crept up to be so
reverend, they knew not for what, no^ what would be the end of his usurped
dominion.

It was told him upon Saturday that there was a great burglary and theft
committed in the Palace of the Prince del Colle Cavalliero di Casa di Somma, at
first they were thought to be some of Masaniello's Squadron, but after a
diligent examination they were found to be some of the Banditi, who had taken
sanctuary in a little Church, where they were dragged out, and executed in the
public Marketplace.

The same morning there came before him for justice a poor wench whose father
had been killed, and the brother of him that had killed him being there
present, he cried out, that if the fact were pardoned, he would ^ake her for
his wife without any dowry; but that kind of Marriage did not please
Masaniello, because the young maid abhorred it in regard of the blood of her
Father: therefore he obliged the brother of the murderer to find out two
hundred Crowns within four and twenty hours for the young maids dowr^, and so
the offense should be remitted; be^^des, he should have the place of a Captain
in the Soldadesca: so all parties being agreed, the sentence Masaniello gave
did terminate the business. A little after this, a murderer was brought
before him, who had been a friend to Perrone, and giving him time of
confession, he sentenced him to death, and that his head and his feet should be
chopped off, and his body dragged up and down the streets; another Bandito was
used likewise just in the same manner.

It was intimated the same Saturday morning, that two Squadrons joined with
seven hundred Spaniards, should go abroad that morning to find out the Banditi
which (as advice was had) were in bands together in diverse places ready to
invade the City: H^ caused a Proclamation of Grace to be published, that what
Bandito soever could discover any such plot, should be absolutely pardoned,
provided he was not depending upon the Duke of Mataloni. He commanded tha^ all
Artizans should work openly in their shop^ and not within their houses, as also
that (...) Merchants should follow their business, (...) be ready within half
an hours call to tak^ Arms.

About dinner time a Message was brough^ him from a Cavalier upon some business
(...) consequence; but he answered, I have nothin^ to do with Cavaliers, for
God has put (...) here for the peeple, and turning himself to the peeple, he
said, My peeple pray for me, and pr^^serve me well; for if you lose me, woe be
(...) you.

There came down the same morning from the Countries about Naples innumerable
peeple, and among them there came women with stafes upon their sholders, and
naked swords in their hands, bringing with them their children armed also with
something or oother, proportionable to their bigness, and they came all to the
great Market place to do homage to Masaniello, and to be redressed by him for
diverse grievances.

But while Masaniello was busied in such exercises, Genovino and Arpaia,
accompanied with the brother of Masaniello, went to the Castle to put the
Viceroy in mind of his former engagement of promise made upon Thursday night,
that he would com upon the Sunday following to the Archepiscopall Church, with
all the Tribunalls of the Chancery, the Council of State and War, with the
royal Chamber of Santa Chiara, accompanied with all the civil and criminal
Judges of the great Court of the Vicaria; in presence of whom and of the whole
peeple an Oath should be taken to observe with all punctuality the Capitulations
of the grand Accord to perpetuity, which Oath was to be taken by the Viceroy,
and all the said Tribunalls.

The day following after dinner, Masaniello being to go to the Castle to take
the Viceroy and conduct him to the Archbishops Palace, he first commanded a
Proclamation to be published, that under pain of firing, every one should cause
the streets to be swept clean before their doors respectively, where the
Cavalcata was to pass, as also to adorn all the windows, Balcones, and walls
with their best sort of furnitures, all which was obeyed and don.

In the mean time the Viceroy sent two of his best horses with rich furniture,
and led by two of his servants to be at the service of Masaniello and his
brother, who being mounted upon them, and apparelled both in cloth of silver,
Masaniello carried in one hand a naked sword, in the other the Charter of
Charl^ the Emperor, and his brother carried the capitulations made with the
Viceroy, to be read publicly, and sworn unto in the Archbishop^ Palace* There
rid in their company the new Elect of the peeple Francesco Arpaia, and Iulio
Genevino, besides diverse others of the civillest sorts among the peeple: And in
regard of the huge multitudes of peeple which innumerably increased through all
the streets, and compassed them on all sides, so that they could not pass
forward or backward, Masaniello with a loud voice commanded that none upon pain
of life should make a step further or else go back, which was accordingly
obeyed* so they rid with a Trumpet still sounding before them toward the
castle, and being arrived thither, and brought to the Palace of the Viceroy,
having entertained themselves a while with him, they came down with the
Collateral, the Council of State, and other prime Officers of Authority, who
all coaching themselfs did advance before toward the Archbishops house: ^i^st
of all in the said Cavalcata there were many Trumpeter^ a horseback, then a
choice Troop of one hundred horse, then Masaniello and his brother, after them
the Elect of the peeple, and old Genovino, who by reason of his great age was
carried in a Sedan; after these came the Captain of guard to the Viceroy, and
immediately after the Viceroy himself, with his Pages, ^^quayes and spare
horses, and his guard of Germans, with a (...) number of Gentlemen and
Cavaliers, domes^ic and adventitious, and encompassed with a n^mberlesse throng
of people, who together with the Viceroy, cried out with loud (...), Viva il
Re^i Spagn^, which voice (...) and re-ecchoed al^ the way, and all (...) out
for joy in ^v'ry Church as they (...), which ^^ll'd every ones heart with (...)
and pleasure: all in general, final and (...) cried out, Viav il Re, but ma^y
(...) Resenza gabell^, let the King (...) gabel; and (...) Spaniards (...) cry,
Viva el Rey* que ya pued^ (...) the King live, for now he may say he is King.
In passing through the piazzo of St. Lorenzo, Masaniello stopping there a while,
and with him the whole Cavalcata, turning himself to the peeple he cried out
with a very loud voice, Viva Iddio, Viva il Re di Spagna, Viva il Cardinal
Filomarino, Viva il Duca de Arcos, Viva il fidelissimo popolo di Napali:
whereat all the peeple took the word, and with strong Ecchos cried out Viva,
Viva, doubling and redoubling the sound with incredible exultations.

Being com in this order, and with these applauses to the Bishops Palace, and
being all dismounted, then the Viceroy with all his gentlemen came: upon the
entrance into the Church he was met by the Archbishop with all his Canons,
Chaplains and Officers, which made a splendid equipage; Then they went to the
great Altar, where the Archbishop being set in a kind of Throne, as also the
Viceroy, and all the Tribunalls who were there attending Cavalier Donato
Coppola Secretary to the Kingdom, did read with an audible voice the
Capitulations desired by the peeple for a final Accord, which being signed by
the Viceroy, the Collateral, the Counsel of State and War, Masaniello standing
all the while afoot upon the steps of the Archbishops throne, who to the
wonderment of all added, and took away corrected and interpreted all things as
he pleased, no man interrupting or replying unto him: So after the Articles
were read, a solemn oath was taken by the Viceroy, and all the forementioned
Ministers and Officers of State, to observe and accomplish the said
Capitulations to perpetuity, promising also, and swearing to procure to have
them confirmed by his Catholic Majesty: all this was don when two quires of
music sung all the while with most exquisite voices, Te Deum laudamus, which
while 'twas a singing, Masaniello was observed to swell with a kind of glory to
have attained his ends, with so much felicity and applause, yet he carried
still in his hand a naked sword, and sent diverse arrogant and ridiculous
messages to the Viceroy: The first was, that from thence forward, he would
continue to be Captain Geneof the City: The second was, that by virtue thereof
he intended to go with a guard, and to give Patents to all Officers of War and
Arms: The third, that he would dismiss from the Castle all Cavaliers. These and
such like messages he sent the Viceroy singly and severally, and there were
affirmative answers brought back, for not to disturb things with Negatives; But
the gentleman that delivered these messages, made an apology for himself
privately in the ear of the Viceroy, for indeed most peeple there did blush, or
laugh, or jeer the impertinences and malapartnesse of Masaniello.

While these messages were a sending, Te Deum was ended, then Masaniello began
to reason sometimes to good purpose, sometimes senselessely. He said that the
most faithful people of Naples were naturally spiritfull and vivacious, and
were so esteemed by all Netions, but they had almost quite lost their wonted
magnanimity and courage, by the heavy weight of so many exactions and Gabells
which were imposed upon them from time to time, not by their Catholic
Majesty's, but by ill Ministers and their own Compatriots. And although for the
loyalty which he always bare, and will ever profess unto his King, he hitherto
tolerated every thing, to avoid all stains of disobedience, yet considering the
benefit of those impositions redounded rather to satisfy the ravenous lusts of
Officers and Courtiers, and of others as well Forreners as Natives, whereby they
became excessively rich, and thrive by sucking the very blood of the peeple,
yet finding the City generally inclined thereunto, he took a resolution to cure
her of this malady, as also the whole Kingdom of such a contagion, which was
hurtful not only to the most faithful peeple, but to his Majesty also his
liege Lord, insomuch that of the bread they gave him he scarce had the crust,
they themselfs reserving the pith and substance to fill their insatiable
appetites; Hence it came to pass, that the more they gave the King, the more
his wants still increased, though in sixteen years he had given him above one
hundred millions, which had been sufficient not only to have conquered
Flanders and France, but to have put under his feet the unlucky Moon of the
Ottoman Empire: therefore for the future all the public Donatives that should be
given the King, care should be taken that his Majesty should have the true
benefit thereof, and not be misapplied to enrich others: and hereof your
Excellency (meaning the Viceroy) may be well assured; insomuch that all these
things considered, and cast into a true balance, he was well assured, that he
should not only not receive any blame from the King his Sovereign Liege Lord, or
any mark of disobedience, but he should gain the reputation and applause of a
most faithful vassal, seeing that whatsoever he had don was for the further
service of God, of his Catholic Majesty, of your Excellency his Vicegerent, of
the whole City, of the Peeple, and of all the Kingdom. During this discourse he
so heated himself, and protested with such a fury and excess of zeal, that the
words proceeding from him so heartily and empha^ically, made all the peeple to
stand amazed, and surpised with a kind of dumb astonishment: at last all that
were within the audience of these words up and down the Church, which was as
full as it could thwack in thick multitudes, gave a loud general applause.

Then he said, that now he had brought his honest intents home to his aim, he
would return to his former calling to be a Fisherman again, to demonstrate unto
the world, that 'twas not his own interest he levelled at, but that of his
King, Country, Peeple, City and Kingdom, had induced and pricked him forward
to undertake so dangerous a tas^; therefore he fell a tearing that cloth of
silver suit he wore, with a great deal of fury, going to the Archbishop and the
Viceroy, taking some of the pieces thereof and laying at their feet; but he was
hindered to tear all: So all being terminated at this solemn meeting, and
nothing left undone, taking his leave of the Archbishop and Viceroy, who betook
themselves to their Coaches, but Masaniello with his brother Genovino and
Arpaia, with all the rest of the Foot and Horse, re-accompanied them to their
homes; and the Viceroy being brought to the Castle, caused all the Ordnance to
fly off: so Masaniello with all that huge brigade of peeple returned to the
great Market place, and with high ceremony ended the seventh day, nothing
having occurred remarkable that night, but the exact diligence of all gards in
all the principal posts of the City, and the splendour of the lights that were
put in every window.

Sunday the 14. of July, 1647. The eighth day.
IT is a thing impossible to express the rejoycings of the peeple of Naples
for the Capitulations of peace which were signed and sworn unto the day
before, which ended not that day, but they continued upon Sunday following: The
Articles were printed, and fixed through all places of the City, that all
things might be manifested to the world: every one did contend who should
express greater contentment, such a kind of general jubilee was among them,
insomuch that it drew tears from some, which falling upon the ground, made those
flowers of joy to spring up which the heaviness of former times had caused to
fade.

And because the beginning of this Reformation, and consequently of this joy,
proceeded from Masaniello, and from his stout undertakings, therefore was he
extolled with highest praises by every one, and cried up to be L^b^rator
Patriae, to be the freer of his Country, and the asserter of public liberty,
from the tyranny and gripes of so many ravening Wolfs both in City, Court and
Kingdom; yea, of King and Crown, who glutting themsel^s with the common blood
of the peeple, increased their wealth by the beggary of others* and all this
was effected (not by the hand of some invincible Emperor, or some warlike Prince,
but) by a poor young fellow, by a barefooted Fisherman: This made it fa^ more
admirable, and to attribute it the more to God, qui infirma mundi eligit, ut
fortia queque confundat, who chooses the weak things of the world to confound
the strong.

With the praises which the common peeple gave generally to Masaniello,
concurred also the just acclamations of diverse of the Nobility and Gentry, of
many sorts of Officers, of Ecclesiastics, and all Religious Orders; ther^ were
many thanks and much honor given also to the Archbishop, who took so much pains
to atone, to sweeten, and accommode al^ things, and had overcom so many
difficulties* therefore there were special acknowledgements made to him, next
to Masaniello.

After the publication of the said Capitulations and general agreement, being
affix'^ every where, that they might be exposed to every ones eye and knowledge,
the City of Naples seemed to have a new face, so that there was no more fear of
any war, of further combustions, and consequently no need of any arm^d bands,
or cautions for the mai^tenance and defense of the people from the insultings
of enemies, yet nevertheless it seemed expedient to Masaniello, to continue
still a military power a foot, therefore he commanded that every one should stand
firm to his post: Nor was it unnecessary or superfluous policy, because the
City after so general a convulsion could not presently recover her former
health, nor after so many combustions could she be secure till the fire had
been quite extinguished.

Hence it came to pass, that the Soldadesca remaining still up and down the
^ity, Masaniello went on to command more like an abso^ute master or Tyrant then
a Captain General* He commanded that under pain of life every one should
discover if any goods were depositated in their hands, of those men whose
houses were burnt: whereupon much wealth was yielded up out of Churches,
Monasteries, Hospitalls and Nunneries. It being known that that Sunday morning
four Banditi were fled for Sanctuary to the Church of Carminello among the
Jesuits; he sent a considerable band of armed men to encompasse both cloister
and Church, whose gates being shut, the assaulters made their way in by
pickaxes so that a great hole being made in the wall, they rushed in, and took
one of them, chopping off his head presently, as they did afterward to the
three other: And because one of those Fathers being zealous of the Church
immunities, had made some resistance for the preservation of those miserable
men, he was so mortally wounded that he died within a few days after.

Notice being also had that within the Monastery of Nuns called della Croce
di Lucca much of the goods of Caesar Lubrano were depositated, because he had
two daughters tha^ were Nuns there, Masaniello commande^ some Captains to
extract thence, and to bring into the public Market place the said goods with
order that if the Nuns made any resi^stance, to threaten them with the firing
of the Monastery: This was put in speedy execution and the soldiers repairing
thither, unhinged the gates of the Religious House, because they were denied to
be opened; which struck such terror into them, that one of them was like to
have breathed her last, which being related by a flying messenger unto the
Archbishop, his E^minence was moved, and therefore sent about it to Masaniello,
who to excuse himself answered he knew nothing of it, but that it was done
without his order, therefore he would give condign punishment to those Captains,
as he did, and commanding them unto him, he inordered they should be examined,
and so executed: notwithstanding that, he was resolved to have those goods,
which were accordingly delivered him by those holy Si^ters, being so much
affrighted.

An act much like this Masaniello acted the same morning upon Sunday, which was
thus; He had given strict command that under pain of life none should dare to go
out of the City without his express license, and because the most illustrious
Caffarelli Archbishop of San^a Severina had necessary occasions to remove
himself from Naples, where he resided then, to Calabria, to visit his own
Church* he went in a ^hort habit, and without a cloak (there having ^een such
an order in force, and yet most ^trictly observed) to the house of Masaniello
to obtain leave of him. When he beheld him, he said, Che vuoi monsignore mio
bello? What wilt ^hou have my fine Lord? he answered, that I may safely pass
to my Church of Santa Seve^ina in Calabria, with your good leave: my lord,
answered Masaniello, crying ola, let ^our hundred of my men go to accompany,
and serve my Lord as far as his Archbishopric* The Archbishop thanked him,
saying that he ^ent by sea; By sea said he? then let 40. Pellu^ucas be
provided to attend my Lord Archbishop, he answering there was no need, because
he had alrea^y taken four for the transport of himself and his family, which
were sufficient, and to have more would be an encumbrance unto him, and
incommodious. Well, well, your Lordship may do what you please, replied
Masaniello. A^ leastwise you shall not refuse to acc^pt of this small bag of
double pistolls, which he pr^sented unto him, saying, Take this to defray ^he
change of your voyage; The prelat thereupon (...), and giving him many thanks,
he refused them a good while, saying he wanted them not; but he was constrained
with threats to receive five hundred, which he did for fear of hazarding his
head with denial to suc^ a capricious and frantic man: And giving him a
license in writing, he told him, and embraced him, my Lord, go with safety. A
little after ^ gentleman of A^versa upon a business of hi^ own came to sp^ak
with him, who was of the Family of Tufo, and havi^g dispatched him, and given
him a kick, he said, Go thy ways, (...) make thee Prince of Auversa.

He commanded that morning the house of a widow Baker to be burnt, because she
had made light bread, being six ounces less in weight of the thirty six which
were established, that every loaf should weigh. He caused also the head to be
chopped off of an Abbot called Nicola^ Ametrano, to Carlo Vitale, and to
Spiritell^ Musico, as being dependents of Mataloni; likewise he commanded a
little after the like to be done to another, who was Comrade to Ame^rano. He
gave out order that it was his pleasure that the Jesuits, the Certosini, the
Benedictans, the Friars of Mount-Olivet should pay ^ great sum of money for the
service of the ^eeple; He commanded also to call before him ^o the same effect
many rich men, and asking them first if they were loyal to their King, and
^hey answering that they were, he made them ^ubscribe to a writ^ng, wherein
every one bound himself to pay him so much every one a part, ^elling them he
did that for to observe the lord given the day before to his Excellency, (...)
make a Donative of six millions of gold to (...) Majesty; toward whom being
desirous to ^evv himself the more devoted and faithful, (...) put out a
proclamation, that none under ^in of life should go for the future habited
ac^^rding to the mode of France, and that every ^e should have care to put the
Kings arms, and ^at of the peeple on his doors, and that every ^e should tend
his shop, yet with arms ready on all occasions.

The same Sunday morning Pizzicarolo a ^^sen of Masaniello, went to the Palace,
say^^^ openly, that he began to dote, and that he (...) told him if he did not
give over his fyrings (...) burnings, his throat would be cut by his own
friends: This Pizzicarolo had more power over him then any other, for he took
no meat from any hand but from his: he obtained of Masaniello in behalf of the
Count of Conversano a guard for his person, goods, and families, and Palace; he
restored unto him two great Hampers full of money and Plate, which he had taken
away from him, and it was sent to the Castle of S. Elmo, where he gave
Pizzicarolo twenty Zecchins, and so the Count went suddenly with diverse other
Cavaliers into a gallie to preserve themselfs.

The same day toward the evening Father Rossi a Theologue of the Archbishops,
wen^ with a message to Masaniello, desiring hi^ that the peeple might lay down
their Arme^ for he was secure enough now without so^^diers, and that he might
retire himself a while to Posilipo to recreate himself, or any when else his
Excellence would please: This Messag^ please him well; so all things necessary
we^^ provided, and diverse bands of superfluou^ soldiers were disbanded, which
was don with^out any grumbling, or questioning whatsoe^ver he did: But at last
he grew odiously prou^ he would will, and unwill a thing at the sam^ instant,
and his head began to turn, being mounted so high, and from a simple Fisherma^
made himself a kind of Monarch. All peepl^ obeyed him, Viceroy, Bishops, and
all, who him the swinge, and humor'd him all the while, not doubting but he
would at last break his own neck, as it happened right; thereupon when the
Squadron of Napolitan Galleys came from Genoa, the Viceroy left to him the
giving leave of letting them arrive at the Port, he saw all the City armed, and
depending on his beck, acknowledging him to be their absolute Commander, and
Captain General, by an exact and a strange kind of implicit blind obedience,
so ^ha^ no King whatsoever could desire more Allegiance from his own vassalls.

Hence it came to pass, that from an humble, judicious, and zealous spirit
which reigned ^n him, he became proud, a fool, and a tyrant, putting out such
rigorous Proclamations, commanding so many heads to be chop't off, so many
Palaces to be burnt, merely sometimes ^o please his own capri^nio, and to make
himself formidable; he would go a horseback alone, and fetch the round of the
City, imprisoning and torturing whom he pleased, shutting up of shops,
preaching, and railing against the Nobility and Gentry, not sparing the
Viceroy himself, but threatening to take off his head; yet when he spoke of
the King he named him with a great deal of reverence, taking off his hat, and
bowing his body; but one thing made him very ridiculous, that he made boys,
very mean fellows Captains, Campmasters, and other Officers of War.

In the afternoon diverse of the peeple, and some Commanders, made by Masaniello
himself, sent to complain to the Archbishop, that they were clap't in prison
for small matters, for a thing of nothing, and some were commanded by him to
have their heads severed from their bodies, and taken off as so many capons.

Thereupon his Eminence spoke unto him by way of advice, and because he saw him
obstinate, he desired him at least to defer the execution of those men till the
day following* it being not fitting to shed humane blood upon a Sunday, and
stain the holy Sabbath wit^ such sacrifices of cruelty: The Bishop spoke to him
with that candor and winning affability* turning his discourse to other
facetious stories, that he obtained of him a deferring of the execution, and to
recreate his tired spirits, he wished him to go to take the refreshments and
pleasure of Posilipo for a while: He embraced his counsel, but desiring that
his Reverence would accompany him, he in scorn of such a companion, desired him
to go before, and he would quickly follow.

A little after Masaniello went from the Market, accompanied with a huge
company of Pleb^ans to the Castle all the way a foot in a loose habit, having
one stockin on, and the other off, without band, hat, or sword, but running on
like a mad man; he made a sign to the Sergeant Major of the Spanish Guard, that
they should make no noise; so he entered and spoke to the Viceroy that he must
eat, for he was ready to perish for hunger. The Viceroy looking upon his
servants, said, Traigan da comer al Senor Masaniello: Bring something to eat for
the Lord Masaniello; no Sir, (he replied) let us go take fresh air at
Posilipo, and leat us eat together there; for I have provision already: and
saying this, he caused diverse Mariners to com in with diverse baskets of fruit.
The Viceroy did excuse himself as well as he cold, praying him to excuse him,
because he was troubled with a great pain in the head, and he would be very glad
of his company at any other time; so he gave order presently, that his own
Gondola should be made ready to wait upon Senior Masaniello, where when he had
imbarqued himself with diverse Mariners, he was attended at least by forty
Fellucas full of Musicians, and other sorts of men fit to give him some
recreation: There ran to the mole of Chiaia many thousands of peeple to see the
spectacle: in his way he gave order that some should go to the regular Canons of
St. Lateran, to draw thence such goods that he had unders^^od were conveyed and
depositated there, which was don and brought to the market pl^ce: As he went
along he threw pieces of gold into the sea, which the Mariners swom after, and
duck'd to take up, to afford him pleasure and pastime.

Then he fell to eating, or r^ther to feasting, for he had very choice
provision ^n the Gondola, and they said that before he came back he had drunk
twelve bottl^s of wine called Lachrymae Christi, but the operations of that
wine you shall read in the next days work, which was Monday: when he was
returned to Naples, that evening he gave all those of the Gondola, and Fellucas
which attended him, ten measures of wheat every one.

The comedy of this day had not been complete, if the wife of Masaniello had
not also acted her part; who about the evening went to the Castle clad in cloth
of silver with a chain of gold and other jewels and galla^tries, which the
Duchess of Arcos had formerly sent her: She went in a very stately Coach of
the Duke of Mataloni's, which was made for the day of his marriage, and it was
a very rich and magnificent piece, valued at least at eight thousand crowns:
she was accompanied with diverse gentlewomen of quality, who complied with the
times, and they went also richly adorned: But these were no other then
Masaniello's mother, and two sisters, and other kinswomen of his, all
Fishermens daughters; a little boy his sisters son bare upon his sleeve a kind
of arms, which showed that his Uncle was Captain General of the City of
Naples: When she came to the Viceroys Palace, there were Sedans sent for her and
her company, with a guard of Halberdeers, Pages and Laquays to attend them: Then
were they brought into the Duchess, where they found a great deal of welcome,
and dainties. The Duchess presented her with a rich Diamond, and the Visitor
General took the young boy often in his arms and kissed him: Masaniello's
mother meeting upon the stairs with Cavalier Cosmo Fonseca the grand Ingeneer,
who used to make Epitaphs, she told him that he should tell the Viceroy that her
son feared no body but God, and his Excellence; therefore he should do well to
send unto him to refrain from so much fire and blood.

Masaniello being returned from his recreations at Posilipo, was so heated with
the abundance of wine that he had drunk, and with the heat of the Sun, that he
fell into a kind of dotage and foolishness: He sent presently to speak with
the said Fonseca, and inordred him to make diverse Inscriptions engraven in
marble to this effect; Tomas Anello of Malphi, Prefect, and Captain General of
the most faithful peeple of Naples, did order, that his command should be no
longer obeyed, but only those of the Duke of Arcos: And thus ended that Sunday.

Monday the 15. of July, 1647. The ninth day.
THe thoughts of Masaniello began to grow so vast and extravagant, as also so
instable and unquiet, that not containing himself within the compass of his
sphere, and those huge honors and authority he had climbed unto, but he would be
more then the sea, who though a raging element, yet is contented to hold
himself within his bounds; he would be more then the Heavens, who pass not
their circumference; more then the Sun, who never goes out of the Ecliptic; He
had an ambition (had it been possible) to inslave the whole earth, to tame the
ocean, to debell the world, to confine the stars, and see the rising and
setting of the Sun.

He was so blinded with arrogant desires, that they took from him the solace of
his sleep, they kept him from seeing the precipices wherein he was like to fall
from the top of his arrogant designs, and the miseries which attended his
greatness. The stairs whereby we ascend to honor, are of glass, the top is
an earthquake, the descent a precipice, and authority does commonly discompose,
and stound the mind of man, specially one of a base carat* and low extraction,
like a Monkey clad with scarlet; Honors serve some men only for their ruin, as
long hair served Absolon to hang himself: He that is far from Jupiter need not
fear his thunderbolts.

If Masaniello that Saturday on which a Te Deum was sung in the Cathedral
Church, had renounced all his usurped authority and power into the hands of the
Viceroy, and returned, as he said and swear he would, to his former vocation of
selling fish, he had deserved that the Napolitan peeple should have erected him
Colosso's, and statues of gold, to the eternal memory of his magnanimous
undertakings, brought to such a mavelous perfection: but a boundlesssse
ambition did cast such a mist before his eyes, that breaking the reins of
reason, upon the Lords Day it self his brain began to turn, doing so many acts
of foolishness and cruelty.

Yet many reasons were urged for the continuance of his command: Some say that
he was willing to resign it, but that by the instigation of his wife, and
others of his kindred, he took a resolution to keep it still. Others say, as
having heard himself say, that he continued still his power, because if he left
it, he was to expect no other but death, he was so generally hated by the
Nobles and Gentry for having burnt and destroyed so many palaces, and wealthy
substances, put to death so many of al sorts, etc. Others say, that he
continued still his authority, because sense opposed reason, being allured with
the sweetness of rule and power.

Yet if his said usurped dominion had bin attended with that humility,
discretion and judgment wherewith he began his reign, he might peradventure
have continued longer, from that precipice whereinto he tumbled in so short a
time. His ruin befell him, because he had broken out into a thousand
delirium's and fooleries, which were the causes of his tyrannical
comportments, and consequently of the universal hatred at last of the peeple,
which for many days depended totally upon him, as upon an Oracle, and obeyed
him as a sworn and natural King.

But if one be curious to know the reason why he fell into that stolidity, I
could tell him, that it was a fatal drink given him by the Viceroy to this
effect, which had an operative virtue to work upon his brain, and distemper his
pericranium, that so by becoming odious and ridiculous, the peeple might do him
away. This is the opinion of many, which whether it be true or no, I suspend my
opinion. It may be well thought also, that that sottishness and foolerie which
befell him, proceeded from excess of vigilance, care, watchings, and not
eating; for he seldom slept, and he did eat more seldom; his head being so full
of thoughts, and new businesses coming like heaps upon him continually, whereof
his little narrow understanding (being exercised before to sell little fish
only) was not capable: The extreme joy likewise which possessed him, to become
from a petty Pleb^an* Monarch of such a city as Naples is, might have
distempered a greater and more seasoned brain then his. Hence it came to pass,
that (putting himself upon his bed) he hardly could close his eyes, but he would
suddenly rise up again, telling his wife, Let us be Lords of Naples, and then
let us sleep: Up, up, let us put our authority in practice: then going to the
window he would face the Guard, and call upon them, employing them always upon
some design or other, that his usurped dominion should not be idle; what marvel
then is it, all these things being well considered that he should fall into such
foolish extravagances; such are the rewards of ambition, wherewith she uses to
recompense her followers.

Domitian the Emperor fell into such a foolish humor, being hanted by this
Spirit, that he would be reverenced and adored by the Senate and peeple, as a
kind of God. Primus Domitianus se Dominum, and Deum appellari jussit. Domitian
was the first who would have himself called a God, says Eusebius, therefore a
parasiticall Poet of that age, to comply with his Genius, said and sung of
him, Edictum Domini Deique nostri,
Quo subsellia certiora fiunt.
Alexander being tyrannized also by this fury of ambition, was not ashamed to
call his mother whore, in saying that he was begot by Jupiter Hamon.

What shall we say of Xerxes, who being moved thereunto by the vastness of his
thoughts, and capricios of his unsettled aspiring brain, threatened darkness to
the Sun, and a yoke to the Ocean; who will not tax Caius Caesar of
foolishness, and being not inferior at all to Xerxes in rashness, when being
angry with heaven he invented a certain engine, whereby he thundered against
thunder, and lightened against lightning, persuading himself that that distic
did very fitly quadrat with him; Jupiter in caelis, Caesar reget omnia terris,
Divisum imperium cum Jove Caesar habet.
Such an extravagant passion as this did predominate and discompose Masaniello,
and more easily, being a creature of so low a degree: Upon Monday morning he
appeared upon the market place a horseback, with a naked sword in his hand,
striking many men, and driving them before him, though no cause offered.

Being thus domineering in the Market place, an old and well qualified Captain
called Caesar Spano of Don Prospero Tuttavilla's Regiment, told him, that he
would be pleased to command that the soldiers of that Regiment might be
consigned unto him, who were Germans and Walloons, which was don accordingly;
but he struck and wounded the old Captain, giving him two cuts in the face,
saying, be gone when I bid you. Turning then his horse head he went toward
Toledo street, who meeting with one that was told him was a spy, he suddenly
without forming of any process caused his head to be chopped off; He met with
another, who complained that his wife was suborned, and carried away by an old
bawd, and asking where she was, said in such a house, he went thither
presently, and found her there with another man; he commanded her to be hanged,
and him to be broken on wheels, which was presently done.

Afterward he met about the Church of St. Joseph with the Prince of Cellamare,
chief postmaster of the Kingdom, a discreet and well tempered Prince, and
complemented very much with him, saying, if he knew any, though he were the
greatest potentate in the world, who favored Mataloni, he would chop off his
head: A little after there passed by the Duke de Castle di Sangro Don Ferrante
Caracciolo, a Cavalier of high esteem in Naples, and not using any complement
toward him, he ran a great hazard of his life; for he made him com suddenly
out of the Coach, telling him, that a new Elect was to be made over the five
Piazzas of the Nobles, and he would publish an order that they who deserved that
degree should go decently habited, and that the Cavaliers who were sellers of
Votes, should retire to their dwellings barefooted, and so he dismissed him:
This being don, he transferred himself to the Kings Stables; and there being
many horses there, he said these are particular men's horses, but the grooms
told him, they were his Majesty's, and that the Lord Carlo Caracciolo the chief
Master of the horse in the Kingdom, had the charge of them: he asked what
Carlo? what master of the Horse? am not I every thing, not acknowledging any
body, and saying this, he took for himself and his friends six of the best
horses, but before he had half brought them to the Market place, recollecting
himself and thinking better on it, he sent them back to the Kings Stables. The
same time he dispatched a band of armed men to the Hospital, and to the Church
of the Zoccolanti, commanding them to deliver up the goods of the Visitor
General of the Kingdom, Don John Ponze de Leon, and carried them to the Market
place, but returned them again when he was told of the kisses he had given his
Nephew in the Castle the day before: yet he told him there would be now no
necessity of a Visitor General, because he himself would look well enough to the
abuses of things, and to the public theefs of King and Country.

In regard of these, and sundry other high insolences, which were too tedious
to insert here every one a part, the whole City tremble, yea the Viceroy
himself, when he understood of such extravagances and innovatious, because he
thought that now all things were terminated by that message which was sent him
by Masaniello the day before by the Archbishops Chaplain, that he would make a
full resignation unto him of all authority, besides the agreement solemnly made
and sworn unto upon Sunday before, with the stipulation of the Articles in the
Dome, so that apprehending more fear then formerly he retired into the inner
Palace, causing it to be fortified, and increasing the guard: And it was held
convenient by all to com to some galliard resolution, considering how that
foolish and phrantic fellow pursued his authority and tyranny, to dispose of
all things according to his own fancy, both in the Courts of Justice, as also
in the Council of War, in the Grassa, and all other Tribunalls, as if he were
an absolute Prince, or some imperious Monark.

After dinner he sent a peremptory order to Don Ferante Caracciolo, before
mentioned, that under pain of life, and the burning of his Palace, in regard he
had not in the morning com out of his Coach to do him reverence, that he should
come to speak with him in the Market place; he sent also another message to Don
Carlo Caracciolo Master of the Kings Horse, to do the like. They answered
prudently and with sleme, that they would do what he desired; but holding it a
diminution to their honor, instead of going to the Market place, they went to
the Castle, having settled their houses and goods, to complain to the Viceroy,
and deplore the abject and sad condition wherein they were plunged, with all the
rest of the Napolitan Nobility and Gentry, and so related unto him the arrogant
Propositions that were sent them by Masaniello, so they concluded to die
sooner, and to be torn by wild horses then to live, so vituperiously in such a
baseness and servitude, therefore 'twas high time for all the Napolitan
Cavaliers to awake, to rid the City of this intolerable ugly Monster; for it
was a great blemish to their reputation to suffer him to sway so long.

The Viceroy was extremely vexed to hear such pungent reasons and grievances,
but he durst not apprehend the fool, being so fortified and backed by the
besotted peeple all in Arms; and while they were discoursing of the means how
things might be remedied, behold Genovino and Arpaia came into the Castle, who
bitterly complained also against Masaniello.

The first spoke very despitefully of him, saying that he could not prevail any
thing with him, but he found himself every moment in no small danger of his
life (for he threatened to take off his head) more then he was in the time of
the Duke of Ossuna, and they say that he had often given him some blows, yet he
was constrained to dissemble and mollify things. Arpaia also had his
mortifications and dangers, he had publicly received a box from him, and all
peeple were terrified by him, and affronted, yet they knew not how to right
themselves, he having at his devotion a hundred and fifty thousand Combatants
well armed, although the major part, and the most ^ivill sort of these did hate
him, specially since ^he Sunday evening, by reason of his inhumane cruelties;
therefore 'twas determined by the advice of Genovino and Arpaia, that all the
peeple should make their addresses to the Viceroy, and assure him, that they
not only mislik'd, but hated the carriage of Masaniello, and not to obey him
any longer, but every where, and in all things to depend upon the commands of
his Excellence, provided that they might be well assured of the observance of
their Privileges and Infranchisements already granted and sworn unto,
whereunto the Viceroy condescending very readily, declared by public Band the
confirmation of them; so they were to meet at the Piazza of St. Augustine, which
they did, but a great number, fearing the frowns of Masaniello came not
thither, but he was gone again in the Dutchesse's Coach to Posilipo: afterward
two resolved to chain him, and keep him in safe custody all the residue of his
life in some Castle, for they were not inclined to put him to death for the good
things that he had operated for the public good.

When Masaniello was returned from Posilipo, he went to the office of the
Galleys, and provided Captains and other Commanders for them, though they were
far from the Port; and thence transferring himself to his house in the Market
place, he threatened diverse Captains to take off their heads, as also to
Genovino and Arpaia, because they had not attended him that day: nay, he
threatened fire to the whole City, because he perceived they had lost the former
respect and obedience which they did use to show him.

Being extreme hot, he threw himself into the Sea water in all his clothes, and
being com out again, he began to shake his sword up and down, and do diverse mad
pranks, nor could any, no not the Archbishop himself, bridle him, or keep him
within any bounds, insomuch that the Captains of the peeple were constrained to
apprehend him, and put him in ho^d, with a band of soldiers for his guard in
his own house; and while all that night most part of the peeple did confederate
and take Arms in behalf of the Viceroy, an unlook't for accident did
cooperate to conclude this Tragecomedie by means of Marco Vitale, a hardy
young man, who was Secretary to Masaniello, who under color of remedying, did
rather foment those tumults and firings, as shall be read in the passages of
the ensuing day.

Tuesday the 16. of July, 1647. The tenth day.
THe foresaid Marco Vitale being early got out of the Castle where the Viceroy
kept his Court, and where he slept that night, and going about nine a clock to
Chiaia the next gate to the Castle, and royal Palace, this Vitale knowing not
any thing of what was intended in the behalf of the Viceroy against his Patron
Masaniello, and meeting with some armed bands in the way confederated and
ligu'd together, he proudly asked them, why, and by whose authority and license
they had taken up Arms? one of the Captains answered him stoutly, 'twas by
order of the Viceroy, Vitale impertinently replied, Well, well, I am going now
to the Market, and thy head shall pay for it: The Captain drew out his sword,
and gave him a shrewd slash, which being seconded by a Musket shot, the
unfortunate wretch fell down dead, and being put in a sepulcher in the next
Church of S. Lewis, among the Minims, the peeple now adhering to the Viceroy,
dragged him forth, chopped off his head, and putting it upon a pole, they dragged
his body up and down the gutters of Naples.

That day was the feast of the glorious Virgin of Carmine, a holy Day of very
much devotion among the Napolitans, specially among the common peeple, that
Church being situated nere the great Market place.

Masaniello entered into this Church, having a little before escaped out of his
irons, where he attended the coming of the Archbishop Filomarino to sing Mass,
and celebrate the day as he used annually to do, and he was scarce come to the
Church door when Masaniello meeting him full butt, said, Most eminent Lord, I
perceive now that the peeple will abandon me, and go about to deprive me of
life. I desire that for my consolation, and of all this peeple, a solemn
Cavalcata be made, together with the Viceroy, with the Collateral, and all the
Tribunalls of the City to this most holy Lady, for being thus to die, I shall
die contented: Therefore I beseech your Eminence to address this letter of mine
to the Viceroy, the Bishop embraced him, and much commended his devotion; and
suddenly dispatched a gentleman to the Palace with the said letter to the
Viceroy, and going afterward to the great Altar of the Lady of Carmine, he
leaned there, intending to sing Mass, the Church being full, and replenished
with peeple as much as it could hold: Masaniello going up the degrees of the
Altar, and taking a Crucifix in his hands, he recommended himself with much
tenderness unto the peeple; that they should not forsake him, commemorating
what he had don for them, he aggravated the difficulty of the design, the
danger he incountred withal, the hatred of so many thousands by reason of his
fiery punishments, and the conclusion at last of the whole business in that
very Church. Then a little while he fell a doting, and accused himself of the
badnesse of his life past, exhorting every one to make the like confession
before the feet of his ghostly Father, that Gods anger might be appeased, and
because he fell into many ridiculous expressions, and some savouring of heresy,
his guard forsook him; And the Archbishop not enduring to hear him, being in the
very act of celebrating the Mass, he wrought so much that he got him down,
which being don, he did prostrate himself before the Bishops feet, praying his
Eminence that he would please to send his Chaplain to the Castle, to advertise
the Viceroy, that he was willing to renounce his command unto his Excellence;
which the Bishop promising to do, he caused him to be conducted to a Dormitory
to be dried, for he was all in a sweat, and to repose awhile, thinking him
worthy of compassion: so the Bishop returned to his Palace.

In the mean time Masaniello being refreshed, and gone out into a great Hall, he
was leaning over a Balcone to take the fresh air sea-ward, some hardy gentlemen
rushed in, accompanied with much peeple, who having first entered into the
Church of Carmine, cried aloud, Let the King of Spain live, and let none
hereafter under pain of life obey the commands of Masaniello: and going thence
to the Cloister under pretext to speak with Masaniello, and negotiate with him,
they found him almost all alone, and hearing some body crying Masaniello, the
unfortunate wretch meeting with those who were conspired to dispatch him, he
told them, Ye go perhaps in search of me; Behold me here my peeple: So they
discharged four musket shots at him every one apart: the first were Salvador,
and Carlo Cataneo brothers, Angelo Ardizzone, and Andrea Rama, who were four of
the principal that slew him: so he fell presently upon the earth, crying after
the first shot, Ah ungrateful traitors! And so he breathed his last. Hereupon
a butcher came and cut off his head, which being put upon a lance, they went
into the Church of Carmine, where there were ten thousand peeple, and thence to
the market place, crying out, Let the King of Spain live, and under pain of
life let none henceforth name Masaniello. Masaniello is dead, Masaniello is
dead; and discharging many archibuzzes, ad terrorem without ball, the common
peeple were so affrighted that they lost their spirits quite; and seeing
themselves headless, they skulk'd here and there, not daring to do the least
outrage unto them who flew their Captain General, that was so much feared,
obeyed, and reverenced: Insomuch that they went securely up and down the
streets, with his head upon a pole, and the boys dragging his body up and down
the channells and public ways, where there was money thrown to them that drew
him, by many, specially by the Gentry, who all this while durst scarce peep out
of their houses, or appeer abroad publicly: So they got a horseback, and went
to the Castle to attend the Viceroy, and give him the joy, who entertained them
with infinite demonstrations of contentment. The Archbishop went also thither,
who after he had com from the Carmine, had scarce reached his own palace, but
the tidings of Masaniello's death was brought him, which made him go directly
to the Castle to acquit himself of those duties of congratulation which were
due to the Viceroy, who sending very strict Orders abroad that the street
Captains should be in a perfect equipage and readiness at his command, and that
upon pain of life they should not obey any body else whatsoever. He commanded to
apprehend the accomplices of Masaniello, as was don; as his wife, his sisters,
his kindred; and being all made prisoners, they were brought up to the Castle.
And because his brother Matteo was gone abroad to Benevento with more company,
to take (as 'twas given out) the Duke of Mat^loni, there were armed bands
dispatched thither to apprehend him, and conduct him to Naples, which was don,
and he was committed to the Castle, though afterward to please the peeple, he
with others were set at liberty, as shall be delared hereafter.

There were armed bands sent also to the market place to bridle the peeple, and
guard the goods that were there depositated, belonging to diverse owners.

These good Orders being given, the Viceroy was exhorted by the Bishop, and by
all the Nobility, and Ministers Royal, to show himself publicly up and down
the streets; Whereupon the Bishop and he mounting on horseback, attended by
all the Counselors, Ministers, Officers, Nobility and Gentry, with all the
Tribunalls, being well guarded with Horse and Infantry, they went to the chief
Church to give God thanks, and the most glorious protector of Naples S.
Gennaro, whose holy head and blood was taken out and put upon the high Altar,
where extraordinary thanks were given for the tranquillity which was
re-obtain'd by the death of so base a fellow, who by the secret judgments of
God, had made himself so formidable, that he terrified the whole City: a clear
instrument, it cannot be said otherwise, of the just indignation of God, being
offended with the sins of that City, who (as sometimes he punished the Egyptians
with small contemptible creatures, as flies, and frogs) did correct, humble,
and chastise the City of Naples by so vile a Plebean.

From the Church the Cavalcata passed to the Market place, where the Viceroy
did again by sound of Trumpet confirm the Privileges granted by Charles the
fifth, together with the Capitulations; he was received with extreme exultances
of joy by all the peeple, who loudly cried out, Viva il Re, viva il Duca d'
Arcos; Let the King live, live the Duke of Arcos, whereunto others added, Let
Filomarino live, the restorer of his Countries peace: they gave also thanks to
the most holy Mother of Carmine, and so they returned into the castle very
joyful, and afterward every one unto his own home.

The shops were suddenly opened, the Spanish Soldiers took their arms again,
and the dispersed gards up and down returned to their former posts, but that in
the castle was redoubled with Walloons, and every one did with exact reverence
submit unto the Viceroy, to whose prudence, patience, and dexterousnesse,
joined with the vigilance and indefatigable assistance of the most reverend
Archbishop, the preservation of that City may be attributed; for if his
Reverence had not strongly and industriously interposed in the business, the
whole City had been like to have been destroyed with fire and sword, as it will
appear by a copy of the following Letter, written by a Napolitan Cavalier,
one of the prudent'st Patriots of the whole Town, sent to a Gentleman a friend
of his, resident at Rome, wherein also there is a relation made how San
Gernnaro, the Protector and Patron of Naples, did appear, which did
prognosticate peace, tranquillity and happiness to the Napolitan peeple: The
tenor of which Letter was as follows: Dear Sir,
THis morning I was to do my observance to the L. Cardinal the Archbishop
Filomarino, and I have reverenced him as much as possibly I could, as Liberator
of his Country, who after he had done me sundry favors, told me, that
yesternight the popular tumult ceased, conducting with himself Tomas Anello the
Captain General of the peeple, and all Capitulations were subscribed and sworn
unto, whereof I will send you a copy by the next. This quietness was
miraculous in a manner, for the many circumstances that attended it, whereof you
shall have distinct advise; that which I can say now unto you, is that from the
mouth of the Lord Cardinal himself the glorious San Gennaro was seen over the
great Church of Carmine, with a sword in his hand, and there were many persons
examined upon Oaths about this Vision. His Reverence also saw as he went to the
Church of Carmine a most bright star, which gave him undoubted hopes of peace
and quietness, which God has pleased to restore to this place by his
Intercession, for he kept all the while the will of the said Masaniello in his
fist, as it were, insomuch that he did few things but what his reverence
pleased and commanded; and he was so prudent, as not to propose any thing, but
what was fit to be obtained for the universal good. In sum, he has given unto
his Catholic Majesty our Sovereign Lord the Kingdom, and has so confirmed it,
that for the future there is no fear of any combustions, and this people is so
well contented with the abolishments of the gab^lls, that they will be able to
defend themselfs against all the world. The said Lord Bishop may be said to
have given life to all the Nobility, because the enraged peeple would have taken
away their life's, he has given quietness and sustenance to the poor, because
bread is made here at thirty seven ounces, and all other things are in mighty
great abundance, and very cheap: To conclude Sir, a new heaven, and a new earth
appears here, and it evidenly appears that the Lord would have it so.

Your most devoted, and most obliged Servitor. Astorgio Agnese.




In conformity, and by virtue of the p^ace aforesayed, many Nobles and
Cavaliers were seen to pass every day along the streets to the Castle in their
Coaches, showing themselfs unto the peeple, from whose sight they had kept
themselfs hugger mugger before. The Ladies also went up and down with their
fardingalls, which formerly they durst not do, by reason of Masaniello's order
to the contrary, yet they moderated their expenses, and train, specially those
who were used to gain by the Gabells.

The same time that Masaniello was slain, there happened two accidents, the
first was, that the head and foot of Don Peppo Caraffa remaining still, exposed
to public view in an iron grate, upon the gate of San Gennaro, with an
inscription, Th^s is the head of Don Peppo Caraffa di Mataloni, Traitor to his
Country, and of the most faithful peeple of Naples, which was don by the
command of Masaniello, as was said before in the successes of the fourth day.
There was scarce news had of the death of Masaniello, but that in that
confusion of peeple, four gentlemen adventured, being kin to the family of the
Mataloni, to go boldly to the said gate, and in a commanding way, though there
were 1000. soldiers thereabout, they got a ladder, and climing up, they broke
the Iron grate with the Inscription, and took out the head, which they carried
in a fair silver basin, covered with a silk towell, and brought it to the next
Parish Church, called San John de Porta, delivering it to the Curat of that
Church, John Baptista Iulino, and caused it afterward to be put in a leaden
box, and that an authentic Instrument should be made, ad futuram rei memoriam,
by a public Apostolical Notary authorized by the Court of Rome, called Don
Maria de Iuliis: within the said Church there were for eyewitnesses, Erasmo
Mastello, Gennaro de Piece, Gio. Baptista Piccirillo. The four gentlemen who did
this hardy act, were Girolamo Laudata, brother to the Duke of Marzano, and
Cavaliers, Gastani sons to a Carrafesca mother, Don Scipion, Pietro Antonio
Rastaldi; Gio. Baptista d' Afflitto, whose names are inserted in the said
Instrument to perpetuity.

The second accident was, that Masaniello a little before his death began to
feel the pulses of the richest men up and down the City, demanding of them many
thousands of crowns, because he purposed, as he gave out, to make five millions
of gold for the King, which he had promised to his Excellence already by way of
Donative: which millions were effectually to be made up out of the moneys found
in the burnt houses, and a contribution of the Cape Merchants and Citizens of
Naples, which he had effected within a few days, had he not died, therefore
'twas questioned whether his death tended more to the service or disservice of
Spain.

Amongst those rich Merchants he had sent to one Gaspar Roomer, a most rich
Flemin, who to prevent the firing of his house, sent twelve thousand crowns
unto Masaniello, and so retired to a very fair house, four miles out of the
City, a place called la Barra, carrying with him all his best movables, and
goods he had in Naples. To this Merchant he sent Savino Converso of the
Carmine, a great confident of his the same Tuesday, the day that he was slain;
with an order of his in writing, at sight whereof, he was to consign unto him
5000* Zecchins, for the service of his Catholic Majesty, since that he had
grown so rich out of good bargains he had from the Viceroys from time to time;
Roomer could not tell how to avoid the complying with his desires, and obey
them; so he delivered so much money in ready gold to the messenger, who leaving
a receipt behind him, and returning to Naples, he understood, as he passed by a
little Church hard by the Carmine, of what happened to Masaniello, so he
embarked himself in a Felluca, and went away with the moneys to Rome; thereupon
the Merchant sent spies up and down to find him out: at last by the help of
those of his Order, for he was a Friar, he had notice where he was, and so
recovered much of his money.

That Tuesday in the evening, was brought to Naples the brother of the said
Masaniello, and committed prisoner to the Castle, together with his mother, and
as they passed, all cried out room, room for the Lady Duchess of Sarda; With
the brother of Maesaniello were brought four heads of his companions, who would
not yield themselfs, but make resistance with musket shot, and nine were taken
alive, the rest mortally wounded, or put to flight.

In this manner ended the life and Empire of Masaniello, having foretold it
himself the ninth of July, the week before, being the third day of the
Revolution, when going up to the Market place, he told the peeple, that what he
did, was for the public benefit of the City, and he knew well, that when he had
finished the work he should be slain, and dragged up and down the streets of
Naples; yet he desired the peeple should remember him, and they answered we will
all die with thee. And so it happened, that having confirmed the interests of
the City upon Saturday, and caused their privileges, and the confirmation of
them, to be subscribed and sworn unto by the Viceroy, and all the Counsels, he
was the third day after assassinated, and haled up and down the streets; his
head was thrown into a ditch, called the corn-ditch hard by the house of
Ardizzone, and his body cast into another ditch between the gates of Nolana and
Capoana.

THE MANIFESTO Of the most Faithful peeple of Naples.
THe most faithful peeple of this City and Kingdom of Naples, says, declares,
makes known, and manifests to all peeple of what dignity, state, degree, or
condition soever they be in Christian Religion, that this most faithful peeple
having professed, and professing still true fidelity to the Catholic Majesty of
their King, and finding themselves laden with diverse excessive burdens of
heavy Impositions and Gabells, equalling almost the prizes of the commodities
themselves, and there being no cessation of new ones every year by the
Ministers of the said Catholic Majesty, the greatest part whereof were imposed
by the voices of the Nobility and Gentry, and with violence of penal mandates
and imprisonments: having also within these few years of War (which his
Catholic Majesty has had) leavied from them one hundred millions, whereby this
most faithful peeple was, and is reduced to such an extreme necessity, that
the greater part of them were ready to famish, and the Fathers, Mothers, and
Husbands were constrained at very low rates to expose the most dear treasure of
honesty, and chastity of living, by reason of those hard and violent exactions
of the said Gabells, for which, peeple of all sexes were cast into prisons,
executed, and forced to pay under pain of excessive punishments, there being
promised on the contrary to the Nobility, and powerful persons, an exemption
from the said Gabells and Impositions; whereby many of them became extremely
rich, by renting and farming the said Impositions; The said Nobles and royal
Ministers and Officers being permitted further to offend the persons, and
possess the goods of the said peeple, insomuch that a company of poor and
little children to whom these pressures were revealed, with weak canes and
sticks did appear before the most excellent the Duke of Arcos Viceroy of this
Kingdom and City, upon the 7. day of July of this present year, 1647. for to
have the peeple eased of the said onerous exactions, with whom this most
faithful peeple concurred with Arms in hand for the defense of their
Privileges, and were permitted without incurring any punishment to resist
those that were the Authors of these burdens and damages: And his Excellency
the Viceroy having taken notice hereof, together with the Collateral and
Council of State and War, was pleased to abolish the said Gabells and
Impositions of this City and Kingdom, and also in remuneration of the perfect
and lively fidelity of this peeple, demonstrated so often by their
acclamations, Let the King of Spain live, as also by their actions, affixing
the effigies of their said King in all the principal places of the City,
whereby their Privileges were confirmed, and promised to be also confirmed
within the space of three months by his Catholic Majesty, giving leave in the
interim to this faithful peeple to keep their Arms still afoot, and all this
being solemnly sworn unto by public stipulation in the great Cathedral Church
of Naples, and in the presence of the most Eminent her Archbishop Filomarino:
And this being concluded, and agreed upon, it was treated by some of the royal
Ministers, and other male-contented persons, for their own private and
particular interests, to make it appear that this was don against the will of
this most faithful peeple: And whereas when they would have represented all
this to his Excellence the Viceroy in the royal Palace, they were suddenly
assaulted by Musket shot and Archibuzzes from the Kings Soldiers, thereupon
they were constrained to take Arms again for the defense of this most
faithful peeple the 21. of August last past, but always with these cries, let
the King of Spain live, with other demonstrations of love and Loyalty toward
his Majesty. Whereupon his said Excellency granted new graces and privileges,
remedying also those things, which were the causes of grievance to this most
faithful peeple, and so reduced again this City to peace and universal
tranquillity, by the mediation of their most reverend Archbishop aforesayed,
who went up and down this City on horseback, assuring this most faithful
peeple of the said peace and quietness, another solemn oath ensuing thereupon
from the said Viceroy, within the Church of Santa Barbara, which is in
Castlenuovo, the seventh of September, 1647. Now expecting the confirmation of
all the said Graces and Privileges from his Catholic Majesty, on the first of
September, the report being going abroad suddenly, though doubtful at first,
that his Highness, Don John of Austria his Majesty's Son was to arrive at this
Port, with a royal Army, this peeple did run with an universal applause,
thirsting to see so noble a personage, being of the blood of her most beloved
King, and when from day to day they hoped to see him, it was represented unto
them that he would not dis-imbarque, if this most faithful peeple would not lay
down their Arms, which was suddenly don, although according to their
Privileges they might have refused to have don it; insomuch that upon Saturday
in the morning the fifth of the same month, there appeared not one armed
person throughout the whole City, but there was an universal quietness; And
as they were greedy to see such a Prince from whom they expected graces and
favors, upon a sudden about midday this City was occupied by the royal
Soldiers by force of Arms, entering into many Monasteries and Conservatories,
violating Virgins, and committing other exorbitant excesses; and at the same
time the City was assaulted, and battered with above 8000. Cannon shot from the
three Castles on every side, and by above forty vessels and Galleys for many
days and nights continually, and since that time to this, whereby so gentle,
and noble a City, the garden of Europe, was like to be made even to the ground,
with all her most noble Edifices, Churches, Monasteries of both Sexes, with
other places of piety, and her Inhabitants extinguished against all piety and
Religion; but the blessed Lord did not permit that such cruel and fierce acts
of his Catholic Majesty's Ministers should have the effect of their desires.

Wherefore this most faithful peeple has been constrained to have recourse to
the natural remedy for their own preservation, and having no hopes otherwise
of quietness, or that the royal Ministers would perform what they promised so
often; 'twas thought therefore necessary to fly first to the divine Majesty, to
the most glorious Virgin his Mother, and to the blessed San Gennaro, and to all
the other Saints, who are Protectors of this noble City and Kingdom,
supplicating and invoking them to assist her in her just defense, praying also
with entire zeal the holiness of Christ's Vicar, the sacred College, and
Prelates of the Church, the Majesty of the Emperor, of other Kings and
Republiques, of Princes, Dukes, Marquesses, Counts, Barons, with all other
Dignities and Titles whatsoever, or degrees constitututed, and every faithful
Christian, that as well by prayer, as all other means they can and shall know
to be necessary, they would please to afford their help and fafavour, for the
protection of this most faithful peeple in their said defense, and besides the
remuneration which they may expect from the goodness of God in an Act of so
much Justice and Piety, this most faithful peeple shall be ever bound to do
the like or greater courtesies unto them according to their power in all
occurrences.

In Naples, September. 17. 1647.
FINIS.

