Universal Love.

Being an EPISTLE Given forth by the Spirit of God, Through his Suffering
Servant Will. Gibson.

AND Is to be sent into all Nations and Countries, where the Lord God has
raised a People to worship him in Spirit and in Truth; to be read in his Pure
Fear, in their public Assemblies and private Families, for their Edification
and Comfort.

Printed in the Year, 1671.

Universal Love, etc.
ALL Friends every where, who have believed in Christ Jesus, the true Light,
which lights every man that comes into the World, that all men in him might
believe and be saved: Whose Understandings he has opened by his Spiritual
Light, shining in your hearts; and thereby has given you to know your Duty
toward God, and Man; and thereby has drawn you to confess him before men, and
to make public Confession and Profession of the Worship of God, which is in
Spirit and in Truth. All in the same Pure Spiritual Light, steadfastly continue,
Waiting, Walking, and Abiding; that so every one of you may receive Strength
from the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, to perform your Duty unto him in all
things; yea, to serve him with your whole strength, as he has commanded; and
to do that which is Just, Righteous, and Equal unto all People, with whom you
have to do: That so you may shine as Lights in the World; and that your Light
may so shine before men, that they may see your good works, and Glorify your
Father, which is in Heaven: Christ the true Light says, No man lights a
Candle, and puts it under a Beshel, (that is, he does not hide or cover the
Light) but sets it on a Candle-stick, that it may give light unto all that
are in the House. So see that your Light be not hid, veiled, nor covered; but
that it may shine forth in its Splender and Brightness, leading and guiding you
into all Truth, according to his Promise, who said, I will send you the Spirit
of Truth, and he shall lead you into all Truth: And this the Lord God has
fulfilled unto a little Remnant, and is fulfilling it daily, and will fulfill it
unto many Thousands, who yet ^it in Darkness, under the region and shadow of
Death: Glory to his Blessed Name for his tender Mercy, which he has mightily
shed abroad in this our Age, in and through the Light Christ Jesus, who is the
Way to God the Father; who is made manifest in us, to take away and destroy all
Sin, because it is of the Devil, and is against God, and Grieves and Dishonours
him; therefore will God have it taken away and destroyed by Jesus Christ his
divine Wisdom and Power; that so Man and Woman may be wholly freed from that
Corruptible Bondage, which the Devil has brought them into, by leading them
into Sin, which has separated them from him, and withheld his Blessings
from them; that so again they may be a Free People, as it was in the beginning,
before Transgression was: And this is the Glorious Liberty of the Sons and
Daughters of God, which Christ did restore many into in the Apostles days,
which Work he is now Gloriously carrying on in these our days; Glory, yea,
Glory be unto the Lord our God forever, for the same. For, now the Children of
the Lord, are taught by him; and his Sons and Daughters are led by his Spirit
into all Truth; and the Peace of all such is plentiful as a River, whose
Streams never fail; and such can sensibly say, Good is the Lord, and worthy is
he to be Feared, Loved, and Served for evermore.

So all Friends, who have taken a Profession of the Holy Name of the Lord God
upon you, walk worthy of that Holy Call, wherewith the Lord, in his tender
Mercy, has called you. And in all your Buying, and Selling, and Exchanging of
God's good Creatures, in Markets, and Fairs, and in all other places, abide in
the Pure Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, that therein you may be a sweet
Savor of God unto his own Witness in the hearts of all People that see you and
hear you; all keeping in the Doctrine of Christ, who said, Let your yea be yea,
and your nay nay, in your Communication; and what is more comes of Evil: So
all keep in sound Speech, which the Spirit of Truth does lead into; that so you
may all Glorify God in buying, and selling, and exchanging of his good
Creatures, that so he may Bless you in the use of them; for, his Blessing is,
and will be, upon the Faithful. So, let all words be spoken in the Pure ^ear
and Counsel of the Lord in buying and selling, and exchanging, and in all your
Handicraft Trades, and Labors; and keep out of that which is superfluous and
needless; and so your Words and Actions will be Few, Sound, and Savory, without
any Deceit; and this will minister Grace unto the Hearers: And Blessed are all
those that so do; their Substance is, and will be Blessed.

And all Friends, that Travel up and down in the World, about your Occasions,
and come to lie, or be at Inns, Victualling-houses, or Taverns, where Beat,
Wine, Ale, or other strong Liquors are sold; keep in the Pure Spirit of the
Lord God, that thereby you may be preserved Pure and clean unto God, in the use
of eating and drinking of God's good Creatures; that so, whether you Eat or
Drink, or whatsoever you do, you may do it in the Pure Wisdom of the Lord God,
to his Glory; And not to drink in excess, to spend God's good Creatures upon
unclean Lusts; but to be true Witnesses for God against all such things, where
ever you (...), that so God's Blessing you may all feel in your Business. Be
not Drunk with Wine, said the Apostle, but be sia'd with the Spirit.

And all Friends, in your particular (...), in your daily Labor and Business,
all watch in the H^ly spirit of God, that the Enemy of your Soul may not (...)
your Minds into Lightness, Vain-words, nor Laughte^, nor Idle-jesting, nor
Anger, Wrath, Strife, nor Business one against another; but that you may live
in unfeigned L^ve together, and serving one an other in the same; (...) being
subject unto their own Masters, serving (...) with Eye-service, but with an
Upright Heart, as unto Gods For, whatsoever (...) any man does, he shall
receive a (...) of the ^^rd, whether he be Bond or Free: And Masters giving
unto their Servants that which is right in the sight of God; and (...), as they
would be done unto: And Children obeying their Parents in the Lord, which is
just and right in the sight or the Lord. The Eye of the Lord is over the
Righteous, and his Ear i^ open unto their Cries; but the Face of the Lord is
against every one, that does Evil.

And all Friends, that (...) Parents of Children, walk ye before them in (...)
Wisdom of the Lord God, and be good Examples unto them in all things; directing
their Minds unto the Principle of God, when they are capable to receive
Direction: And let not your Fleshly Affections be drawn out, by the Enemy of
your immortal souls, to encourage your Children in Wildness, nor any
Unrighteous Word or Action; but still, in the Wisdom of the Lord God, watch
over them, and show your Dislike unto the Evil in your Children; and seasonably
(in the Wisdom of the Lord) Reproving and Correcting them for the Evil, and
Admonishing them to that which is Good; not in Rashness, nor Fretting; but in
that weighty Spirit of the Lord God, which will keep your own minds Cool and
Temperate; and that will not harden your Children's Hearts, nor provoke them to
Wrath against you.

And Friends, Strive not so much to get great Riches in this World, for your
Children, as to bring them up in the Fear of the Lord God; for, if they come
into the Fear of the Lord God, and Serve him, though you have little to leave
them, yet will the Lord God provide for them; and if they do not Love, Fear,
and Serve God, much outward Riches will do them no good; but they will be hurt
by it, as we may see many are at this day, who had outward Riches left them by
their Parents; who were not trained up by their Parents in the pure Fear of the
Lord God; but contrariwise, in Pride, Sports, Plays, Games, Vain words,
Lightness, Wildness, Swearing, Lying, and Drunkenness, etc. and so, growing up
in Wickedness, which took root in them in their Youth: They spend their outward
Riches, left unto them by their Parents, upon their Ungodly Lusts, and so
Grieve and Dishonor the Lord the more thereby; and so, it had been better for
them, that they had never had it.

And all Friends every where, Keep in the Pure Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ,
which will keep you all Meek, and truly Lowly and Humble in Heart and Mind;
that your Adorning may not be that, of putting on of Rich or Costly Apparel;
but that it may be the hidden Man of the Heart, in that which is not
corruptible; even the Ornament of a Meek, Pure, and Quiet Spirit, which with
the Lord God is of great Price,

And be you not, nor your Children, Conformable unto this World, and its
Fashions, and Customs, and Manners, which are Corrupt, and Vain, and
Changeable, and abundantly Sinful, in Riotousness, Gluttonny, Drunkenness, and
Superfluity of Apparel; while they suffer the Poor to lie languishing in the
Streets, for want of a Supply of those things which are needful: And this is a
crying Abomination in England, and many other Parts of that, called
Christendom, which is a great Shame to the Bishops, who are called, Reverend
Fathers in God; a Name very unfit for their Unmerciful, Ungod-like, and
Unchrist-like Nature: For, God is Love, and those that dwell in him, they dwell
in Love; and Love does feed the Hungry, and clothe the Naked with a Garment. So
the Bishops, Priests, and Rulers, and Rich, and Fat, and Wanton People, who
suffer their Poor Neighbors, yea, and their own Church Members, to suffer want
of Food and Raiment, (while they are Eating, and Drinking, and clothing, in
excess, without the Fear of God) have not a Habitation in God, who is Love, nor
in Christ Jesus. So be not you like unto them, but keep in the Wisdom of the
Lord, in putting on your Apparel, and in all things else, that you may preach
forth Righteousness in the whole course of your Life, and manner of your
Conversation.

And all dear Friends every where, who have been called by the Lord God out of
the worships of the World, which are vain, into his own pure Worship, which is
in Spirit and Truth; continue steadfast with the Lord in all things, I tenderly
beseech you (as moved by him)

Oh Friends! You that have been moved and commanded by the Lord God of Heaven
and Earth, to withdraw your selves from the false Teachers, who are set up by
men, and not by the Lord God; whose Work has been, and yet is, to preach up
War, Strife, and Persecution, and to set People one against another, to destroy
one another. O keep your Testimony pure unto the End, that so you may all
receive a full Reward of the Lord God.

O Friends, you know what War the Priests have prepared against us, since the
time the Lord, in his tender Mercy, let us see their Deceit, and called us out
from among'st them, and constrained us, to forbear putting into their Mouths:
What Havoc and Spoil have they made of our Goods, and imprisoning of our
Bodies (diverse until Death?) But O how has the Lord born up a Remnant (who
loves him and fears him) as upon Eagles Wings! And has made us to bear
joyfully the spoiling of our Goods, and the imprisonment of our Bodies; Glory,
yea, Glory unto his Holy Blessed Vame forever.

So all be valiant for the Lord God, and his Worship, which he has called us
into; and have an Eye unto the Recompense of Reward, which the Lord God has in
store for those who continue in Well-doing unto the End. So the Lord God
Almighty strengthen you all with his Mighty Power, in your inward Man; and let
not an Evil Mind of Unbelief spring up in any, to distrust the Lord concerning
outward things: For, he who feeds the Ravens, and clothes the Grass, and takes
Care for Sparrows, he has provided for us, and does and will provide for us,
if we do abide in Faithfulness unto him, he will not suffer us to want that
which is good for us, that all the Faithful are fully satisfied in: And many
have deep Experience of his Fatherly Care over them, which has begotten a
depth of Love in their hearts unto him; by which they are made strong in the
Faith, to follow him through the greatest Hardships: And so we know him a God
near at hand, Mighty to Save; and do endure Afflictions with Cheerfulness,
because we do inherit his Mighty Power, by which we are made Conquerers over
Hell, and Death, and all the Rage and Fury of Man.

And all dear Friends in England, and elsewhere, who have been, and yet are
under great Sufferings, in the Spoil of your Goods, and Imprisonment of your
Bodies, for your Pure Obedience to the Living God, in meeting together to
Worship him in Spirit and Truth: Happy are you, and great is, and will be your
Reward, if you continue in Well-doing unto the End.

O Friends! Rejoice in the Lord, who has given you Ability to suffer for his
Glorious Name's sake; knowing, that it is not only given unto us, to believe in
Christ Jesus, but also to suffer with him, and for his sake; and if we do
suffer with him, we shall also Reign with him: But if any should refuse to
suffer with him, they cannot Reign with him; For (said Christ) he that denies
me before men, him will I deny before my Father, which is in Heaven: And he
said, Whosoever does forsake Father or Mother, Wife or Children, Lands or
Living, for my Name's sake; he shall receive in this World Many-fold, and in
the World to come, Everlasting Life: And this is a faithful Saying, and worthy
to be believed and accepted by all; and it is believed by Thousands, and the
Truth of it seen and witnessed inwardly; Glory to the Lord God for the same.

O the Glorious Powerful Presence of the Lord Jesus Christ, which Thousands do
enjoy in their Hearts and Souls! Which does give them perfect dominion over
Sin, and the Devil, who is the Author of it. O my dear Friends! This is a
Many-fold Reward for our Sufferings; and I do sensibly say, and affirm on God's
Behalf, That the Sufferings, which do attend us in this World, for the Truth's
sake, are not worthy to be compared to the Glorious Power of the Lord, which is
already revealed in us, who have steadfastly believed in him, and freely have
been given up to suffer with him, and for him: For, as our Tribulations have
been increased, for his sake; our Consolation in him has much more abounded;
so that we can truly and sensibly say, as those, who suffered with him before
us, did say, Greater is he that is in us, then he that is in the World; by whom
we do overcome the World, and the Devil, who is the godd of it: And he has
made us Conquerors through his Love, Life, and Power; and so we can bring in
our Testimony for him, to his Glory, and our own everlasting Comfort, That he
is able to save unto the utmost all that come to the Father by him. So dear
Friends every where, be Valiant and Cheerful in your Sufferings for the
Precious Living Truth, and Way of the Living God, in which you are come to know
your souls Salvation; and as good Soldiers of Christ Jesus, endure
Afflictions, and rejoice in them, and through them, and over them; and Reign in
the Lamb's Patience, over all Persecution and Persecutors, unto the End of your
Days, in this World: For, dear Friends, It is those that endure unto the End,
that must inherit Everlasting Life, and the Heavenly Joy and Divine Riches,
which is beyond what can be declared in words: But if any man draws back, my
Soul shall have no pleasure in him, says the Lord God: So all Friends, prize
your precious Time, and press forward in the Truth, that so you may grow more
and more Spiritually-minded, our of Earthly-mindedness; for, we brought nothing
into this World. and it is certain, we can take nothing out: so having Food and
Raiment, let us therewith be content; for, here we have no continuing City; but
though our Earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, yet have we an
Inward Eternal Habitation in the Lord; and though our outward Man perish, yet
do we know a renewing of strength in the inward Man, day by day: And our light
Affliction, which is but as for a Moment, works unto us a far more and
exceeding weight of Glory, while we look not at the loss of Temperal, Outward,
and Perishing Riches; but at the gain of Spiritual and Eternal Riches, which
the Lord our God is abundantly enriching us withal, in this the Day of the
Manifestation of his Great and Glorious Power and Wisdom in us. So dear
Friends, we have no cause to be dicourag'd; for we certainly know, That the
Lord God is with us, and he will plead our Cause with all our Adversaries; and
he is stronger then them all; and by his Strength we are upheld, and made bold
as Lions, to meet together to Worship him, as he has commanded us: And all our
Enemies are not able to pluck us out of our Heavenly Father's Hand; but as
Christ has said, we do witness it to be true, who said, My Father is greater
then all; and no man is able to pluck my Sheep out of my Father's Hand. So, God
Almighty (...) you all my dear Friends, and Heavenly Relations, and Spiritual
Kindred, whom the Living God has Redeemed out of the World, which lies in
Wickedness, by his Almighty Power, which has wrought Mightily and Effectually
in you, for your Redemption out of sin; and has brought a Remnant to sit
together in Heavenly Places in Christ Jesus, where the Devil and Sin has no
place: And he is daily increasing the strength of the least of his People, who
wait upon him in the Measure of his pure Light, Grace, and Spirit, already made
manifest; and those that are Faithful in a little, he does make to inherit
great Riches; he bears his Lambs in his Arms, and gently leads on those who are
waiting upon him in the Way of his Righteous Judgments; and those that do own
him in the Way of his Righteous Judgments, he does show Mercy unto: and though
they do know a time, wherein they do sow in Tears; yet they do not long abide
in that Estate (but he brings them to reap in Joy) as it is witnessed at this
day by Thousands, who have known a time, wherein the Hand of the Lord has been
heavy upon them, because of Sin; but he has blotted out and forgiven those
that have been brought unto true Repentance, and a Forsaking of Sin, by his
Righteous Judgments: and so, Times of Refreshment are come unto those who have
patiently born his Righteous Judgments; and now such can sing forth the high
Praises of the Lord, in the Land of the Living, in the Beauty of Holiness. O
the Beauty, the Beauty that is in Holiness! And without Holiness none can be
accepted of the Lord God, who is Holy; for Holiness becomes his House and
People forever: And the Temple of God is Holy, which Temple Faithful Suffering
Friends are, who have owned him in the Way of his Righteous Judgments, and have
been cleans'd thereby; in whom he has appeared as a Refiner, with Fire; and as
a Fuller, with Soap. O Friends, How precious is that Freedom and Liberty, which
Christ Jesus, the Power and Wisdom of God, has wrought in us and for us? O
stand all in it forever; and none suffer your selves to be again entangled with
the Yoke of Bondage, which the Enemy of your Immortal Souls once had you under:
O remember those bitter Days and Hours, which we spent in Darkness, when we
knew not the Way of Life and Peace! O remember how we did wander as Blind Men,
and could find no Comfort in all the Earth unto our Immortal Souls; and then
the Lord God of tender Mercy, heard our Cries and Groans in secret, and has
rewarded us Richly! O let his tender Mercy be had in Everlasting Remembrance by
all that have partaken of the same!

And all Friends, Keep your first Love unto the Lord, and his pure Living Way,
which he has brought you into; and none look back into the World, and its
glory, which will Perish and come to an End: But keep your Minds chaste unto the
Living God, who has showed you such great Kindness: O let not the Cares of
this World, and the Deceitfulness of Riches, and the Love of other things choke
nor hinder the growth of the pure Seed of Life in any of you! nor let not the
Storm or Heat of Persecution drive any of you away from the Lord God; but all
keep your Virginity unto the End.

And all Friends every where, Keep your Meetings in the Name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, who never fell nor changed; and feel his Living Virtue in the midst of
you, keeping you Quick, Fresh, and Lively; out of all Carelessness, Dullness, and
Drousiness; for, these are Uncomly. So all have a great Care to keep out of
such things; and all wait upon the Lord in the Comely Order, that you may all be
Refreshed by him, in your Meetings; and that you may all have Cause to say,
Good is the Lord, and worthy is he to be waited upon; for he feeds the Hungry
with Good Things: And as all do diligently wait upon God in the Measure of his
Holy Spirit, which he has given unto them to profit withal, they will feel a
true Hungering and Thirsting after the Righteousness of God, to be made
Partakers of it more and more; and unto such the Blessing does belong; and God
will deal bountifully with such; for he delights in his People's Diligence:
And as it is written, The Diligent Hand makes Rich; but the Sluggard shall be
clothed with Ruggs, whose Field grows over with Briars and Thorns: And Man, in
such a State is Miserable, and shall not be Crowned with Honor, which God
gives unto the Faithful; nor can he in that State dye in Peace with the Lord.
Therefore all be Faithfal unto the Lord God in all things, that when your days
are ended in this World, you may rest Eternally in the Bosom of the Lord; as it
is written, Blessed are the Dead which die in the Lord; for they shall rest
from their Labor, and their Works shall follow them.

And Friends, Our God (who is the True and Living God) he is Love, as it is
written of him; and all People, who do dwell in God; they do dwell in unfeigned
Love one unto another, and also unto their Enemies, as the Lord Jesus has
commanded: In which Love of God we are raised up to Worship him, and in it to
watch one over another, and to build up one another in Holiness; and in it are
we Comforted and Edified, and are made of one Heart and Mind, and made near and
dear one unto another, and truly tender one over another, and careful one of
another Good every way; and in true Humility to Honor and Esteem one another,
and thereby led to be just and true in all our Words and Actions, one to, and
concerning another, and to and concerning all our Enemies, in which we do seek
the Eternal Good of all People; and in which we do live in sweet Unity, and
pure Peace together, as does become the Family of God.

O how sweet is the Unity in God's Spirit of Love and Life, in which the Bond
of Peace is kept, without BREACH! For, in the Spirit of Love and Life, all
Friends being kept (which keeps all Upright, Just, and Pure) the Bond of Peace
cannot be broken.

So in this, the Lord God of Heaven and Earth preserve you all, my dear
Friends, (unto whom my Love is dear and near in the Lord) that so all your
hearts may be full of the Pure Love of God, which thinks nor does no evil
unto any (but does good unto all) that you may be known to be the Disciples of
Christ, who said, Every Tree shall be known by its Fruit; and said, A Good Tree
cannot bring forth Evil Fruit; and he said, The Good Man, our of the Good
Treasury of his Heart, brings forth Good Things,

But he said, The Evil Man, out of the Evil Treasury of his Heart, brings
forth Evil Things: Which are the Fruits of the Flesh, begotten therein by the
power of Darkness, which does Rule in the Hearts of all the Wicked and Ungodly,
upon the Face of the whole Earth.

Which Evil Things are, Envy, Malice, Murder, Oppression, Injustice,
False-judgment, Idolatry, Strife, Hypocrisy, Defrauding one another in Words
and Actions, Evil Imaginations, and Evil Thoughts, and Evil Words, Pride,
Covetousness, Swearing, Lying, Drunkenness, Whoredom, Thieft, Lightness,
Wildness, Vain-Laughter, Idle-Jesting, Whispering. False-accusing, and
Tale-bearing to sow Strife, etc.

So all Friends, who do make Profession of the pure Truth, and perfect Way of
the Lord, and to be Followers of the Lord Jesus Christ, the Patient and
Innocent Lamb of God, who did not Sin, neither was Deceit at any time (in any
thing) found in his Mouth; See how you do follow him, your Living Example; and
perfect Pattern, I say, Search all with the Heart, searching Spirit of the Lord
God; and see that you stand out of all those, before mentioned Evils, etc. For,
because of them comes the Wrath of God upon those who do continue in them, and
do not believe in Christ, and follow him, who leads out of them, and destroys
them: For, no Unclean Thing can inherit God's Kingdom.

But Glory to the Lord God, He has Redeemed a Remnant from such of the before
mentioned Evils, as they were guilty of who now know a Pure Peaceable Rest, and
a quiet Habitation in him, in whom he works to Will and to Do of his own Good
Pleasure; and he is daily Redeeming those that wait upon him in the Ways of
his Righteous Judgments.

And so all who do profess the Truth, and live and walk contrary to it, and
thereby cause the Way of Truth to be Evilspoken of, and harden the Hearts of
Unbelievers against it, and so shut the Kingdom of Heaven against men, not
entering themselves, but by their Evil Example hinder others: If they do not
Repent while they have time, and amend their ways, and walk orderly, as
becomes the Gospel; heavy will the Judgments of God fall upon them in the End.

And all such who have once known and Professed the Way of Truth, and in some
Measure (and for some time) have walked in it; but now are turned away from it,
into the Ungodliness again, like the Dog to his Vomit, and the Sow that was
washed, to the wallowing in the Mire; and now are grown so hard-hearted, that
they can speak Evil of the Way of Truth, and oppose it; and hate, contemn,
scorn, and reproach those who live in it, and suffer for it: (My Soul pitties
them) Miserable is their Condition. O that it were in their Heart to seek a
Place of Repentance! then it may be, the Lord might show Mercy unto them: But
if they do go on in Gainsaying (as Core did) then had it been better for them,
that they had never been born; for, Everlasting Torment and Anguish will be the
Reward of their wicked work.

And dear Friends, and Brethren, and Sisters every where, This Testimony am I
moved of the Lord God to bear for your Consolation, (viz.) That this is the
True and Living Faith, wherein we stand, who have believed in the Lord Jesus
Christ, the true Light, and have followed the Leadings of his Blessed Holy
Spirit, which has led us out of the Evil that is in the World, by which we
have been crucified unto the World, and its Glory, and the many Sinful Customs
and Fashions, that are of it, and in it; and by which we have been led into a
Holy Innocent Conversation: And by, and in this Faith, we do live to God; and
in it are we brought to Love God (Uprightly) and to serve him with our whole
strength: For, this Faith is his own Gift, which has wrought by Love, in us,
Effectually, to the purifying of our Hearts and Spirits, which were defill'd
with sin: And in this Holy Faith is our Religion and Worship Pure, and is of
the Pure God, and so is accepted by him; and we have the Witness of this in our
own Hearts: And we do certainly know, that we are of God, by his Spirit, which
he has given us: And this is the one standing Faith, which is God's Gift, in
which the Pure, Standing, Unchangeable Worship of God is again renewed, and set
up among'st us, as it was in the Apostles days; Glory, yea, Glory be to the
Lord God forever, whose day of Light and Life is now (again) made manifest in,
and unto us, as it was in the Apostles days; and it shines Gloriously among'st
us to our great Consolation.

O the Glory, the Glory of the Lord God! O how does it shine in the Assemblies
of the Righteous! Overcoming, Refreshing, and Melting the Hearts of the
Upright, and making them more glad, then they that have great increase of Corn,
and Wine, and Oil. And we can truly say, The Lord has dealt bountifully with
us; our Lot is fallen in a Fruitful Hill, and we have a goodly Inheritance; and
this is our Inheritance, The everlasting Power and Wisdom of the Lord our God,
whereby we are redeemed out of the Evil that is in the World, and through Faith
in the same, are upheld in Purity, wherein our Peace and Joy is great at this
day, and no man can take it from us.

And my dear Friends, I know the Lord God is daily increasing your Faith, who
have been freely given up to suffer for Righteousness sake; so that you can say
(with the Prophet) Though there be no Flocks in the Fold, and though the Fruits
of the Earth be taken from you, for your pure Obedience unto God; yet can you
not Murmur at it, but do still Rejoice in the Lord God of your Salvation; and
can cast your Care upon him, knowing he does care for you, as a Tender Father,
for his Tender and Obedient Children.

And my dear Friends, Though all the false Worshippers and Apostates upon the
whole Earth, should join together, and seek to destroy our Testimony, and pure
Faith, and pure Worship; yet can they never do it: But the Testimony, and
Faith, and Worship, into which we are gathered by the Lord our God, it shall
stand and remain, when all their Fighting, Persecuting, and Blood-thirsty
Faiths, and Religions, and Worships, and False Testimonies are gone, and ended.

And we shall yet live to Praise the Lord our God, notwithstanding all the Rage
and Fury of our Enemies. And though Sufferings may attend us for a little time,
yet will they be ended in the Lord's Time; and he does suffer us to be tried,
but it is not in Enmity to us, but in Love, that we may be gathered unto him,
out of all things which perish with the using; and that we may know him to be
our Strength; and that he may show forth his Virtue and Power in us, in our
Sufferings; and that People, who sit in Darkness, and whose Hearts are set on
Earthly Things, may see, that he has redeemed a People from the Earth, who can
suffer the Loss of all earthly Enjoyments, rather then to deny their Testimony
Faith and Religion, which he has called them into: And by Friends Faithfulness
herein, is the Lord God Glorified, and the Understandings of People opened; and
they come to see the difference betwixt those, who do profess Christ in words,
and Faithful Friends, who do enjoy him in Life and Power: And so, the Wise
Man's House upon the Rock comes to be known from the Fool's House upon the
Sand; that so those, who are dissatisfied with the Dead, Huskey, False Worships
that are in the World, may know where to center and sit down, even with us, who
are become the Flock and Heritage of the Lord God.

And God's Worship in the Spirit and in the Truth, which he has set up
among'st us, and into which we are gathered, it must spread over the Nations
and Kingdoms of the World; and the Nations and Kingdoms of this World must
become our God's, and his Christ's (as it is written) This has the Lord God
Decreed, and all his Enemies cannot reverse nor alter this his Decree.

And God will certainly throw down all the Fighting, Persecuting, Blood-thirsty
Faiths, and Worships, and Religions upon the Face of the Earth, which have been
set up in the Fallen, Earthly, and Sensual, and Divilish-wisdom of Wicked Men;
about which they have shed the Blood of many Innocent People, who have been
taught of God, and therefore could not bow unto their Devilish Inventions.

And the Living, Powerful, Almighty, Dreadful God, before whom all the strength
of his Enemies is but as a Thread of Tow in the bot fiery Flame, he is risen to
execute his Judgments upon the Old Red Draggon, the Devil, who has made the
Nations, like the Raging Sea, throwing forth Mire and Dirt, and has set People
to devour one another about Religion, Faith, and Worship, like Wolves, Lions,
and Dogs: And the Lord God will certainly Plague him, and Bind him; and REDEEM
the Nations from under his Accursed power.

And the Great Whore, who has been drunk with the Blood of the Saints, who
have kept the Testimony of Jesus (which is the Spirit of Prophecy) Her will
God judge, and the Beast, and False Prophets, and all whose Hands and Hearts
are defiled with shedding Innocent Blood; the Wrath and Indignation of the Lord
God will be heavy upon them: And God will certainly Waste, Consume, and
Confound, with his Righteous Judgments, the Stock and Root of the Wicked and
Ungodly, and will Rout Wickedness and Ungodliness out of the Nations of the
Earth; and will plant the Nations with Righteousness, Holiness, and Purity,
that so he may be Exalted over all the Works of his Hands.

And the Lamb Christ Jesus, the Prince of Life and Peace, who comes not to
destroy men's Lives, but to save them, He must have the Victory over the Dragon,
Beast, Whore, and False Prophets, whose Work has been, and still is, to
destroy both the Souls and Bodies of People.

And all Nations that come to be saved, must walk in the Light of the Lamb
Christ Jesus, in which Light we do now Reign with him, over all Deceit, and
over all the false Worships in the World, (notwithstanding our outward
Sufferings) for our Reign is Spiritual and Inward.

AND all Friends, who are newly convinced, or such who may be Young and Weak in
the Faith; God has put something into my Heart to write unto you, for your
Establishment in the perfect Way of the Lord.

And this is God's Counsel unto you all, Let your Faith remain firm and
steadfast in Christ Jesus, the true Light and Life of men; and all wait upon God
in that Measure of his Blessed Light and Spirit, which he in his tender Mercy
has given unto you, to profit withal; that therein you may all grow into a
living Sense and Knowledge of God (which has been lost by Transgression) that
you may all come to be renewed up into the Pure, Spiritual, Heavenly, and
Divine Image of God, in which man was made in the Beginning (A Noble Vine;
wholly of a Right Seed) So, all wait to know your Birth of the Immortal
Incorruptible Seed (which is the Word) of God, which Lives and Abides forever;
which Word, Seed, Light, and Life is to be found, received, and enjoyed within
People: And Blessed are they who do believe in it, and continue steadfast unto
the End; in them it does take root, and bring forth Fruit abundantly unto the
Praise and Glory of God, and unto their abundant Joy and endless Comfort: So
all you, that have been bound down in sin, by the great Enemy of your immortal
Souls, and who have known great Distresses, Anguish, and Sorrow because
thereof; Wait you all diligently upon God in the Light, which does show unto
you your present condition, and therein you will receive Power from God, who is
Light, over Sin and the Devil, who is the Author of it; and so will come to
feel and know Christ (the true Seed) in you, to bruise the Old Serpent's Head,
yea, his whole strength and power in you to waste and destroy, and he will
bring you out of the Bondage of Corruption into the Glorious Liberty of the
Sons and Daughters of God; and so you will come to know, that God and Christ is
greater in you, then the Wicked-spirit (called the Devil) who will certainly
bind him, and cast him out, and take from him all his Armor, wherein he trusted.

But for the Accomplishment of these great and weighty Matters, You must all
wait upon God with much Diligence and Patience; and let the Pure Judgments of
God freely take hold of all that is Unrighteous, and contrary to God in you;
that so the Pure, Powerful, Quickening Word of Eternal Life may freely operate
and work mightily in you, as a Fire, Hammer, and Sword; that so by it you may
be perfectly set free. For, there is not any thing else, that can make free
from sin. And this is an Eternal Record, and True Living Testimony, which the
Eternal and Engrafted Word of Life (which does Reign in my Heart, and in the
Hearts of my Faithful Friends) does bear unto you, and unto all People upon the
face of the whole Earth.

And whosoever does Write, Print, or Speak against the Word, Spirit, Light, and
Life of God and Christ within Man and Woman; and do say, That it is not able to
destroy all sin, nor able to lead into all Truth, nor able to uphold Man and
Woman in it They are all Liars, Deceivers, and False-witnesses; and their
Words, Writings, and Testimonies herein are not of God, nor for him; but are
absolutely of the Devil, and for him, whose Kingdom stands in Sin (which Christ
is come to throw down, and wholly to destroy: So let none believe them in those
things; for, if they do, they will be undone by it.

And so, all keep out of all the Shadows and Figures, which do not make the
Heart and Conscience perfect in the Sight of God.

And all keep to Christ, the Immortal and Eternal Husband, and know him to
Baptize you with his Spirit and Life, which does burn up the Corruptions: And
this is the one standing Baptism, of which the Apostle did testify; and the
one Faith, of which he did testify is, to believe in Christ the Light, and
Life, and Word, and Power of God, who said, There is one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism, one God over all, through all, and in you all: So, who are come to
witness this, have no need of outward Shaddows and Elements (which are but
beggarly in comparison of the Life and Substance) So, in Christ, the Substance,
Life, and Light, all are to come to sit down in the Heavenly Places, knowing
his Flesh and Blood, which comes down from Heaven (and feeding upon it, which
gives Life, and this is the Lord's Supper) with which he feeds his Faithful
Followers, by which they are made strong to resist the Devil, and to overcome
him: So, in and with this the Lord God preserve you all, and by it strengthen
you in your Inward Man, that you may follow the Lord God with Cheerfulness,
that you may walk in the Way of the Lord valiantly, and never be weary of it,
nor faint in the hour of Temptation, which is suffered to come upon you for the
trial of that precious Faith, which the Lord God has in a measure given unto
you; but all look unto him, who is the Giver of Faith, by which the Just lives
in Dominion over the Tempter.

So let none look down at the Temptations of the Devil (for that will weaken,
and do hurt) But all, when you are tempted, look up unto Christ Jesus, the
great Power and Wisdom of God, who is given unto us by the Father, to take away
all Sin, and to lead into all Truth; who, in the days of his Flesh (as the
Apostle said) was tempted in all points like as we are; but he did not sin: And
so, it is no sin to be tempted (by the Devil) unto any wickedness whatsoever;
but the sin is, to consent with the Mind unto him, and so to join to him, and
so by him to be led to think, or speak, or act that which is evil in the sight
of the Lord God; but out of all this Christ Jesus does redeem; and he is able
to preserve and uphold you in Purity and Holiness (in all things) For he is
able to save to the uttermost all, that come to the Father by him (and that is,
to free from all sin) and of this the Apostle was a true Witness, (who writ
thus of him.) And though the Devil may go about you like a Roaring Lion, ever
seeking which of you he may devour (whom the Lord has redeemed from him) yet,
be ye not hereby Affrighted, Discouraged, nor cast down in your Minds, nor
despair of overcoming him, you tender, and contrite hearted Ones; but resist
him in the Faith, and be steadfast, and Christ will succor and uphold you: So
all look unto him from whom your help comes.

Given forth by the Spirit of God, in the sixth Month, 1671. through a Tried
and True Witness of those things, which he has here written for the
Edification and Comfort of all, who are turned from Darkness unto Light, from
the power of Satan unto God: And what is here written, may be of some service
unto those, who are yet Strangers from God, and his Way, and Worship, which is
Pure.

I am a Sufferer for Righteousness sake; a Prisoner (for the Testimony of Jesus
Christ, the Light and Life of men) at Maidston in Kent, in England.

And my Heart's Desire is, that all People might come to believe in Christ
Jesus, the true Light, and so be redeemed by him from Sin, and so from the
Curse, which is due unto it, and from the Devil who is the Author of it; that
so they might be blessed Eternally. And as the Holy Apostle said, I do say, God
would have all men to come to the Knowledge of the Truth, and be saved: But
Christ said unto the Wisemen of the World, great Professors; Search the
Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have Eternal Life: but ye will not come
unto me, that you might have Life. And as it was then, so it is now; People
will not come unto Christ the Great Power and Wisdom of God, to be redeemed
from Sin by him, and so to have Eternal Life in him; and so, many die in their
Sins, And he said, If ye believe not that I am he, you shall die in your Sins;
and whither I go, ye cannot come. No Unclean thing can enter the Kingdom of
God; and there is no Repentance in the Grave; and all who die, and perish in
their Sins, their Destruction is of Themselves, and the Lord God is clear.

William Gibson.

THE END.

