THE Further Vindication, etc. OF Mr. Owen Considered in a LETTER to a Friend.
SIR,
IN Obedience to your Commands, I send you here a short Account of my Thoughts
concerning Mr. O's Further Vindication, etc. In the way of Writing he has taken
up, he is not (I believe) to be paralleled, having outdone all Men living a
Bar and half, except happily two or three of the United Brethren, who have
sufficiently exposed Mr. Baxter and Father Alsop. I shall not so much as
endeavor to requite him, Prove. 26. 4. R. R.
being obliged to the contrary, and having already engaged my self thereto by
Promise, which I will religiously observe. For which Reason you must not expect
here a particular Answer, or that I should follow him step by step: My Work
then as well as Yours would be endless, and it would be difficult for me not to
retort some of his ill Language, and discover many of his Misrepresentations or
Mistakes, which he is not capable of enduring, nor you willing to be troubled
with. All my Design, and I suppose your expectation is, that the whole Argument
be laid plain and open unto the view of any one of common Sense. This I propose
to my self to do in the Order of the Sermon, and as briefly as I can.

And first you must remember, that Mr. De Laune severely taxed the Church of
England as guilty of diminishing from the Word of God, by leaving out the
Titles of the Psalms in our Liturgy Translation; and that I undertook the
defense of this Omission, first from the uncertainty of the Titles being
Canonical. Now I submit it to your Judgment or any observant Reader's weighing
the Arguments on both sides, as they are to be found in Rem. and in R's on R's,
whether Mr. O. (who is Mr. D's Vindicator) has given a convincing Proof of the
Certainty of the Titles being Canonical: I say, this is submitted to your
Judgment without more ado. This notwithstanding I shall here have occasion to
repeat some things, and observe others de novo, which will minister some
further satisfaction in this controverted Point.

Mr. O. Vind. p.
has not stuck to pronounce me a Blasphemer, and to give me words of Brass,
because I affirmed, many of the Titles were to no purpose at all; nay, he will
not allow that my supposed Ignorance can make any Atonement for me, though God
himself winked at the times of Ignorance. But let us look back unto the
Rector's obvious meaning. Mr. D. contended that the Titles unfolded the
Mysteries of the Psalms; the Rector denied that they serve to any such purpose
at all. R. R. p. 15.
Ex. gr. A Psalm, a Song, etc. These Titles unlock no Mysteries that I know of,
and if they must needs be called Keys they want Wards. Other Titles are
infinitely more Mysterious than the Psalms themselves. It cannot be thought the
Holy Ghost meant to give us them as Keys to open the secret Sense of the
Psalms; that would be to explain obscurum per obscurius, which I am persuaded
the Spirit of God would never have done. When Jesus Christ expounded his
Parables, he made 'em clear as the Sun. Besides, whereas the Mysteries of the
Gospel are confirmed out of an abundance of Passages in the Psalms, I do not
find one Title brought to prove any one Mystery, though indeed some Fathers (who
delighted, Ludere campo Scripturarum, as Jerome speaks) took a liberty to find
out I know not what Mysteries in the Titles.

But to return, R. R. p. 13.
I pleaded formerly that the Chaldee Paraphrase, the Syriack, Arabic, and the
LXX Version generally used by the Hellenistical Jews, and the Christians for
several Ages differ much from the Hebrew; that Gregory Nyssen observed there
was not an entire Agreement between the Christians and the Jews about the
Titles, especially of Psalm. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, etc. That this Father asserts not
the Divine Authority of the Titles but Ecclesiastical Custom. By the way note,
that Mr. O. has declined giving any sort of Answer to this Testimony of Nyssen.
Synop. Crit.
I add, Grotius believed Moses was not the Pen man of the 90th. Psalm. Eben Ezra
affirms the 6th. Psalm. was composed (not by David, as the Title has it, but) in
the Captivity by some other Person. Does it not follow hence, that according to
the judgment of these Churches, and these Authors, the Titles are not
Canonical, at least not certainly so? And are they to be all damned for so many
Blasphemers? It might have sufficed Mr. O. to have let alone the charge of
Blasphemy (which I fancy is a little too much) and to have contented himself
with ranking me among Dunces, though at the same time you see I have some not
contemptible Company.

I do not know any better way to clear this Matter than by considering the
Titles of the several Books of Scripture, some whereof are most certainly not
Canonical, not one of a certainty such, and some doubtful. The first Section of
Moses's Pentateuch is in Hebrew called Beresith, but in the LXX, Genesis, and
in our English Translation, The first Book of Moses called Genesis: Are we,
Dissenters and all, yea and all Christendom Blasphemers for departing from the
Hebrew? The truth is, I do not believe the Author of the Pentateuch divided his
Work into Five Sections or Books; but the Church of the Jews, who for
convenience entitled each Section from the first word of it, though the LXX more
judiciously from the principal design and matter contained in those Sections. I
prefer the Title of the LXX to that of the Heb. in the Historical part of the
Kings. In Heb. we find the First and Second Book of Samuel, in the LXX more
properly and truly called the First and Second Book of Kings. Samuel died, 1.
Sam. 25. The rest of this and the next Book was not (neither could be) written
by Samuel, nor concerning him, but the Kings of Israel (and Samuel himself is I
conceive comprehended in Kings) being the Supreme Judge;) The Heb. divides the
Psalter into Five Sections. Are we, and the Dissenters all Blasphemers for
leaving this Division out of our Translation? If it be answered, that some Heb.
Copies have not these Five Sections or Books of the Psalter (which I know not,
nor will trouble my self to examine) I ask which are the true and uncorrupted
Copies? (for both cannot be) and why do we follow the latter Copies rather than
those which are (...) in all Men's hands? The Books of the Prophets are thus,
intitul'd, The Book of the Prophet Isaiah, etc. and the Apostles Epistles thus,
The Epistle of Paul to the Romans, etc. I cannot think the inspired Prophets
and Apostles set these Titles on the head of their Books or Letters. For they
prefixed their Names themselves at the beginning and as part of the Body of
those Books and Letters, but the Titles on the top were added for convenience.
There needed no Inspiration to do this. The general Title of (...) Books of the
New Testament is* (...), etc. but is not Canonical, say Grotius and Hammond
(and yet they Comment upon it) being added by the Church, when the Inspired
Books were put together. That Title, The Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the
Hebrews, is found in all MSS. Copies (says Beza) except one only, which I hope
will break no squares. Now Grotius is of Opinion Luke wrote this Epistle,
others Barnabas, some Clemens Romanus, Dr. Hammond that the Author is
uncertain, this being the very Reason many Churches received not this Epistle
into the Canon of a good while. I must not pass the particular Reason which the
Latin Churches gave for their rejecting this Epistle to the Heb. sc. because
some things were in it favoring the Novatian Heresy, as they then judged. Mr.
Pool imputes this to their Ignorance, but challenges them not with Blasphemy:
nor did I ever hear that Grotius, Hammond, and the rest who deny Paul to be the
Author of this Epistle, were ever censured as Blasphemers.

St. John doubtless was the Author of those three Epistles that go under his
Name, but not of the Titles also. This Apostle and Evangelist for some special
Reasons concealed his Name, when he wrote contrary to the practice of the rest.
Nor can I believe any other inspired Person affixt those Titles, it being
highly improbable, that John by the Spirit should conceal himself, and another
by the same Spirit should discover him. I hope Mr. O. will not call me
Blasphemer for this. The meaning of all is, the Church of God did ever take the
Liberty of giving Titles unto Books sometines by Conjecture, and sometimes of
certain knowledge, as we at this day prefix the Contents before Chapters, and
call the Books of Psalms in Meter, The Psalms of David, which is not the Hebrew
Title, Or else the Copiers of them did it for obvious Reasons. viz. that holy
Men might more readily upon occasion go to such Books, and consult 'em, as they
lay in their Closets or Libraries among other Volumes of the Scripture. Briefly
the Titles of the Psalms and of the several Books of Scripture must (as I
conceive) run the same fate; all must be of a certainty Canonical or none at
all can be.

Mr. O. has himself confessed enough to overthrow the whole Fabric of his
elaborate Discourse on this Subject. He acknowledges, Vind. p. 47.
It was a prevailing Opinion, that all the Psalms were Penned by David, that
August, Chrysostom. and Bid, and several Jewish Doctors thought so. What then
will become of the Title of the 90th. and of many other Psalms? Were they of a
certainty of their Penning, unto whom they are ascribed in the Hebrew Text? Or
is the Rector singular in a doubtful Point, when he has so many giving in their
Testimony on his side? Though by the way I see no great harm in being singular,
when the Point is doubtful, but much more I apprehend not that there is any
Blasphemy in such Singularity. Besides I pray Sir take notice, how Mr. O.
expresses himself concerning the Title of the 137. Psalm. It is not material to
us, who composed it, we are satisfied it was divinely inspired. But is it not
as material that one Psalm should have a Title to unsold its Mysteries as
another? And why will not he give me leave to declare my self thus? It is not
material to me what becomes of the Titles, I am satisfied the Psalms themselves
were d^vinely Inspired. I make no reckoning of those Critical Disputes about
the 90th. Psalm. whether Moses, or David, or any other Inspired Person penned
that Psalm, I am content to believe it Canonical. Great then is the power of
Truth you see: It will out sometimes even before a Man is aware.

But after all this, I will now suppose (what I believe you will not grant)
that Mr. O. has cleared his Point beyond contradiction, yet still I must
condemn Mr. D. (and his Vindicator too) for reflecting on us, because we leave
out an essential part of the Psalms in our Liturgy Translation. I argued
formerly, Ser. p. 4. R. R. p. 15.
The Dissenters translate 'em not all; some part of 'em Translated is thrust
out of the Text into the Margin, like a various Reading, or mere conjecture, or
as not material; but to this he offers nothing. I added, They leave 'em out of
the Metrical Psalms, neither do they sing 'em. But he endeavors to take off
this Retort thus, The Titles were not designed to be sung. V. p. 53.
Good! It Is my very Plea in Defense of the Church of England, our Liturgy
Translation was designed for singing, but the Titles were not. No, says Mr. O.
You read that Translation. I answer, 1. Some negligent Ministers do indeed read
'em; it is their Fault, 2. Some conforming Nonconformists will read 'em; it is
their Crime, 3. Some cannot prevail with their People to bear a part in the
rehearsing 'em; it is their Unhappiness. But still this Translation is designed
not for Reading and Instruction in the Public Worship, but Devotion. For the
Order of the Church is that the Psalms in this Translation should be said or
sung; said? that is at least repeated alternatim, by Minister and People, which
is a species of singing, as we believe. Observe then, they are sung in all
Cathedrals, they are repeated in multitudes of Parochial Churches, and
Noblemens Chapels. What would the Man have more? Shall the Infelicity of some
Ministers, the Treachery of others, or the Carelessness of another sort be
thought sufficient to force the Church to take new measures, and lay aside her
Liturgy Translation? I trow not. Besides you should observe further, that if
the Titles be Canonical, they ought at least to have been Printed with the
Metrical Psalms, though not sung: So the Jews did. Briefly here is nothing but
Cavil, not a shadow of Answer. But Mr. O. concludes, Their (the Dissenters) not
reading the Titles (in the Congregation and out of the other Translation) is an
Innocent Omission. Hem! an Innocent Omission? Verily I cannot get this down. If
the Titles be an Essential part of the Psalms, and useful to unfold the
Mysteries in them, as Mr. O. and Mr. D. will have it, can there be a more
Sacrilegious Omission than first not to Translate the Titles exactly, and then
neglect the Reading them? Not to make use of the Canonical Key, but to burst
violently and blindly into the Chambers of Divine Secrets, like Thieves and
Robbers? Besides a little Justice would have taught Mr. O. that our not
Printing the Titles is as innocent an Omission, as their not Reading 'em. One
might reasonably expect just Weights and Measures. Either let the whole body of
Christians throughout the World come under the Charge of being Corrupters of
the Psalms, or let the Church of England and the Rector pass in the Crowd as
Innocent also. Why should we be made an Example, when even our Accusers
themselves are guilty of the same Omission? I leave you then to judge how well
Mr. O. has acquitted himself on this first Question.

The next is about the Verses interpolated Psalm. 14. I remit you to what I have
in Sermon and R. R. offered on this Argument, and to inform your self thence
whether Mr. D. did honestly impute it unto us, that we foisted them in, and
whether Mr. O. has thoroughly justified him. But I Will in a few words consider
Mr. O.'s Vindication of Jerome, whom he would sain lick clean, if it were
possible. He informs us, who they are that have commended him, and it is confessed
he was a great Man, but perhaps his truest Character is, Magnae virtutes, nec
minora -- In the Point about Bishops it has been often enough laid to his
charge, that he says and unsays, and contradicts himself. In the Letters which
he exchanged with St. Austin, he maintained the lawfulness of Dissimulation,
and endeavored to excuse Peter and Barnabas. He is believed to have been
disgusted for nor being made a Bishop, and on that score depressed the Order as
low as he could with any color of Truth. Nor did he escape the suspicion of --
Besides, he was so bent against the LXX. that he blushed not to abuse 'em,
choosing to represent 'em by some corrupt Copies, rather than by the known and
unquestionable reading. I will give you two Instances. Zach. 12. 10. cited by
St. John 19. 37. They shall look on him whom they pierced, Jerome's LXX it seems
read not (...), but (...), even as our LXX does at this day. But Jerome might
(if he would have been ingenuous) have taken notice of what he could not be
ignorant, that the right reading in the LXX was (...), as is witnessed by four
Fathers more early than himself. Justin M. in his Dialogue against Trypho the
Jew. Tertullian likewise frequently. De Resurrect. c. 26, 51. De carne Christi
c. 24.
St. Cyprian in his 20 Testimony against those People. To whom add Lactantius
also, Zach. 13. 4. He makes the LXX speak perfect Nonsense, non sum Prophets
ego, quia Homo genuit me a Juventute mea. Whereas even in our present LXX we
read thus agreeably with the Heb. (...). Finally I observed in R. R. how
scandalously he abused St. Luke. No, replies Mr. O. For as Paul is called a
Babbler by the Athenians, so was Luke accounted by the Nations an obscure vile
Person and of no great credit, not by Jerome, though Jerome relates it, as Luke did
that of Paul. But there are many differences between the one and the other.
Luke was an Inspired Historian, flourished when what he relates of Paul
happened, it may be had his Relation from the Apostle himself, and had no Cause
to support: But Jerome lived about 350 Years after Luke, Writes what he backs
with no Authority or probable proof, and was now calling into question the
truth of Luke's History. There is then all the Reason in the World to believe
that this Character of Luke, though fathered on the Gentiles, was the Issue of
Jerome's own Brain, to disparage the LXX and to set up the Heb. Bible. Nor did
St. Luke write the Acts for the use of the Gentiles, as Mr. O. asserts, though in
time ('it is true) it might fall into their hands. But the Historian addresses it
to Theophilus a Christian, Chap. 1. 1. And what if Jerome's Gentes were the
Gentile Believers? Did they esteem Luke obscure, vile and of little Reputation?
Sure (if this was his meaning) Jerome was not a little mistaken, to speak as
softly as I can. Besides can any one believe Luke was less considerable among
the unbelieving Nations, than the other Inspired Writers? He was the most
learned of 'em all, except perhaps Paul. His Greek (as Critics say) is the
purest of all. He was a known Physician, which doubtless commended him to the
esteem of the Nations, both Jews and Gentiles as he traveled along with Paul,
and that before his Writings were ever published. So that Jerome cannot be
sheltered by pretending, not he, but the Nations accounted him obscure, etc.
For this Father further affirms, Non debuit, etc. St. Luke ought not to write
any thing contrary to the Scriptures, that were then in the hands of the
Nations, that is contrary to the corrupt LXX. Here you see, he magisterially
declares what the Spirit of God ought not to do. Belike for fear of disobliging
them, who as yet had not the Hebrew verity among them. Right Jerome all over.
The Inspir^d Evangelist Luke to serve a small turn must tell a Lie: Or lest he
should offend the Nations, must dissemble the Truth, The Hebrew verity, and
this without all regard to the Jews, and Jewish Converts, whom he must needs
scandalize thereby. Here is Dissimulation with a witness, and made a necessary
Duty (non debuit) in an Inspired Penman of Scripture. Whoever is disposed to
vindicate Jerome, may go to his Letters written to St. Augustine, and furnish
himself with Arguments enough to that purpose. But shall a Man lie for God?
Surely Jerome's much Oriental Learning made him mad, I will not say a
Blasphemer. In fine, that Jerome framed this Character for Luke in the name of
the Nations will appear from what he adds. Hoc generaliter observandum, quod
ubicunque SS. Apostoli and Apostolici viri loquuntur* ad populos, iis plerumque
Testimoniis abutuntur, quae jam fuerant in Gentibus divulgata. The Holy
Apostles and Apostolic Men (neglecting the Hebrew verity) when they speak to
the People, make use of those Testimonies, (viz. which Jerome contended were
mistaken and false) out of the LXX. which had already been divulged among the
Nations (...) Is not this superfine Doctrine? One needs not be Hypercritical to
observe hence, that Jerome makes the Apostles and their Companions in Preaching
the Gospel to be a Pack of Dissemblers, and guilty of the same pious Frauds and
holy Cheats, that he before suggested particularly of Luke. Once more
Commenting on Mic. 5. 2. He thus delivers himself, Sunt autem qui asserunt,
etc. There are who affirm (I believe no body but himself) that almost in all
the Testimonies which are brought out of the Old Testament this Error is
committed, either that the Order is changed, or the Words, and sometimes the
very sense is different, the Apostles or Evangelists not gathering their
Testimonies out of the Book, but trusting to their Memories, which sometimes
faild them. Sir, Can you read these Lines without Horror and Amasement? The
Spirit of God surely (whereby they wrote) forgot not himself, though they did.
That which follows from the whole is, that Jerome is not defended. The LXX. as
to that Passage in the Acts Chap. 7. was in Jerome's days more correct, than the
Hebrew verity now is, and that the LXX. was followed by the Inspired Infallible
Apostles, and Apostolical Men, as Jerome acknowledges. May it not then be
inferred hence as probable, that Paul followed them in his 3d. to the Romans v.
13. etc. and transcribed the Verses out of the then LXX? O! but the Greek
Fathers do not Comment on these Verses. Supposing this (for I have 'em not
ready at hand, nor leisure to examine them all) the Reason may be, either they
Commented on them in other places, or it was an innocent Omission, or else it is
but a negative Argument and unconcluding. But after all, let us imagine the
Three Verses have been interpolated, this is no just Excuse of Mr. D. who
accused us for foisting them in. Why may not we do so as well as, and after
Paul? And besides they are in the Latin Vulgar Version, which was in use in
Jerome's days, and is still in good Credit with Mr. O. You may see more Reasons
given to excuse the Church of England. Sermon. p. 7. R. R. p. 18. which I will
not trouble you with. Here I leave this part of the Controversy to the
Judgment of any Man of Understanding, whether Mr. O. has vindicated either
Jerome or Mr. D.

The Question about the Three Verses Psalm. 14. occasioned a more general one
concerning the LXX. and the Hebrew Copies of the Old Testament: The former are
by my Adversaries said to have been corrupted; and I granted it, but withal
affirmed that so are the Hebrew also. But Mr. O. undertakes to prove they were
not corrupted before and in our Savior's days.

Here I must premise (because Mr. O. makes such an hideous Outcry against the
Rector, as if he were about depriving the Church of the Scriptures, and a
Divine Knowledge of the revealed Will of God) that my Argument is not intended,
neither looks that way at all, as any fair Adversary would grant. The Truths of
Revelation are to be sought for, not out of the Hebrew Text only, nor out of
the LXX. only, but out of both, which lend their helping hand to one another,
together with all other Ancient Translations, and those numerous Quotations of
Scripture which we meet with in the Fathers. And I humbly conceive nothing
ministers more advantage unto Atheists, than obstinately to contend that the
Hebrew Text is not in the least corrupted, and to strip us of all other means
of correcting it. Now Mr. O. attempts to evince his Opinion by Three Arguments.

I. That the Hebrew Bibles are de facto incorrupt.

II. That the Jews could not.

III. Would not corrupt them. The first he confirms thus, Because Christ never
charged the Jews with corrupting them. A. If the Hebrew Text was the same in
Christ's as in our days (which Mr. O. must acknowledge) then it had been
corrupted in Christ's time: This appears afterward. Besides I retort his
Reason thus, the LXX. was not corrupted in the Apostles days, because they
never charged that Version with any Corruptions, as they would and ought to
have done. As Christ bids his Disciples to search the Scriptures (the Hebrew
Copy) So St. Paul commends the Bereans that they searched the Scriptures, and
Timothy, that by his Mother and Grandmother he had been trained up in the
Knowledge of the Scriptures, viz. in the LXX. for all these were either
Gentiles, or Gentile Proselytes, or Hellenistical Jews, and therefore used the
LXX. When Origin and Jerome speak thus, That most of the allegations made by
Christ and his Apostles out of the Old Testament are still there, they plainly
enough confess that some are not, and consequently there must have been a
corruption of the Old Scriptures according to these Fathers. On the other hand
I^ll give you a better Argument in proof of their Corruption, viz. because they
had been corrupted before Ezra's time, who (say most of the Fathers) corrected
the Errors that had crept in afore-time, and amended them, as the Hebrews
report. Synop. in Ez. ^
Now tell me, is it not much more probable, that they were somewhat corrupted
between Ezra and Christ? Had God a greater care of the Scriptures under the
second Temple, than under the first, when Prophets were common among them? But
of this more by and by.

2. Mr. O. in his Harangue here insinuates that I affirm an Universal
Corruption of the Hebrew Copies, but it is Mr. O's own fancy not mine; and
besides he talks very highly of Providence, even as if there lay an absolute
engagement on God, either not to suffer any Corruption, or miraculously to
discover it. A Why then has Providence permitted so many various Readings in
the New Testament? and why has not God by some extraordinary means told us,
whether the latter Period 1 Jo. 2. 23. was written by Divine Inspiration, or
added by some Transcriber? The sum is, Providence has taken care that all the
material necessary and Essential Doctrines of Religion are still abundantly
preserved in the Scriptures, and no false Doctrines therein established, which
I take to be true both of the Hebrew, the LXX. and the New Testament. But still
in all Ages before Printing, Corruptions of other kinds crept in, and God for
Reasons best known to his Wisdom has permitted it.

3. It must be granted a pious Jew would not purposely Corrupt the Hebrew Text,
but others would. That very Talmudical Tale* that one Solomon endeavored to
root Jod out of the Text shows that some Jews would have Corrupted the Hebrew
Text. You see how unconcluding Mr. O's. Arguments are. In a word, that the Jews
would have corrupted the Word of God in the Prophesies pointing at Jesus
Christ, is undeniably true from Justin Martyr his Dialogue, wherein he charge
them with it. It must be allowed thence that they had inclination enough to
attempt it, or else the Martyr could in no wise be excused; whether they were
successful is to be examined in the next place, and

1. From the Testimony of Justin and in answer to Mr. O. I affirm,

1. That Justin Martyr did understand both the Hebrew and Syriac Languages, and
so doubtless was acquainted with the Hebrew Bible. For in Apology 2d. He calls
himself the Son of Priscus Bacchius born or come from Flavia Neapolis in the
Syrian Palestine. Accordingly I find him playing the Critic upon the Etymology
of Satanas, Dialog. p. 331. deriving it from the Jewish and Syrian Tongue;
Sata, signifying Apostata, and Nas, Serpens. Yea, Mr. O's. instance proves him
skilled in the Hebrew; nor was he mistaken when he affirmed, that Israel
imported homo vincens virtutem (...) signifies Virtue, Fortitude, one of the
great Attributes of God, which Mr. O's Novice did not consider. And God often in
Scripture makes an Attribute to be as it were his proper Name, 1 Samuel 15. 29.
The strength of Israel cannot lie, that is, God cannot. So Jacob as a Prince
had power with Fortitude it self, that is, with God. And that Justin by Virtue
meant no other than God, may be seen Dial. p. 285. where he so reads the place,
(...).

2. It is not then the LXX. only used in the Synagogues, that Justin Martyr
challenges as corrupted by the Jews, but the Hebrew also. For after he had
defended the Version of the LXX. then among the Christians, to have been
exactly true in the places before spoken of, and had challenged the Jews (p.
297.) for having eras'd out of theirs many entire Passages, which foretold the
Crucifixion of Jesus Christ God and Man, which places because the Jews denied
to belong unto the Scripture, Justin promises to make good his general Charge
out of those very Scriptures* which the Jews acknowledged to be genuine, and
accordingly produces a Passage out of Esdras, two out of Isaiah* and that of
Psalm. 96. 10, (...), which Observations he had made out of the Scriptures,
which the Jews read in their Synagogues (p. 298.) And he adds, these
Corruptions, or at least one had crept in very lately. To all which Trypho had
not a word to say. It hence appears that Justin argues not out of his own
single Copies of the LXX. which Mr. O. seems to grant had these Passages, but
out of many Copies used in the Jewish Synagogues, which the Father had carefuly
examined, and in all likelihood Hebrew Copies too in Palestine of Syria,
whereof he was a Native. Nor can we suppose Justin Martyr argued from his own
Greek Copy only, but those commonly in the hands of the Christians. He had more
sense than so to impose upon himself and Trypho too.

3. It must be confessed it is a wonder that even after Justin had thus noted
these Corruptions, the Christians should not have amended them. But I can
produce Mr. O. a like Instance, which must be acknowledged parallel. All the
Hebrew Copies that we have (as far as I can learn) and mine in particular has
that of Psalm. 22. 16. As a Lion, instead of They pierced; and I have consulted
Pagnine, who renders it tanquam Leo, though in the Margin he has foderunt. And
though all agree that they pierced is the true Reading, and though some seem to
have found a few Copies in Hebrew which have it so, yet for the two Ages last
past, wherein Learning has superabounded they have not corrected this Erratum.
Our beloved Jews doubtless will not suffer us; and we happily are as unwilling as
they, lest the Infallibility of the Hebrew Text to a title, like that of the
Roman Church, should come to nothing, for this Change would be an open
acknowledgment of its Corruption. Let then Mr. Fuller call me Foulmouth, and
Mr. O. Blasphemer, I am still of Opinion, and do aver upon the Authority of J.
M. that the Hebrew Copies the Jewish LXX. and both have received some
Corruptions. But to return, If the places had been found in any of the Hebrew
Copies in the days of Justin, it had been an easy matter for Tryph^ and the
Jews to have appealed to the Original Hebrew Verity for their Justification,
and retorted upon J. Martyr, that the Christians rather had been the Authors of
the forementioned Interpolations, for the support and advancement of their
Religion. They might the more confidently have done this, if J. M. had not
understood the Hebrew.

The Chronological Argument I will not meddle with; I must either Transcribe
Vossius, or wast more Time and Paper than is needful, since any one may have
the entire Argument at the Fountain Head; but to treat of it in short, as Mr.
O. has done, and overlook the most, and the best of the Arguments, would be to
small purpose. Only remember that Vossius establishes the Chronology of the
LXX. by the Testimony of Josephus, between whom there is a very near Agreement:
And all the World knows that Josephus was a learned Man, a saithful Historian,
a Jewish Priest and Interpreter of the Law, and therefore could not be very
much mistaken in this matter. But whereas Mr. O. suggests p. 70. that upon this
Principle of 6000 Years we cannot prove Christ is yet come, I reply 1. It may
upon that very Principle be proved, if we will admit (as we ought) the LXX.
into our assistance. 2. Supposing the Hebrew Chronology right, it is not
necessary for us to follow the Jewish Principle of 6000 Years; it is sufficient
to say, (let what will become of the Chronology whether it be 4 or 6000 Years)
that the time of Christ's Appearance in the Flesh was come in the days of
Augustus Caesar, when both Jews and Samaritans were big with expectations of
him, and thereby acknowledged the time to be fulfilled. Which time, if they
believed to be 6000 Years it is not unlikely, but they corrupted the Hebrew
Chronology, to justify their not Believing and Crucifying Him.

The Instance of Cainan, Luke 3. in Christ's Genealogy, left out of the Hebrew,
is so clear, that one might justly admire good Authors should so toil and
sweat, to avoid Luke's Testimony, and all for the sake of the Hebrew Verity. I
can give a plausible Reason, why the Jews might leave Cainan out of the Heb.
viz. Because thereby they would disparage and overthrow Luke's Genealogy, and
spoil his credit among the Nations. As for other Additions unto the LXX. it is
nothing to the Point. It is confessed the LXX. has been corrupted: But it is --
(I will not say Blasphemy) to impute Corruption unto that place, which has
received Testimony from the Spirit of God by the Pen of Luke. But says Dr.
Lightfoot, Luke must follow the Heathen's Bibles in his Quotations. That is,
Luke an Inspired Penman (debet, as Jerome before him) must leave the Hebrew
Verity, and transcribe out of a corrupt Version of the Scriptures. Some happily
would think this not far off Blasphemy; but I will not reflect so severely on
that worthy and learned Gentleman. 2. The Doctor, adds, Luke was but a Copyer
and not a Corrector But he was an Inspired Copyer, and ought by the Hebrew
Verity to have amended, at least not have followed the Corrupt LXX. Ay but, the
Gentiles well acquainted with the LXX would then have called Luke 's veracity
into Question. A. So they did, if Jerome is to be believed; however, Luke ought
not, doubtless did not value this. Let God be true, but every Man a Liar. Shall
an Inspired Writer value his own veracity above the Truth of God's Word? The
Dr. confesses, Luke in the rest was a Faithful Transcriber. Very good, I think
so. And why not in this? Or how can a Man believe him in any thing, who was
unfaithful in one, or two? Here is a curious Principle, upon which Jerome's
lawfulness of Dissimulation, and the Papists pia frauds, and officious Lies
may be vindicated, and differs very little from that Maxim of Jerome, Quod
ubicunque SS. Apostoli and Apostolici viri loquuntur ad populos, iis plerumque
testimoniis abutuntur, quae jam fuerant in Gentibus divulgata. The Apostles it
seems were very cautious of offending the Gentiles, but not of scandalizing the
Jews, and the Jewish Proselytes, by this unfaithful representation of the
History of the Jewish Church and Christ's Genealogy.

To the Corruption, noted, Psalm 22. 16. Mr. O. replies, and mentions several
Hebrew Copies, which read, they pierced. Very well, and is not this a fair
Confession, that the Hebrew Copies have in this place generally been corrupted?
And I ask, how shall the true Reading be adjusted, but by the Testimony of the
LXX? For the Passage is not once cited in the New Testament. It is no wonder
(Mr. O. says) the Jews should prefer that Reading which favors their Cause.
Right, but it is wonder upon wonder to me, the Christian Sticklers for the
Hebrew Verity, should continue it still in the Text, for fear, (I suppose) of
offending the Jews, without any regard to the Christians, and to the Truth. Or,
rather as Mr. O's. Story of the Famous Dan. Bomb. for fear of losing the Sale
of their Bibles so corrected; for which Reason he might better be styled
Infamous.

I add again that Passage, Deuteronomy. 32. 8. According to the number of the Angels,
even Jerome himself thus reads it. Quatuor ventos coeli; quatuor arbitror
Angelicas potestates, quibus principalia Regna commissa sunt, juxta illud quod
in Deuter, legimus, Quando dividebat altissimus, Gentes, quando separabat
filios Adam, constituit Terminos populorum, juxta numerum Angelorum Dei. It
must then be confessed, that this was the true Reading in Jerome 's time, but
not so now. The Hebrew Copies therefore at this day are here corrupted, if
Jerome may be credited.

Once more, take notice, that there is, at this day, a Corruption of the Hebrew
Text, in the 1 Samuel 2. 17. Where it plainly discovers it self, the Course of
the Story being intolerably perplexed and transposed, as any one will discern,
reading the latter end of the 16th, the whole 17th, and beginning of the 18th
Chapter. But I will not enlarge on this, nor trouble you with those lame
Solutions of this Difficulty, which I meet with in the Synopsis; all of 'em
devised to salve up the Credit and Infallibility of the Hebrew Verity; whereas
the most expedite and Satisfactory Way, if Men could lay aside Prejudices, is
to correct the place by the LXX.

Moses blessing the several Tribes of Israel, Deuteronomy. 33. 6. Thus speaks of
Reuben in the Hebrew: Let Reuben live and not die, and let his men, (his
posterity) be few. For though our Translators have helped the place by adding the
Negative (which indeed ought to be there, else Moses Curses that Tribe, instead
of Blessing it) yet it is not in the Hebrew, as is acknowledged by our
Translators, putting the Negative not, in a different Character. Here, again,
the Critics in the Synopsis take a deal of Pains to patch up the Hebrew
Verity, but without any Satisfaction to me, I do profess.

But let us now take a view of Jerome, who will appear not so tight and so
firmly persuaded of the Incorruption of the Hebrew Text, as Mr. O. is,
Commenting on that Passage, Gal. 3. 13. Cursed is every one that hangs on a
tree. He delivers himself thus, Ex quo mihi videtur, etc. From whence it seems
to me, either that the ancient Hebrew Copies read the words otherwise, than at
present, or the Apostle expressed the Sense of the Scriptures, not the Words,
or (which is rather to be thought) that the Name of God was after the Passion
of Christ, by some body added to the Hebrew, and to our Bibles, that he might
disparage us, who bolieve in Christ (as if) accursed of God.

Again, on Micah 5. 2. He observes that many Cities or Villages, eleven in
number, are reckoned up, (Jos. 15. 60.) in the LXX, though not in the Hebrew, and
amongst the rest, Ephratah, or Bethlehem, which belonged to the Tribe of Judah,
whence Christ sprang, Matthew. 2. 6. He then adds, sive d^ veterihus erasum sit
militia Judeorum. etc. We know not certainly, whether it was struck out of the
Ancient Copies through the Malice of the Jews, least Christ should hence appear
to have sprang from the. Tribe of Judah, or whether it was added by the LXX.
But enough, and more (I hope) than needed on this Point.

Having, I suppose, made good my Assertion, that the Hebrew Bibles have been
corrupted in all Ages*; I now return to the main Business. When I had been in
the Sermon on the Defensive, and had vindicated the Church of England, from Mr.
D's. frivolous Objections; and having at that time (it was a time of Peace
among us) met with a Pamphlet in great Vogue at Manchester, Entitled, Notes on
the B. of S. etc. And another in M. S. called a Sermon, in both which, we were
vilely, Maliciously, and Causelessly traduced; and so the Peace being broken, I
thought it not improper to carry the War into the Enemies own Country, and to
let 'em see, it was possible to give 'em a Diversion, Briefly, I taxt them with
that Corruption, Acts 6. I argued conjecturally, and from Circumstances, but
principally from Matter of Fact. And because Mr. O. was not content with one,
and that a Scotch Instance too, I then proved 'em to have countenanced and
supported the Corruption by two other Overt Acts, which rendered my other
Conjectures the more probable, and the main Charge (...) against them beyond
all Controversy. The life of the whole Argument put together, depends on the
Evidence of those Matters of Fact, which, whether Mr. O. has vindicated the
united Brethren from, is now to be considered. But first, take notice, it ought
not to surprise you, that my Circumstantial Proofs are made so little account
of. Even Malefactors have Brow enough to stand out to the last gasp against
such Evidence, and to assert their Innocence, when the Halter is about their
Necks, and sometimes against positive Witness also.

To the Cameronian Instance, all that is offered of moment (if that be so) is
Coll. Fairfax heard not the Camer. Urge the corrupt Reading, and that perhaps
the Story passed twenty Hands, before it reached the Colonel. But perhaps it
passed not above one, and it is plain the Colonel believed it, and we ought
not to think him so Easy and Credulous, as to entertain a Story without good
Ground. Besides, in the more large Account, I have of the Story, the Reporter
is mentioned by the Colonel, with Honor and Respect, whom he styles a
Gentleman, and perhaps inclinable to the Cameronian Faction, yea, perhaps that
Gentleman might urge it by way of Dispute with the Colonel. What abundance of
things may one surmise? But Mr. O. Pleads, Person, Time and Place, are not
named, that therefore the Evidence is blind, and would look ridiculous in a
Court of Judicature. The proper Answer hereunto, is, that though such Testimonies
in Courts of Justice, are not accounted sufficient to ground a Judiciary
Definitive Sentence upon, yet are they not Ridiculous, but oft-times believed
by the Court. An Evidence may be sufficient for private Conviction, which will
not be allowed of, in public Forms of Justice.

St. Paul accuses some of the Corinthians (and he had it from some of the House
of Cloe, whom he mentions not, and through how many Hands it passed, we know
not) for disparaging him. His Letters are weighty and powerful, but his bodily
Presence is weak and contemptible. Here was neither Person, nor Time, nor Place
named, and yet Paul believed the Report. But the Reason of the Collonel's not
naming Person, Time, and Place, is obvious. For not thinking any use would be
made of the Story, and neglecting to put down these Circumstances in his
Memorials. He easily let 'em slip out of his Memory. The Faith of Men is at a
low Ebb, if the want of these Circumstances must damn all Reports as
Ridiculous, and especially, when they are but of yesterday.

To the Information of Mr. Ellison, he pleads that Mr. Jolly is dead, and
thereby we are put out of all hopes of being able to examine the Truth. I
question not, but you see this is mere shifting. If Mr. O. does really suspect
the* Veracity of Mr. Ellison, let him (for he has the means) inquire into some
of the Circumstances, which will in a good measure clear the rest. There are
those in and about Manchester, who can tell him there was such a Dissenting
Minister as Mr. Jolly, that there is such a Place as Duckenfield hall, whether
Dissenters were wont to resort, and I doubt not, but it may be proved, that Mr.
E. and Mr. J. were then engaged in some Disputes about Church Discipline, and
Government. And if so, there is no Reason to reject Mr. Ellison's Testimony, as
a mere devised Tale. Will any one say this Evidence is a blind one? Would it
not be admitted in a Court of Justice? No Judge but upon such Testimonies,
would decree the Nuncupative Will of a deceased Person, Good and Valid.

As to that Story from the Bolton Gentleman, it is an unexceptionable Proof of
what it was produced for. My Business was not to show, upon what particular
Point this false Reading was alleged either at Duckenfield, or in this Dispute,
whether about Peoples making, or choosing their own Ministers, but that it has
been urged in favor of the Popular Government, and the various Reading can
concern nothing else. Nor was the Question between Mr. O. and me, whether any
Dissenting Ministers, but any Protestant Dissenters had ever urged the Corrupt
Reading, Rem. p. 14. And if these Dissenting Disputants were so ignorant, as
they are suspected to be (for they shall be called Ignorant when the Cause
requires it, though at other times they are the most knowing Persons) can it with
Reason be thought, but that the Argument was put into their Mouths by some of
their Leaders? Whether Laymen or pretending Ministers, is of no moment in this
Case.

Upon the whole Matter, it is, I hope, manifest, that the Dissenters, if they
did not contrive the Erratum, were justly charged with owning it, seeing they
have endeavored to improve it unto their own Advantage. If they did not beget
it, they have at least Fathered it, and why should we refuse 'em the Child,
which (right, or wrong, concerns not us) they lay claim unto, and no body else
has a mind to, especially when it was in requital for spiteful and groundless
Reflections, cast on us by the Note-maker without Provocation: For requital
seems to Mr. O. a just Reason for thus doing. Now then, if we must yet dwell
upon that Expostulation, who began, and who justly requited? You will find this
resolved at the entrance of R. R. And yet without any Defense against that part
of my Apology, we are still told. The Note-maker does not charge any Personal
Fault of the Bishop of S. on the whole body of the Episcopal Church, Vindic. p.
22. But see here how Prejudice and Partiality will blind a Man; for he
immediately subjoyns, that the Note-maker retorts the Schism upon the Church,
which the Bishop of S. had supposed the Dissenters guilty of. Now I think the
Episcopal Church is here charged with (...) supposed Fault, that is, taxing the
Dissenters with Schism. He should have let us (at least of Manchester) alone;
for there the Storm was to fall, whatever the Title Page says it was in usum
Sarum. Nor should he have left his Subject, and Reproached us with Atheism,
Socinianism, Perjury, etc. What Is this to Schism? Or was it for the Service of
the Government, to discourage Men from. Submitting to it? I observe this,
because these Men are so apt (like our Dragoons last among us) to accuse every
body of Jacobitism, that stands in their way, when as none more effectually
promote it than they. And if some shall be esteemed Perjured for the Alteration
of their former Principles, what shall we think of a multitude of Dissenters,
who, if they did not swear (...) unto K. J. yet solemnly promised it? Read
Father Alsop's Speech to the late King, in the Name, and at the Head of a Body
his Brethren, and you will be forced to say, they are, if not false Swearers,
yet egregious Liars, departing from their public and declared Protestations,
which I think comes pretty near the Fault, others are (I think unjustly)
accused of. But I dismiss the Note-maker.

There remains now the Case of Mr. B. and Mr. P. The former's Greatness was
alleged as sufficient excuse, why he vouchsafed to make no Answer to his
Accuser; but the Goliath looked scornfully on little David, and made no
reckoning of him. He had leisure to uncover the nakedness of the Fathers, but
none to hide his own; to revile them, but to commend himself. And for his
greater Honor to interweave the whole History of the Times and public
Transactions with his own; which (as I take it) was too assuming and arrogant.
Thus his Life swelled into a prodigious and intolerable length. It Is observable
that whoever adored him and embraced his Seutiments, with what Laurels he was
wont to adorn their Temples as well as his own; but if any Man dared to gainsay
him, or refused to truckle unto his Dictates, they were sure to be
Thunderstruck by this J. O. M. For which Reason the Ancient Fathers
Infirmities were so imprudently exposed to the dishonor of Christianity.
Though we owe our Religion under God to their Zeal and Learning. For these and
the like Reasons, it was, that some Men of his own Fraternity have rewarded
him, as he had served others. Doubtless you have seen that Pamphlet, etc.

From the whole you will learn (as also by Mr. O's. and the Note-makers
Writings) what liberty these patient, peaceable, mortified, and sanctified Men:
These are the usual Characters they give one another) take in spitefully
reviling their Adversaries, though in the main of their own Persuasion; No
wonder then if they treat us as barbarously. And if you want another example of
this, I send you to the Confutation of Mr. Williams, by Mr. Alsop, and to the
History of the Union, where no quarter is given to these Gentlemen, who
(especially Father Alsop) are (as we speak) handled without Mittens; But if a
Church of England Man meddles with any of 'em they seem to be of the Humor of
that lewd Soldier, who excused himself thus, that the Commandment is thou
shall not, but not, I shall not -- The Author of the said Pamphlet may venture
to deliver many sad Truths of Mr. B. but the Rector must not. The sum is, and
my design was to note, that Mr. B's. Greatness ought not to be his Protection;
nor did he truly deserve that Epithet. A Man ought not to be commended at
adventures. All that can be said of him with respect to Greatness, is, that He
was a person of very good natural Parts, but of no Improvements proportionable
to them. Thus much I have to say on my own behalf for speaking and writing as I
did, when just Ocasion was offered me.

The same Motive drew in Mr. P. he was a Passable Man, and that is all that can
be said of him truly: but to make an Hero of him, and to tell the World he
shined among us, tanquam inter Stellas Luna minores, to carry his Character
higher than it really deserved, and for want of Materials to guess at some
excellencies, which he was so far from meriting, that the contrary must needs
be allowed against him, is an Artifice of advancing the credit of a Party,
which ought not to be endured, and none but desining Men will engage themselves
in. What I took notice of, was his Marrying without the Woman's Parents consent,
and producing a Diploma or Testimonial of taking his Degree at Cambridge.

Hear then my Evidence. A Gentleman of my Parish who knew him well, acquainted
me with both above Twenty years ago, and oft-times since, occasionally in
Discourse. When therefore I read his Life; I went immediately to the Register of
the Class, where I found, That Mr. L. was accused, Aug. 15. 1650. for having
consummated a Marriage between Mr. P. and one S. S. Clandestinly and
Irregularly, therefore the said Mr. P. and Mr. L. are appointed to appear again
at the next Meeting. September. 12. ditto, Mr. P. is appointed to bring in a
Certificate under the hand of his own, and his Wives Parents, testifying their
consent to the Marriage, that the Class (a^ the same time) has received
satisfaction, and acquiesceth in the acknowledgment of Mr. P. and Mr. L.
concerning their irregular Proceedings in the late Clandestine Marriage of Mr.
P. Then November 14. ditto Mr. P. brought in his Certificate concerning Parent
consent to the Marriage. No Man alive laying these things together, but would
have concluded the Marriage was made without the Consent of S. S's Parents,
especially when the other Report proved true beyond all Controversy. As for
Mrs. P. and R. M's Testimony to the contrary, there is still one defect in
them; we are not told that Mr. P's consented to the Marriage before its
consummation, and this is the more to be suspected, because the Marriage was
consummated Clandestinely and Irregularly, under an Hedge in an Alehouse, or
without Banns asked, I know not which, but I am sure not by an Ordained
Minister, contrary to the Law of the Land. But why all this, if their Parents
had consented beforehand? Besides, it was Two Months or ever Mr. P. produced a
Certificate of Parents consent, which makes it probable his Parents consented
not before the Marriage, but were drawn to it with difficulty, when there was
no other remedy. Finally Mr. P. acknowledged himself guilty of some
Irregularity or other, which is sufficient to the general Design of my
Argument. However in the next place that Mr. P. took no Degree in the V. of C.
proves true you see beyond any Contradiction or Apology offered to the
contrary. And if my Relator was in the right in one Story, why should I
question the other? I avoid here speaking openly or further aggravating Mr. P's
fault; for I will not dwell upon so foul a Miscarriage, though one might take
the advantage here to expose both the guilty Party and his Vindicator too. But
I have utterly resolved against it, and so dismiss the Matter of Fact as now
taken pro confesso.

Here then you have an Instance of Mr. O's dealing with Arguments by halves,
which fault he falls into almost in every Page, and in some Pages more than
once; But we must bear with him in this, his Design being (as to me seems) only
to Write a Satyr and deride the Rector, let the Points in Question shift for
themselves as they can. Much good may it do him. I am at his Service, and when
he has reviled me as much as he is able, I am persuaded he will never make the
World believe; I am either Fool, or Knave, or Impudent, or a Blasphemer, the
Dissenters themselves (that know me) being Judges: For to them I am content to
surrender the Interests of my Reputation. I will only speak of one Passage in
the Vindication and so conclude. He acquaints his Reader p. 32. that I give him
the Character of a great Rogue. Really, if I did so, I were no manner of way to
be excused. What I said in R. R. p. 58. Was, That the Dissenters have
themselves owned, The Corrupting St. Chr.
that if Mr. O. is indeed guilty of the Crime laid against him, he is a great
Rogue, and in the Margin I declared the Expression to be none of mine. Now,
Sir, I am content to be the Rogue my self, if I am guilty of calling him so.
But if without any coulor he has in this thing charged me falsely, and robbed me
of my Reputation, among all those that shall read his Vindication, and not
consult my R. R. which I am persuaded one Reader of 100 will not do, then I
leave it to any Man's Judgment, whether he has not done what in him lies to
deserve that Character which I never did, nor will give him.

Finally, I take leave to tell you, (I do it with some Confidence) that there
is scarce one Paragraph (and they are numerous) but I could easily detect in it
some material Defect or other, and effectually answer it; but to what purpose?
When shall we have an end? It would have been hard to undertake so particular a
Reply, without falling into hard words, which is the thing I have carefully
declined. I am not sensible that I have given him any ill Language, or Cause of
Exasperation, except happily it be in this one thing, that I refuse to scold with
him.

I hope both he and you will forgive me this wrong.

And remain yours, T. G.
April 8. 1699.
FINIS.

