The Ark of the Covenant Opened: Or, A TREATISE Of the COVENANT Of Redemption

BETWEEN God and Christ, as the Foundation of the Covenant of Grace.

The Second Part.

Wherein is proved, That there is such a Covenant. The Necessity of it. The
Nature, Properties, Parties thereof. The Tenor, Articles, Subject Matter of
Redemption. The Commands, Conditions, and Promises annexed. The Harmony of the
Covenant of Suretiship made with Christ, and the Covenant of Reconciliation
made with Sinners: wherein they agree, wherein they differ. Grounds of comfort
from the Covenant of Suretiship.


Written by a Minister of the New Testament.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the Bible and three Crowns in Cheapside,
near Mercers Chapel, 1677.

TO THE READER.
THE two only things that should induce any one to give his Testimony and
Recommendation unto Discourses that are published for public use, are the
importance of the Argument treated on, and the useful judicious handling of it,
in those Discourses. Whatever else may be, or usually is spoken unto, on such
occasions, is a diversion from what ought to be intended, and what is expected
by all them who give such Prefaces the perusal. But both these in the ensuing
Discourses seem to be such, and so stated, as to render any Recommendation of
mine in this way needless and superfluous. For the Argument treated of, being
the Covenants of God with Christ the Mediator, and with the Church in him,
there are none who have any acquaintance with Christian Religion, or care of
their own Souls, but must, and will acknowledge it to be of the greatest weight
in it self, and highest concernment unto them. For the Doctrine hereof, or the
truth herein, is the very Center wherein all the lines concerning the Grace of
God and our own duty, do meet; wherein the whole of Religion does consist.
Hence unto the understanding, Notions, and Conceptions, that men have of these
Covenants of God, and according as the Doctrine of them is stated in their
minds, their Conceptions of all other sacred Truths, or Doctrines, are
conformed. And therefore as they who have right apprehensions, and a true
understanding of these things, cannot in the use of diligence, and the means
appointed thereunto, lightly mistake the Truth in any other point of weight in
the whole compass of Religion; so those who unhappily fall under
misapprehension about them, do generally either fluctuate in their own minds
about all other Evangelical Truths, or do corrupt and pervert the whole
Doctrine concerning them. And hereon also depends the regulation of all our
entire Christian practice or Obedience, as all will acknowledge who have any
knowledge of these things. It seems therefore altogether needless, that there
should be any new Recommendation of the subject matter of the ensuing
Discourses, unto those who seriously mind their own Spiritual and Eternal
concerns; and as unto others, it is to no purpose to declare the worth and
nature of such Pearls unto them. As for the manner of the Declaration or
handling of these sacred Truths in the ensuing Discourses, the known Abilities,
Piety, Learning, and Judgment of this Author, with that leisure he had to add
his last thoughts and considerations unto them, are sufficient to give the
Sober Reader an expectation of as much satisfaction as he is like to meet
withal in endeavors of this nature. I cannot therefore but judge that there is
little need of this Attestation which I am desired to give unto this excellent
and useful Treatise. Howbeit, that I may not seem wholly to condemn my self in
what I do, I must acknowledge that there were some reasons which induced me to
comply with the desire of the worthy Publisher of it. My long Christian
acquaintance, and friendship with the Author, made me not unwilling to testify
my Respects unto him and his Labors in the Church of God, now he is at Rest,
for whom I had so great an esteem whilst he was alive. And whereas the whole
Design and end of my self, as unto others, is to promote the knowledge of the
truths of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the practice of them; I knew
not but that with some at least, this occasional word might one way or other
conduce unto that end. I shall therefore briefly and plainly give an account of
my thoughts concerning this Discourse, which I have with some diligence and
great satisfaction perused. Very many learned and godly persons have labored
in the same subject unto the edification of the Church: I intend them only who
agreeing in the truth as to the substance of it, may yet differ in some
conceptions about it, or the way of Explanation of it. For it is not unuseful
that the same truth, especially that which is of so great importance as is what
concerns the Covenant, be variously handled by many, according unto the
measure of the gift of Christ which they have received; so whereas we know all
but in part, if we have, as we ought to have, a continual sense of the
imperfection of our knowledge, none ought to be offended if they meet with some
difference in Conceptions and Expositions about things of lesser moment, among
those who agree in the substance of what they do propose: Perfect Harmony, and
Universal Agreement in all things, is the privilege only of the sacred Writers
who were Divinely inspired. But from the first day that the management of
Religion was in the Providence of God entrusted with them who had not an
infallible Guidance, there is an apparent evidence of such differences as those
we speak of, amongst them all; even the best and wisest of them. We may
therefore allow them all their just Commendation who have labored diligently
in the investigation of the Truth, although some of them have not escaped
various mistakes about it. Nor is it spoken with any reflection on the
endeavors of others who have written on this subject, when I do freely declare
my judgment, That for Order, Method, Perspicuity in treating, and solidity of
Argument, the ensuing Discourse exceeds whatsoever single Treatise I have
seen written with the same design; as it also is entirely compliant with the
Doctrine of the Gospel, in what is assented in it. Three things may be expected
in discourses of this nature, or however the subject requires that they may be
attended unto.

1. A diligent declaration of the Truth, in and from its proper principles,
with a solid confirmation thereof. 2. A practical improvement of the Truth so
declared and demonstrated. 3. A vindication of it from direct opposition
against it, or the corruption of it by a mixture of false notions and
apprehensions about it, especially such as wherein Christian Practice is nearly
concerned.
Each of these the Reverend and Learned Author of the ensuing Discourse had an
especial regard unto; and how he has discharged himself in them all, will
quickly appear unto every judicious and attentive Reader. I am sure I shall not
offend in wishing that others may find the same satisfaction in their perusal,
as I have done. Wish, I heartily do also, that as many of those as can with
convenience, who desire a good and safe Guide in these important truths, in the
declaration whereof so many have run into extremes, even unto the hazard of the
Souls of Men, and would have their hearts excited unto their practice, would
furnish themselves with what is here tendered unto them. For I find that in
what is Doctrinal in the whole Discourse, wherein a great and excellent part of
the Mystery of the Gospel is unfolded, the Reverend Author has fully weighed,
not only what can be said in the confirmation of what he asserts, but also what
can be said against it, or be set up in competition with it, carrying on the
Truth with successful Evidence, and clear Demonstration. And as unto what is
Practical, as he had the experience of it in his own Soul, so there is nothing
wanting that might give the severals insisted on, a due impression on the Minds
and Affections of others. Soundness in Doctrine, Gravity in Speech, Conviction
in Argument, Power in Exhortation, Clearness and Perspicuity in Order, with a
nervous intertexture of Scripture-Testimonies and Reason, throughout the whole,
all evidencing their spring in this work to have been, Zeal for the Glory of
God, Love of the Truth, and Compassion toward the Souls of Men, do in my
judgment animate and fill up these discourses from the Beginning unto the End.
That they may be blessed unto the benefit and advantage of them who desire to
be edified in the truth that is after Godliness, is, The earnest Prayer of,

READER, Thy Servant in the Work of the Gospel, JOHN OWEN.

THE CONTENTS.
Chap. I. OF the foundation of the covenant of Grace, or of the covenant of
Redemption; where it is 1. Proved, that there is such a covenant between God and
Christ, P. 1. 1. Proof, from Isa. 59.20, 21, p. 2. 2. Proof, from Psalm 89. p.
3. 3d. Proof, from Scriptures, which hold forth all the Essentials and
Requisites for making up a formal Covenant, to be betwixt God and Christ, p. 5.
The necessary Requisites unto the essence of a Covenant, p. 6. That they are to
be found betwixt Jehovah and Christ, ib. (1) Consent and agreement between God
and Christ about this thing, p. 6. (2) Proposals made by Jehovah to Christ, p.
7: And Christ's consent to these proposals, p. 12. (3) That there is Vestigies
to be found between God and Christ, of all things required to explicit formal
covenanting, p. 16. (1) Commands, with Promises, p. 17. (2) Promises with
conditions, ibid. (3) Conditions with consent, p. 18. (4) Consenting, with
performing, ibid. (5) Asking, and giving, p. 19. (6) Works, Wages, ibid. 4.
Proof, from the Offices, Employments, Trusts, Powers, Authorities and
Relations, which Christ did bear in order to his peoples Redemption, p. 20. The
Covenant between Jehovah and Christ evinced to be the foundation of the
Covenant made with us, p. 26.

Chap. II Of the necessity of the covenant of Redemption; and 1. What kind of
necessity for the being of this Covenant, p. 31. Three Questions about it
resolved, p. 32. And the extremes on either hand considered, p. 36. (2) In what
respects, or to what intents it is necessary: 1. For the honor of God;
considered, 1. Essentially, as to his Nature and Attributes, p. 39. 2.
Personal, as to the distinct subsistences of the persons of the Trinity; and
the distinct Offices of the three Persons, p. 40. 2. The good of the ransomed
and redeemed people, p. 42. And that, 1. To usher in the new way of Life by the
Gospel. 2. That the Gospel covenant with us, might be purely of Grace, p. 43.
3. To advance our salvation, p. 44. 4. That the fountain of our salvation might
be out of our selves. 5. For our establishment under the new Dispensation, p.
45. 6. For the bettering of our blessedness and glory, p. 47. 7. For having in
readiness a Physician before we should be sick. 8. For cutting off all occasion
of boasting from man.

Chap. III. The nature of the covenant of Redemption, manifested. 1. The
various eternal Acts of the Will of God, that concurred to make up this
Agreement: 1. Designation of the person. 2. Fitting of him. 3. Calling of him.
4. Investing him, p. 51. 5 Sending him. On the other part, Christ's consent and
compliance, p. 52. 2. The distinction and order of these acts of his Will: 1.
According to the futurition of things, p. 54. 2. As to his execution of them.
3. As to the end.

The Properties of the covenant of Redemption are, 1. Freedom, p. 57. 2.
Graciousness, p. 60. 3. Eternity, p. 63. 4. Equality in parties and conditions,
p. 67. 5. Order, p. 70. 6. Stability.

The parties of this eternal transaction about Redemption, Jehovah and Christ,
p. 73. How they are to be considered, shown in these assertions: 1. Though God
be on both sides of this Covenant, yet not to be considered the same way on
both parts. 2. The Covenant is transacted with Christ personal: not Christ
mystical p. 74. 3. The Covenant was no^ made with Christ, as God; but as
God-man, p. 75. 4. Christ was chosen Lord-Mediator, and we chosen in him,
before he is a party covenanting with Jehovah about our Redemption, p. 78.

Chap. IV. The subject matter and Articles of the covenant of Redemption
concluded between God and Christ, were, 1. Who should be redeemed, p. 80. 2.
Who should be the Redeemer, p. 81. 3. What the Redeemers work. 4. When it
should be done, p. 82. 5. How to be applied, p. 83. 6. What reward for his
work, p. 84. 7. What should be the mutual assurances for performance of the
Articles agreed on, p. 85. The conditions and engagements required of Christ by
the Covenant, opened in eight assertions, p. 86. 1. All the commands of the
Covenant, and conditions, ibid. 2. All the conditions of the Covenant, were
voluntary acts of Christ's Will. 3. They were certain conditions, p. 87. 4. They
were works, p. 88. 5. The conditions of the covenant of Suretiship made with
Christ, did fully answer the intent of the covenant of Works, p. 89. 6. Neither
Christ's active nor passive Obedience are to be excluded from making up the
adequate condition of the covenant of Suretiship, ibid. 7. The conditions
required of him, and performed by him, were meritorious, p. 90. 8. The
condition of the covenant of Suretiship is more general, viz. his whole u
dertaking, p. 91. Or more special and formal; his whole Obedience both active
and passive, p. 92.

The encouraging conditions made to Christ by God, of eight sorts: 1. Such as
relate to the Offices, Authorities, Trusts and Powers, that were covenanted to
him for the doing his work, p. 94. 2. Such as relate to the Gift and habitual
Endowments, necessary for performing this work, p. 96. 3. Such as relate to his
support in execution of his Office, p. 97. 4. Such as relate to the success of
his work of Redemption, p. 99. 5. Those that relate to his Fathers acceptance
of his work, p. 101. 6. Those that relate to his reward for his work, p. 104.
7. Those that relate to Interest, p. 107. 8. Those that relate to the whole
design and intent of his Suretiship, p. 108.

Chap. V. The harmony of the covenant of Suretiship made with Christ, and the
covenant of Reconciliation and Grace made with sinners: They agree together, 1.
In their rise from Free Grace, p. 113. 2. In their design, the redemption of
lost people, p. 114. 3. In that Christ is the grand Instrument of both, ibid.
4. They are both commensurable with Gods election of the parties with whom he
made the Covenants, p. 115. 5. The principal ends of both, are the same, ibid.
6. The advantage of both redounds to us: the honor to the Lord. 7. There is
exchange of places between Christ and his redeemed seed in both, p. 116. 8. In
many properties, free, gracious, sure, p. 117.

They differ, 1. In their rise; one came from grace in both parties: the other
not, p. 117. 2. In the property of Eternity. 3. The parties are different; in
one, Jehovah and Christ, in the other, Father, Son and Spirit, and lost
sinners, p. 118. 4. The covenant of Redemption is equal, that of Reconciliation
unequal. p. 119 5. In the covenant of Redemption, there was no Mediator; in
that of Reconciliation there is. 6. The Promises of the two Covenants are
different, p. 120. 7. Threatenings are annexed to the covenant of
Reconciliation. 8. The commands and conditions of them are different, p. 121.
9. The covenant of Redemption tarried not for our consent to make it an actual
covenant: the other does, p. 122.

The two Covenants are conjoined together by a five-fold connection: 1. By an
inseparable connection, p. 123. 2. By an infallible connection. 3. An
insuperable connection, p. 124. 4. By a secret and hidden connection. 5. By a
beautiful connection, p. 125. Their connection illustrated by a Similitude, p.
127.

Chap. VI. The grounds of comfort resulting from the covenant of Suretiship to
those who are in the covenant of Reconciliation: 1. The original of Gods
covenanting with us, is an eternal compact between Jehovah and Christ, p. 128.
2. The same love of the Father and Christ, now drawing thee into the New
Covenant, has been in action for thee in Eternity. 3. Our Redemption and
Salvation has little of our Will, and much of Gods gracious Will in it, p.
129. 4. By the covenant of Suretiship, the fountain of life and salvation, lay
out of our selves, in Christ. 5. By the covenant of Suretiship, our Rights and
Charters, the Promises, are in a surer hand than our own, p. 130. 6. By the
covenant of Suretiship, Christ and the Believer are in a manner in one Writ, p
131. 8. By the covenant of Suretiship, all the hard conditions lay upon Christ,
p. 135. 9. That in the covenant of Suretiship, the Believer is undertaken for
by both the parties, Jehovah and Christ, p. 136. 10. The Believer is in a sure
and confirmed Estate, p. 137. 11. Whatever Christ did in that Covenant, it was
for us: and we did it in him, p. 138. 12. By that Covenant, besides all other
Attributes, the Justice of God is for the Believers salvation. This, 1. Is an
argument to answer all temptations from our frailty, inconstancy, etc. p. 140.
2. Admire and study the depths of Love in Gods Covenant, p. 142. 3. Learn how
needful the knowledge and persuasion of Christ's Suretiship for us, is, p. 143.
4. Nothing more necessary to engage our hearts to study faith and hololiness,
p. 144.

Chap. VII. Concerning the Mediator of the New Covenant; and, 1. Of his Name,
what it signifies, p. 145. Christ called Mediator on a fourfold account: 1. In
respect of his Person. 2. Office. 3. Fitness and qualification. 4. His actual
interposing, p. 147. 1. Through him was the Covenant first moved. 2. Through
him was the business begun and ended in the Council of God. 3. Through him were
we represented in his transaction with his Father, p. 148. 4. Through him God
did strike hands with us. 5. Through him the Covenant is fulfilled. 6. Through
him came the news of it. 7. Through him is the Mystery made manifest in the
hearts of his people, p. 149. 8. He paid the price to Justice for us. 9.
Through him is peace made. 10. Through him the blessings of the Covenant are
applied to us. 11. Through him we receive these blessings, p. 150. 12. Through
him was the Covenant with us confirmed. 13. Through him are our hearts engaged
to the bargain, p. 151. 14. Through him is the Covenant made firm and stable.
Uses, 1. The misery of those under the covenant of Works, 2. The blessedness of
Believers under the covenant of Grace. 3. Since Christ is Mediator, he must be
employed and acknowledged, p. 152.

Chap. VIII. Concerning the necessity of a Mediator; and the reasons why the
Covenant is established in the hands of a Mediator, of three sorts, p. 153.

(1) Respecting Gods Glory; 1. The glory of his Honor. 2. The glory of his
Wisdom. 3. The glory of his Goodness, p. 154. 4. The glory of his Justice, p.
155.

(2) Reasons respecting Christ; 1. In respect of his Offices, King, Priest, and
Prophet, ibid. 2. His Power. 3. In respect of the dependence we have on him. 4.
In respect of his sole working the whole business, p. 156.

(3) Sort of reasons, respecting the creatures good, negatively, and
affirmatively: Negatively, 1. Without the Mediator, we could have had no
saving-knowledg of God, p. 156. 2. No union between God and man. 3. No
communion with God. 4. No conformity to God. Affirmatively: 1. A foundation is
laid for a higher happiness to be recovered in Christ, than was lost in Adam,
p. 157. 2. There is a better security of that happiness. 3. Solid grounds of
Consolation. Uses: 1. This clears one difference between the covenant of Grace,
and that of Works, wherein was no Mediator, p. 158. 2. From the necessity of a
Mediator, be convinced of your need of a Mediator, p. 159. 3. Carry it as those
that need a Mediator, p. 160.

Chap. IX. Concerning the person of the Mediator of the New Covenant, p. 161:
called, 1. The Word of God, p. 162. 2. The brightness of his Fathers glory, p.
163. 3. The express Image of his Fathers person, p. 164.

1. Christ has in him a glorious resemblance of the excellency and Attributes
of the Father. 2. It is by Christ that all those Excellencies of God are
revealed to us, p. 164. Three things in God are discovered in Jesus Christ. 1.
The Attributes of God; Wisdom, Goodness, Mercy, Power, Soveriagnty, Justice,
Holiness: All Sufficiency, Patience, Faithfulness, Majesty, p. 166.

2. The distinct subsistences of the persons of the Godhead, p. 171.

3. The distinct Offices of the three Persons: 1. The Acts of the Father,
plotting and making the covenant with Christ Mediator. 2. The Acts of Jesus
Christ undertaking. 3. The Acts of the Spirit.

Chap. X. Concerning the Office of the Mediator; and 1. Of his calling to it,
p. 174. 2. By whom he was called, by God the Father, p. 175. 3. When he was
called to it: 1. In respect of his designation to the Office, it is Eternal, p.
176. 2. In respect of his Furniture for, and being invested in his Office, it
is in time, p. 177. Use 1. Wonder at Gods eternal Love in calling Christ, and
his voluntary submission to it. Use 2. To establish our faith in the prevalency
of Christ's Mediation, ibid. Use 3. Shows the necessity of receiving the
Mediator. Use 4. Is comfort to Believers.

Chap. XI. Of Christ's qualification for the Office of Mediatorship; and 1. Of
his taking our nature upon him, p. 179. Where, 1. Is to be considered the
reality of it, p. 180. 2. His condescending-love in it, p. 181. 3. The
exaltation of our Nature, p. 183. 4. How Christ taking our Nature, is the great
qualification of him for his Mediatorship, p. 185. 1. He must be God: for man
could not satisfy for sin, p. 186. 2. He must be Man, because he must stand in
our stead: and be one with us, etc. p. 187. 3. The reasons why he must be God
and Man, in one person, p. 188.

Chap. XII. Several Questions resolved concerning Christ's taking our Nature
upon him; Why God the Father, or the Holy Ghost, took not our Nature, but the
Son? p. 189. 2. Why must the Son of God be not only Man, but the Son of Man,
the seed of the Woman? p. 191. 3 Why did not the Son of God take Adams nature
in Innocence, but when it was corrupted? p. 192. 4. Why must our Mediator be
born of the seed of Abraham? and when? p. 194. 5. Why must our Mediator be made
under the Law? p. 195. 6. Why was the Son of God born of a Virgin, and not a
married Woman? p. 196. 7. Why is Christ made Man in the fullness of time, and
not sooner nor later? p. 197. The Uses, p. 198.

Chap. XIII. Of Christ's Unction, another qualification of him for his Office;
the first part of which is his Anointing to these Offices of Prophet, Priest,
and King, p. 201. The necessity of them in him, p. 202. The use of them in our
Mediator, p. 204. 3. The concurrence of them for the end of his Mediatorship,
p. 209. Uses, p. 215.

Chap. XIV. The second part of Christ's Unction, viz. as it relates to his
qualifications for the work: 1. Of his Unction in general, p. 221. 1. It was
the same with the Unction of Believers, p. 224. 2. It was without measure, p.
225. 3. As to the time of his Unction; it was from the first Union of his two
Natures: 4. The extent of his Unction: it reaches to all the parts of his
Mediatorship, p. 226. Uses of it, p. 227.

Chap. XV. Of the Requisites in a Mediator, which are eminently in Christ: and
1. Of the Requisites of fitting him for his Trust; as 1. A Mediator must be a
person that must have interest in both parties. 2. He must be trusted by both
parties. 3. He must be well affected to both parties, p. 230. 4. He must have
power over both parties.

(2) Requisites relating to the managing such a work: As, 1. He must be a
condescending person, p. 231. 2. He must be Mollifying, p. 232. 3. He must be
Affable, p. 233. 4. Meek and long-suffering, p. 234. 5. Merciful and
tendr-hearted, p. 235. 6. He must be potent enough to compass his undertaking,
p. 236. 7. Faithful to the interest of both parties in the Mediation, p. 238.
8. He must be a wooer of both the parties, to bring them in friendship
together, p. 239. 9. Courageous to undergo difficulties and oppositions, p. 240.

Some other properties in our Mediator qualifying him for his wrk, not found in
any other Mediator: as 1. His Oneness with both parties between whom he
mediates, p. 242. 2. He never declines the work of Mediation for any. 3. He is
always at hand, and ready, p. 243. 4. A perpetual Mediator, p. 244. Several
Uses, ibid.

Chap. XVI. Of Christ's execution of the Office of a Mediator: 1. He does it
according to both Natures: proved by six Reasons, p. 151. 2. Christ has
executed this Office ever since the beginning of the World, p. 255. 3. Jesus
the Mediator executes his Office as well in his estate of Exaltation, as
Humiliation, p. 257. A Question, whether the Angels have any share in Christ
Mediation? Answered, p. 259. The execution of Christ's Mediatorship, reduced to
five Heads, p. 262. 1. To prepare a way for man's covenanting with God, p. 263.
2. To bring the Elect within the bond of the Covenant, p. 264. 3. To enable
whom he brings into the covenant of Grace, to perform the Duty of the
Covenant, p. 266. 4. To keep them from falling away from that blessed Estate,
p. 207. 5. To bring them to the height of that blessedness he has appointed
for them, p. 269.

Chap. XVII. Grounds of comfort and supports of Faith, arising to Believers
from Christ's Mediatorship; 1. To those who are convinced of enmity betwixt God
and them, and desire Reconciliation, p. 272. 2. To Believers, who are come to
God through him, p. 273. 3. It reaches to all the evils wherewith Believers
can be afflicted, ibid. Grounds of comfort: if we consider, 1. The Person who
mediates, he is one with the Father: 2. The Person with whom he mediates; his
relation to the Mediator, and the persons he mediates for, p. 277. 3. The
Persons for whom he mediates; our nearness to the Mediator, and to God by him.
4. The cause for which he mediates; the righteousness and honourableness of it,
p. 278.

Chap. XVIII. Of the Relations that Christ sustaineth in the covenant of Grace,
viz. A witness of the Covenant: 1. The Witness witnessed, p. 299. 2. The
Witness witnessing: 1. An Eyewitness, p. 302. 2. An acting Witness. 3. He did
declare all he saw, heard, and acted about it, p. 303. Three Mysteries declared
by him: 1. The mystery of the Gospel Covenant, p. 304. 2. The mystery of
Christ, p. 305. 3. The mystery of the Gospel-righteousness, and the way of
justifying Sinners, p. 306. Several Mysteries in this Righteousness; 1. The
imputation of it: 2. In the Instrument, viz. Faith. 3. In the imputation of it,
with reference to the Persons to whom it is imputed.

(4) Christ is the witness of the Covenant, who confirms the truth of all
that is contained in it, p. 307. Viz. Commands, Promises, Conditions,
Threatenings, Predictions and Exceptions, p. 308. 5. Uses of this, p. 313.

Chap. XIX. Another Relation Christ bears in the Covenant, viz. the messenger
of the Covenant, p. 325. Where,

(1) The import of the name, Messenger, or Angel of the Covenant, p. 326.

(2) In what respects it is applicable to Christ, p. 327. 1. In regard of the
trust committed to him in the matters of the Covenant. 2. In regard of his
pains and travel in it, p. 328.

(3) Betwixt whom does Christ travel as Messenger of the Covenant, p. 330. 1.
Christ is in some respect a Messenger betwixt God, and all the visible
multitude to whom the Covenant is offered, and the Gospel preached, p. 331. 2.
More specially between God and his chosen. 3. To many Hypocrites and
Reprobates, p. 332. 4. To the multitudes unto whom the Gospel is preached, p.
333.

(4) Whose Messenger: whether of one or both parties, in respect of delegation,
and mission, and subordination: but of one, in respect of his business, labor
in it, and Embassage about it, and correspondence with both: he is a Messenger
of both parties, ibid.

(5) About what business he is Messenger, viz. all things appertaining to the
Covenant: 1. As to the making it, p. 335. 2. The maintaining and preserving it,
p. 336. 3. The renewing and establishing of it, p. 337.

(6) Consider the Properties of the Angel of the New Covenant; 1. He is
faithful, p. 338. 2. An active diligent Messenger. 3. A sweet Messenger, p.
339. 4. An accurate Reporter of his Message. 5. Mortified to his own honor and
credit, p. 340. Two Uses of this, ibid.

Chap. XX. Another Relation Christ bears in the Covenant, is that of a Servant,
p. 349. To understand this: consider,

(1) In what respects this name is given to Christ: 1. In regard of his Office.
2. In regard of his condition of Humiliation. 3. In regard of his Trust. 4. In
regard of his Work. 5. In regard of his Wages. 6. In regard of his Spirit of
Fear he was subject to, p. 350.

(2) How he came under this Covenant Relation: 1. The Lords choice or Call. 2.
His own Love. 3. His free Consent. 4. His compact and Covenant engaged him, p.
353.

(3) Whose Servant Christ was in the business of the Covenant: 1. Gods. 2.
Ours. 3. Servant to both: with some differences, p. 354.

(4) What kind of service belongs to Christ by his Covenant Relation? 1. The
greatest ever was put on man, Redemption and Salvation. 2. The hardest piece of
work, p. 356. 3. An honorable Service; he served as King. 4. The most kindly
service from Love, p. 357.

(5) What was the service Christ did in the business of the Covenant? it was
all that Christ had in commission to do in our Nature, from the time of his
receiving a Commission to be the Mediator of the Covenant, to the time of his
delivering up the Kingdom to his Father, p. 358. Two Uses of this, p. 360.

Chap. XXI. Christ the Surety of the Covenant, p. 368. To open this, it is
considered,

(1) Of the name and thing: the several significations of the Hebrew word,
(...), Ghnarab, p. 369, which answers to the Greek, (...), p. 371. and Sponsor,
p. 372. The nature of this Suretiship: 1. It is a ground of Trust, p. 372. 2.
It imports several things: 1. Obligement for another: and that 2. Voluutary. 3.
Union of parties, p. 373. 4. Communion between the Debtor and Cautioner. 5. The
substitution of one in the room of another. 6. A conjunct Obligation of Surety
and Debtor to the Creditor, p. 374. 7. Imports either irresponsableness in the
Debtor, or distrustfulness between Creditor and Debtor.

(3) Suretiship of diverse kinds among men, perfectly resembling Chists
Suretiship, p. 375.

Assertions for clearing the Covenant Relation, p. 379. 1. Man considered in
the second Covenant, has as much need of a Surety, as a Savior. 2. Christ's
suretiship was not only a voluntary act, but an act also of absolute
Sovereignty, p. 379. 3. When man was broken, Christ unrequested, undertook for
him to satisfy his Creditor. 4. Christ died not only for our good, but in our
stead, p. 380. 5. Christ the Surety, and broken man, the Debtor, are one in
Law, p. 381. 6. Neither the Creditor nor Law can exact satisfaction of Surety
and Debtor, p. 382. 7. Christ's suretiship was a mixture of justice and grace.
8. Christ's suretiship was not private. 9. Christ in his undertaking, had his
Fathers Bond of relief and warrandize, p. 383. 10. All Christ's Offices are
founded on his suretiship, p. 384.

(3) How came he to be surety of the Covenant? God made him so: which imports,
1. Something in God, viz. his decree. 2. His anointing him. 3. Investing him,
p. 385. 2. Something on Christ's part, viz. His condescending. 2. His engaging
his faith to do what he agreed. 3. His performance of these things, p. 387.
From this suretiship of Christ for his people, arises a fourfold Relation,
founded on it: 1. A natural Relation. 2. A legal Relation. 3. A foederal
Relation. 4. A mystical Relation, p. 388.

(4) For whom Christ is engaged as Surety of the Covenant: some premises to
the Answer, p. 393. Answer, 1. Negatively, Not for all mankind. 2. Nor for all
those within the visible Church, p. 395. Affirmatively: Christ undertakes for
the Elect only.

(5) For what Christ is engaged by his Suretishp. Some distinctions speaking
the extent of his undertaking. 1. Christ is Surety for his people, in his
state, and in his actions, p. 397. 2. He was so in earth, and is so in heaven,
p. 398. 3. In our stead, and in our behalf, p. 401. 4. On Gods part to man, and
man's part to God, p. 402. 1. For God to man, engaging to make good all the
promises thereof to us, p. 402. 2. For man's part to God; which lies in three
things. The first relates to the violation of the Law, and broken covenant of
Works, p. 404. which comprehends two things; 1. His surrogation in ourplace. 2.
His satisfaction, p. 405. The 2. Relates the condition and commands of the New
Covenant. 1. He is surety to God for our performance of the Commands of the New
Covenant, p. 406. 2. He is an engager to make these things that are required of
us, possible and certain in the performance, p. 408. 3. He is engaged to give
habitual Grace, and actual Influences, p. 409. 1. Bowing our will. 2. To
preserve these Habits, p. 410. 3. For our exercising habitual Grace. 4. For the
liveliness of our Graces. 5. For the increase of the habits of Grace, p. 411.
6. To stir us up when heavy. Five assertions clear this; that Christ is engaged
for our obeying the preceptive part of the Law, p. 412. The third part of
Christ's Suretiship for man to God, relates to his undertaking for the persons
of the Elect: 1. For the indemnity of all the Elect, p. 418. 2. For their good
behavior. 3. For their appearing before God at last. 4. For completing
whatever concerns their salvation, p. 419. 5. For completely delivering them.

(6) Some things that commend Christ's Suretiship, 1. That he rendered himself
their Surety, before they needed him. 2. That he entered on it so freely. 3. The
great danger of his undertaking, p. 420. 4. That he engaged for a party which
deserved no pity, p. 421. 5. That he engaged for a people he could expect no
satisfaction from, p. 421.

(7) Wherein Christ's Suretiship differs from bonds of cautionry among men, in
eleven things, p. 422.

(8) The advantages believers have by Christ's Suretiship. 1. Exemption from the
Law and hand of Justice, p. 427. 2. the New and better Covenant-state. 3. Our
perseverance, and stability in ii, p. 428. 4. An ability to perform the
conditions of the Covenant, p. 429. 5. Boldness in distresses to lay our weight
on him. 6. In respect of temptations, preventing, standing against, or
delivering from them.

Uses. 1. Ground of Comfort, p. 431. 2. Use. Expostulation with believers and
unbelievers, p. 432. 3. Use. Trial whether Christ has undertaken for you, p.
434. 4. Use. This Doctrine confirms many Articles of Faith: 1. Free Election,
p. 435. 2. The Sovereignty of Grace. 3. Perseverance, p. 436. 5. Use. Serves to
answer all temptations, discouragements, and doubtings in believers, p. 437. 6.
Use. Exhortation to believers, p. 440. 7. Use. Put not any thing in Christ's
place as Surety for you.

Chap. XXII. Of Christ's being the Testator in the Covenant of Grace: where, 1.
Of the name and relation. It imports a person dying. 2. A person invested with
possession and right to some estate, p. 445. 3. A power in him to dispose of
what he possesses. 4. A Deed. 5. An actual disposing of his goods, p. 446.

(2) What was the design of his being Testator in the Covenant. 1. That he
might add a new title to believers. 2. To declare his free Grace. 3. To ratify
believers titles to Covenant-blessings. 4. To make way to the possession of
them, p. 447.

(3) How this design is accomplished in Christ's bearing this relation in the
several instances. p. 448.

4. Uses made of this, p. 450.

Chap. XXIII. Besides the relations Christ bears in the Covenant: he is the
Covenant it self; which imports, 1. The abridging the whole Covenant in Christ
Mediator. 2. The committing the whole business by God to him, p. 453. Christ is
all the Covenant, 1. Originally, p. 454. 2. Primarily. 3. Eminently, p. 455. 4.
Virtually. 5. Exemplarily, p. 456. 6. Comprehensively, p. 457. (2) The sum of
the Articles of the Covenant is in Christ, p. 458. (3) The sum of the mutual
stipulation is in Christ, p. 459. (4) Christ is the sum of all the Promises, p.
460.

(5) Christ the sum of all the properties of the Covenant, p. 461. 1. Freeness.
2. Everlastingness. 3. Of the order of it. 4. It Is stability. 5. It Is
perfection. 6. It Is satisfactoriness, p. 463.

(6) Christ the sum of all Covenant-bleffings. 1. Eminently. 2.
Comprehensively. 3. Vltimately, p. 465. 4. Virtually, p. 466.

Use. 1. Of reproof. 1. To those who seek something else. 2. To those that seek
something more than Christ, p. 466. 3. To those that seek something less. 4. To
those that wrangle about circumstances, to the prejudice of the marrow of the
Gospel, p. 467.

Use. 2. To discover how we fall short of giving Christ his place in the
Covenant, p. 467.

Use. 3. Of trial, whether you are in the covenant of Grace, p. 468. Try this,
1. By your divorcement from Idols, p. 469. 2. By consenting to the mutual tie
of the Covenant. 3. By your subjection and submission to Christ, p. 470. 4. By
your satisfaction with, and acceptance of the whole bargain. 5. By accounting
duties your privileges. 6. By your equal endeavors after holiness and heaven,
p. 471. 7. By being humbled and provoked to holiness, by the knowledge of your
being in Christ. 8. By your valuing of Christ, p. 472.

Use. 4. To teach us to observe more of Christ, in whatever we see appertaining
to the Covenant, p. 473.

Use. 5. For commending Christ to you. 1. See the necessity of him. 2. Learn
the way how to come to God, p. 474. 3. Be persuaded to take him that is given
for a Covenant of the people, p. 475. 4. Take him, and make use of him for all
the Covenant, p. 476.

Use. 6. For comfort to believers, ibid.

CHAP. I. Of the Foundation of the Covenant of Grace, or of the Covenant of
Redemption. Where, 1. It Is proved that there is such a Covenant with Christ. 2.
That this is the foundation of the Covenant made with us.
AS the Covenant of Grace has its rise from God only, and from Grace; so it is
founded and bottomed upon nothing in us, but upon God's Covenant with Christ,
whom he gave for a Covenant of the people, Isa. 49.8; whom he laid in Zion for
a foundation, a sure foundation, Isa. 28.16. The Covenant made with us, did
spring out of the Covenant made with Christ; and as it is commonly
distinguished, the Covenant of reconciliation, whereby we are actually
recovered and reconciled unto God, is bottomed upon the Covenant of Redemption;
or as others speak, the Covenant of suretiship, whereby the recovery,
redemption and restitution of fallen man, was transacted betwixt God and
Christ. I shall therefore speak a little of the Covenant of Redemption, to make
way for the better understanding of the whole Treatise of the Covenant of
Grace; and particularly what relates to Christ the Mediator.

And, 1. That there is a Covenant betwixt God and Christ; though the name of
this mysterious transaction, which we call the Covenant of Redemption and
Suretiship, be not found in the Scripture, in so many words (which may be among
the reasons why most Writers have been silent about the thing); yet the thing
it self being so evidently held forth in the Scripture, F. Socinus de Servats
l. 2. cap. 16.
that the Socinians who enervate and study to make void the Suretiship of
Christ, yet do not deny a Covenant wherein he is Surety or Mediator, Saltmarsh
of Free Grace. Obs. 6. and 38.
as they understand his Suretiship. And the Antinomians, Who upon the matter do
own no Covenant of Grace properly so called, D. Crisp. Tom. 1. Sermon. 6.
made with us; yet they do acknowledge a Covenant betwixt God and Christ. Ja.
Arm. Orat. de Sacerd. Christi p. 16, 17.
The Arminians also acknowledge the same, though in a sense different from ours.
Mr. Ruthtry. Treat. Of ^b. Covenant. p. ^. c. 6.
The Scriptures (I say) being so very pregnant in this proof, I shall the more
briefly dispatch it, E. Bulk Gosp. Covenant, p. 29.
and refer the Reader to what is written of it by others, every way more fit to
open this mystery, than I am.

The first proof I take from Isa. 59.20, 21, And the Redeemer shall come to
Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, Jo. Cocc. Summa
doctrinae de soedere. c. 5.
says the Lord: As for me, this is my Covenant with them, says the Lord, etc.
Where we read of a Covenant betwixt the Lord and the Redeemer, that was to come
unto Zion, which can be no other but the Covenant of Redemption. For clearing
of this, Consider 1. That he to whom the Lord speaks there, most be Christ and
no other; For 1. It Is he only, whose seed have the Spirit and Word ensured unto
them; for the seed of no Church-Society upon earth has the Spirit and the
Ordinances appropriated and ensured unto them, only Christ's seed have the
promise of the Spirit and the Word appropriated and ensured unto them for ever,
Gal. 3.29, And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's Jeed, and heirs according
to the promise. And the Churches seed have this Promise and Covenant only in so
far as they are Christ's seed, Isa. 44.3, I will pour my spirit upon thy seed,
and my blessing upon thy offspring. 2. Because it is Christ only, who has in
store the Spirit which is given to all his seed; though all Christ's seed
receive of the fame Spirit of the Lord, yet it cannot be said of any of them,
nor of the Church in general, that their seed receive the Spirit that is upon
them, or in them; to wit, by communication of any part of the measure and
proportion given to them; but of Christ's only, who received not the spirit by
measure, Joh. 3.34. Nor can it be said, My spirit that is upon thee -- shall
not depart from thy seed, Gal. 4.6. And because ye are Sons, God bath sent
forth the spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying Abba, father.

2. Let it be considered, that this is not only a Covenant made with Christ;
but it must needs be the Covenant of Redemption: For although, 1. There be
mention here made of his seed, which are not Parties in the Covenant of
Redemption; yet nothing is spoken to them, but only to Christ, and of them, as
a party not treated with, but about whom there was treaty and Covenant 'twixt
God and Christ; for still the speech is to Christ in the second person, upon
thee, thy seed, and thy mouth, etc. 2. Although there be here mention of a
Covenant with them that turn from ungodliness in Jacob, and of Promises
concerning the seed of Christ; yet that amounts to no more, than that they are
the subject matter of the Covenant transacted betwixt God and Christ; and that
the Covenant with them springs out of the Covenant with him, and is the result
and execution thereof. So that I take the meaning of the words, This is my
Covenant with them, my spirit that is upon thee, etc. to be, This is my
Covenant that I have made with thee upon their account, and for their behoof;
or the Covenant that I have made with them, to wit, virtually, when I
covenanted with thee, and made promises to thee for their behoof; the result
whereof, should amount unto a Covenant with them actually. And I say, it can be
no other upon the matter but the Covenant of Redemption: 1. Because it is made
with the Redeemer that should come out of Zion, or with Christ as designed
Mediator and Redeemer in the counsel of God, long before he came in the Flesh.
2. Because it is a Covenant about the Redemption and recovery of the Elect
people of God, who are the only subject matter treated about in this Covenant;
as appears from the Text, v. 20, 21.

2. Proof, I take from Psalm. 89, where the Covenant made with Christ is held
forth as the Original, Foundation and Establishment of the Covenant made with
his seed; and Christ is spoke of under the name of David, with whom he changes
Names in the Scripture, and who was a type of Christ in many things, but
eminently in the Covenant that God made with him, and that he was a public
person, and a King by Covenant, v. 3, I have made a Covenant with my chosen.
God having chose Christ, for performing the work of Redemption, did make a
Covenant with him. Two things being cleared in that Psalm, it will amount to a
full proof of the point in hand: 1. That the Covenant spoken of there, is made
with Christ. 2. That it is the Covenant of Redemption that is here intended.
For the first, that the person spoken of under the name of David, and with whom
the Covenant was made, is Christ and no other, is evident from feveral
expressions which are peculiar to Christ's Person and Kingdom, and cannot be
applied to David, further than he was a type of Christ: This David is the
mighty one upon whom God laid the help of his people, v. 19. It Is he upon whom
the enemy shall not exact, v. 22. It Is he who is higher then the Kings of the
earth, v. 27. whose seed endures for ever, and his throne as the days of
heaven, and to all generations, v. 4, 29, 36, 37. It Is he who is distinguished
from his seed by this difference, that they may sin and be chastised, v. 30;
which case is not put of himself, but only of his seed; it is he, by the force
and virtue of whose Covenant, his sinful seed are not cast out from
Covenant-kindness, v. 33, 34, 35. and this could be no other but Christ: And to
put the matter out of question, the Covenant and Promises made here, v. 27, and
in the parallel-Scripture, 2 Samuel 7.14, are applied unto Christ, Heb. 1.5.

2. That this was the Covenant of Redemption, which God says he made with his
chosen David, i. e. Christ, may be gathered also from the Text. 1. It is the
Covenant by which Chris is constituted a Servant, and engaged in the Service of
the Lord about our Redemption, v. 4, I have made a Covenant with my chosen, --
David my servant. 2. It Is the Covenant by which the help of the People of God
is laid on Christ, as a mighty, potent, responsal person, able for the work, v.
19, I have laid help upon one that is mighty. 3. It Is the Covenant by which
Christ is a King and a Priest, and is designed and destinated, called and
separated unto Offices for the work of Redemption, v. 19, 20, 26, 27, I have
exalted one chosen out of the people, with my oil have I anointed him, etc. 4.
It Is the Covenant by which Christ received commands to fulfill his offices, and
to depend upon God in the doing of the work, v. 27. He shall cry unto me, my
Father, and my God, thou art the rock of my Salvation. 5. It Is the Covenant by
which Christ had peculiar promises made unto him, of assistance for the work of
Redemption, and help to the people of God, v. 21, Mine arm also shall
strengthen him, etc. of glorious victory, v. 23, I will beat down his foes,
etc. and exaltation, v. 27, I will make him my first born, higher than the
Kings of the earth. Of a seed and offspring to endure for ever, v. 29, His
seed also will I make to endure, etc. Now this could be no other but the
Covenant of Redemption; for by no Covenant is Christ engaged in this Service,
called unto these Offices, undertaker of the Peoples help, receiver of such
commands and promises, etc. but by this Covenant of Suretiship.

Object. If it be said, That here are many things spoken which relate to
Christ's seed, and which do belong to the Covenant of reconciliation; such as
the keeping Covenant-kindness and mercy with Christ's seed, etc.

Ans. We are not to conceive of the Covenant of Redemption in such an
abstracted consideration and notion, as if the things transacted in that
Covenant made with Christ, had no relation to, nor connection with the Covenant
made with us; but upon the contrary, we are still to keep in mind the great
affinity and connection that is between these two Covenants, and as the Apostle
reasons from the one to the other, 2 Cor. 6.2, For he says, I have heard thee
in a time accepted, and in the day of salvation have I succored thee. Where he
looks upon what God said to Christ concerning us, and the hearing of him for
us, as spoken for our encouragement, to apply to him in the improvement of the
day of Grace. Yet I say of this Scripture; 1. Here is nothing spoken of
Christ's seed and people, as parties with whom God deals in this Covenant, and
upon whom he lays any commands, nor to whom directly he makes any promises,
(except what may be gathered consequenter and in obliquo) which things must
needs be in the Covenant of reconciliation. 2. Whatsoever is spoken here
concerning Christ's seed and people, it is only of the force of the Covenant
made and sworn with Christ; having influence toward the establishment of
friendship with them, and toward their perseverance in a Covenant-state;
because of God's transactions with Christ; wherein they were comprehended, and
by which they and their interests were disposed of.

The third Proof, I take from these Scriptures which hold forth all the
essentials and requisites for making up a formal Covenant, to be betwixt God
and Christ; which Texts though they speak not explicitly of the name of a
Covenant; yet they do explicitly hold forth the thing.

The Argument in form is this: Where all things necessarily required unto the
essence and being of a Covenant for matter and form, are to be found; there
must needs be a Covenant. But betwixt God and Christ in the matter of our
Redemption, all things necessary unto the essence of a Covenant are to be
found: Therefore there must needs be a Covenant betwixt God and Christ about
the work of Redemption, which we call the Covenant of Suretiship or Redemption.
The major is manifest and undeniable: I come therefore to confirm the minor.
Concerning which, I shall first tell you what are the necessary requisites unto
the essence of a Covenant, and then give plain Scripture Proof that these were
betwixt God and Christ.

1. It is generally acknowledged by the Doctors of the Law, that the agreement
or consent of two or more Parties upon the same thing, makes a Paction; and
that Proposals upon the one part, Ulpian de Pollicit. L. Pactum and L. 1. F. de
Pact.
and a consent upon the other, makes a formal Covenant, though there were no
condition or restipulation. Cic. 2. de invent. Panormit. 2a. part super. Primo
tit. de Pact. Cap. Antigonus.


But more particularly and above all question, where there are Proposals,
Commands, or Promises upon the one part, with conditions required upon the
other, and a consent unto, Panormit ubi supra Azor. instit. Moral. p. 3. l. 11.
de Pollicit. c. 1. and l. 6. c. 3.
or acceptance of these Proposals, with the conditions required upon the other
part, or where there is a restipulation of conditions upon the other part,
there must needs be a Contract or Covenant, not only materially and virtually,
because there is all the essentials of a Covenant; but formally and explicitly,
because there are all the formalities of explicit Covenanting.

2. It is manifest, that all these things are to be found betwixt Jehovah and
Christ, concerning the work of Redemption. 1. There is a consent and agreement
betwixt God and Christ about this very thing, which amounts to a Paction,
Zech. 6.13, The Lord speaking of that ineffable mysterious Economy and
dispensation of the business of man's Redemption and Salvation, as the same is
transacted in the counsel of God's Will; bids him tell us, that the counsel
of peace shall be between them both; to wit, See Pemble on Zech. 6.13. and Jo.
Cocc de foedere, c 5. Sect. 88.
between the Lord of Hosts, and the man whose name is the Branch, v. 12;
betwixt them was the business plotted, consulted and concluded; to the same
purpose are these Scriptures that tell us of the agreement of the Lord's Will,
and Christ's Will in this affair; it was his Father's Will to send him, Joh.
6.40, And this is the will of him that sent me. And Act. 3.26, Unto you first,
God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him, etc. and it was Christ's Will to
be sent, Heb. 10.9, Then said he, Lo, I come to do thy will, Joh. 6.38, For I
came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent
me; it was his Father's will that he should lay down his life, and it was his
will also, Romans 8.32, He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for
us all. Joh. 10.18, No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self: I
have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This Commandment
have I received of my father; it pleased the Lord to bruise him, Isai. 53.10.
and it pleased him to be bruised, Isai. 50.6, I gave my back to the smiters,
and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair: I hid not my face from shame
and spitting. Still there was an agreement.

2. We find clear vestiges in the Scripture of Proposals made by Jehovah unto
Christ, concerning his Will about the work of our Redemption; and of a consent
and agreement upon Christ's part unto these Proposals; whereby he declares his
will to be consenting to his Father's Will. The first, to wit, Proposals made
by God to Christ, we read Psalm. 110.1, The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at
my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool; and Psalm. 2.7, 8, I
will declare the decree, the Lord has said unto me, thou art my Son, this day
have I begotten thee. Ask of me and I will give thee, the heathen for: thine
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. That
these Scriptures contain Proposals, is manifest; and that they are Proposals
made by Jehovah to Christ, appears by the Holy Ghosts asserting it, Act. 13.33,
God has confirmed the same unto us their children, in that he has raised up
Jesus again; as it is also written in the second Psalm, Thou art my Son, this
day have I beg^tten th^^. (...) 1^5, For (...) which of the Angels, said he at
any time, Thou art my S^n; this day have I begotten thee. But all the
difficulty is, to make it appear, that these Proposals belong to the eternal
transaction and Covenant of Redemption. To this end it is to be observed, 1.
That whatsoever is revealed in these Scriptures concerning the things that were
between God and Christ, God said and propounded it unto Christ long before his
coming in the flesh, and therefore it must needs relate to such transactions as
were betwixt God and Christ in the counsel of his Will from all eternity. 2.
Though the accomplishment of these things be applied by the Holy Ghost, unto
the resurrection of Christ; Act. 13.33, and to the exaltation of him in his
humane nature, Heb. 1.5; that does not make against the transacting of them by
an eternal Covenant, where first these Proposals were made; but on the
contrary, it does streng then what is here asserted; because the accomplishment
of these things is declared to be that which God had revealed in the old
Testament to have been said long before by him to Christ. Therefore also the
same Scripture is brought as an evidence of Christ's being consecrated by his
Father unto the offices which he did bear for the wor^ of our Redemption, Heb.
5.5, So also Christ glorified not himself to be made an high Priest: but he
that said unto him, thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee, etc. So that
the declaration of the Sonship of Christ, this day I have begotten thee, is not
to be understood of an hodie aternitatis, a day of eternity, and of the counal
generation of the Son of God (as many of the Ancients, and of the Schoolmen
understand it) and indeed, if it should be vielded to be spoken of an eternal
Sonship, I should understand it of that eternal adoption and designation of
Christ by his own consent in the counsel of God's Will; to a new Sonship for
the work of Redemption, whereby he voluntarily became the first born of many
brethren, and an obe. ient. Son even unto death, Phil. 2.8; and whereby he
consented to take a new Covenant-^ight unto God, as his Father, and his G^^ by
Covenant. Heb. 1.5, -- I will be to him a father, (...) be shall be to me a
son. And we know it is not unusual in Scripture, to style adoption unto a
succession in office, by a Sonship and a begetting; therefore Salathiel is said
to be begotten by Jethoniah, Mat. 1.12; because he succeeded him in the
Kingdom. But since the Holy Ghost applies it distinctly to Christ's
resurrection, Act. 13.33, and to the exaltation of him in his humane Nature,
when he had humbled himself as an obedient Son unto the death of the Cross, and
having by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty
on high, Heb. 1.3, 4, 5. it is safest for us to hold close to that meaning of
the words, This day have I begotten thee; which was the accomplishment of that
which God had said to Christ long before, in the transaction of the Covenant of
Redemption, when Christ was set up from everlasting, before his works of old,
etc. Prove. 8.22, 23. and when the Decree was passed, which was not declared
till long after, Ps. 2.7. Now this day of Christ's exaltation in his humane
Nature at his resurrection, which was the fulfilling of what God said to him,
when he was by eternal destination and decree, called and set a part unto the
work of Redemption, and unto the offices, which as Lord Mediator, he did bear,
is fitly called the day wherein he was begotten; upon several accounts: 1.
Because in this day he was declared to be the Son of God, Romans 1.4, And
declared to be the Son of God, with power, according to the spirit of holiness,
by the resurrection from the dead, (...). The Syriack reads it, Qui cognitus
est; the word signifies, demonstrated, Chrysostom. Hom. in Romans Esthi. in locum
Eras. Beza, etc.
manifested, or defined to be the Son of God; as most Learned men render it.
Though Bellarmine's rendering of the word with the vulgar Latin, for which he
contends, would also fit our purpose, who was predestined to be the Son of
God; which must be meant, of such a Sonship as he took upon him in time, or
rather of the execution of God's Decree, containing his being manifested in the
flesh by the terms of the Covenant of Suretiship (if we read it predestined)
and not of his eternal generation; because as Esthius says upon the place,
Predestination does not relate unto that which was from eternity, but to future
things only. 2. Because on this day of his resurrection, there was in respect
of Christ's humane nature, a second entrance into life, the Grave being a
second womb, See Dr. Ha^^mond Annot. on Ps. 2.
from which he came forth unto life (as his Mothers womb was the first, from
which he came forth unto life, in respect of his humane nature) so he was
begotten, or brought forth in this day, by a new birth out of the womb of the
grave; hence the resurrection is called (...), renascentia, a new or second
birth, See Gerhard H^rm. in locum.
Matthew, 19.28. 3. Because the day of Christ's resurrection, was the day of
vesting, inaugurating and installing him in his Regal Office and Authority in
our nature; this is the day whereof it is said, Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee; because this was a Coronation-day, a day of exaltation of him in
his humane nature, and of constituting him, and settling him in his offices in a
most glorious manner, against all opposition; as the context of that Psalm
bears, v. 6, 7, Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Sion. I will
declare the decree. And Heb. 1.3, 4, 5, -- When he had by himself purged our
sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high. Being made so much
better than the Angels, as he has by inheritance obtained a more excellent
name than they: For unto which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my
Son, this day have I begotten thee. It was a custom among the Romans, that the
Emperors had two Natales, or birth-days, kept; the one was Natalis Imperatoris,
the birthday of the Emperor, to commemorate his coming into the world. The
other was Natalis Imperii, the birthday of the Empire, to commemorate his
advancement to the Imperial Dignity. The feast of commemorating the building of
Rome, was called Palilia; and this title was by decree given of Caius the
Emperor, Sueton in Calig. c. 26.
his advancement to the Empire, Decretum est ut dies quo cepisset imperium
Palilia vocaretur. There is also mention made of another, Spartianus in
Adriano.
Natalis adoptionis, the day of his adoption, i. e. his civil birthday, V. id.
Aug. and then of Natalis Imperii, the birthday of his Empire, III. id. Aug.
And of Vespasian it is recorded, Tacitus Hist. lib. 2.
that Primus principatus dies in posterum celebratus, the first day of his
Empire was celebrated afterward.

3. It Is to be observed concerning the Proposals beforementioned, which I said
are made by Jehovah to Christ, that the Scriptures cited, do distinguish
betwixt the propounding of these things which God said to Christ, and the
publishing or promulgation thereof, Psalm. 2.7, I will declare the decree; Dr.
Hammond in locum.
or as as a late learned Annotator reads it, I will tell of a decree or
Covenant; that is, I will publish and manifest that which was sometime a great
secret, kept betwixt God and Christ; but now is declared and opened up, Psalm.
25.14, The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will show them
his Covenant. Col. 1.26, Even the mystery which has been hidden from ages and
generations, but now is made manifest to his Saints. And what is the secret
that is now declared plainly? even that which follows: The Lord said unto me,
thou art my Son -- ask of me, etc. i. e. God said to Christ, or made this
Proposal to him, thou art the only fit petson for undertaking this work of
Man's Redemption, and I destinate and appoint thee for it: Now therefore ask,
and have the noblest rewards that can be devised, only do the work. I say then,
here is but a declaration of that which was said and done, concluded and
transacted by Proposals 'twixt God and Christ in his Decrees, and the Counsel
of his Will.

4. It Is observable that the Hebrew word here used and translated Decree, (...)
Chok, Vid. Paquin Thessarum in Rad. (...) Chakak Conrad. Kircher. Concord. in
voce (...) Chok.
comes from a root that signifies originally, scribere, describere, statuere,
to write, engrave, ordain, appoint, etc. and so proportionably is the Noun
signifying many things; not only a Law, Statute, and Ordinance; but also a Pact
or Covenant; a writing subscribed with the parties hands, Vid. Bibl. Polyglot.
in locum.
etc. And in this place it is rendered a Covenant by the Chaldee Paraphrast.
Recitabo Pactum, the LXX here render it (...), an Order and Agreement; and so
most of the ancient Interpreters following the Targum, render it God's Statute,
Buxtorf. Lexic. Rab. Talmud. p. 818.
his Pact or Covenant; and it is observed by a great Hebrean, that this word
among the Talmudists is often put for the quality, condition, or nature of any
thing; and if so, here it is the nature, quality and condition of God's decretal
Covenant with Christ. But further, besides the affinity that is among these
notions of Statute, Decree, Agreement, Pact, Covenant, etc. the word (...) that
is here used, is in the Scripture sometimes promiscuously or synonimously used
with the word (...) -- that is usually rendered Covenant. Compare Jer. 31.35,
36. with Jer. 33.20, etc. In both which places God's Ordinance and Covenant
with the day and night is spoken of, to illustrate the stability of his
Covenant with his people in Christ, and there you will find the words (...) and
(...) Statute or Ordinance and Covenant, promiscuously used; and the same thing
which is called God's Ordinance of the day and night, or of the Sun and Moon,
Jer. 31.35, 36. is called his Covenant with the day, and his Covenant with the
night, Jer. 33.20; the meaning of both we are to gather from Genesis 1.16. Vid.
Bibl. Polyglot. in locum.
and 8.22. and 9.11, 12, 13. the Chaldee Paraph. in both these places renders
the different Hebrew words Pactum and Pacta, Paction or Covenant; and the
Syriack renders both the words administrationes, a word comprehensive of both
these notions of God's Economy and dispensations.

Besides the Scriptures beforementioned, we read also of God's Proposals to
Christ, concerning the work of man's Redemption, Isa. 42.6, 7, I the Lord have
called thee in Righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and
give thee for a Covenant of the people for a light of the Gentiles. To open the
eyes of the blind, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that
sit in darkness out of the prisonhouse. And 49.5, 6, And now says the Lord
that formed me from the womb to be his servant, to bring Jacob again to him;
though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord,
and my God shall be my strength. And he said, it is a light thing that thou
should be my servant, to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the
preserved of Israel. I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that
thou may be my salvation to the ends of the earth, etc. which things no man
can reasonably doubt to be spoken by Jehovah to Christ, and to contain
Proposals concerning the Redemption and Salvation of his elect people.

2. Let us in the next place consider, where we find Scripture proof for
Christ's consent unto these Proposals, made by Jehovah to him, which amounts
to a Covenant? We find Christ's consent and agreement, and that before the
beginning of the world, unto the Proposals made to him by Jehovah concerning
this work of Redemption, and the office which he was called unto for that
effect, clearly insinuated, Prove. 8.22, 23, 24, The Lord possessed me in the
beginning of his way, before his works of old. I was set up from everlasting
from the beginning, before ever the earth was. When there were no depths I was
brought forth, when there were no fountains abounding with water. -- 30.31,
Then I was by him as one brought up with him, and I was daily his delight,
rejoicing always before him. Rejoicing in the habitable part of his earth, and
my delights were with the Sons of men. Where we find the substantial, eternal
wisdom of God, Jesus Christ declaring such a plenary voluntary cheerful consent
to undertake the work of our Redemption, that when he was in the Counsel of God
set up and designed unto the office and glory of the Lord Mediator and
Redeemer; he took pleasure and satisfaction beforehand, not only in his people
not yet created, above all the works of his hand, who were to be the satisfying
sight that should be given him for the travel of his Soul (as the Lord says,
Isa. 53.11.); but he took pleasure also in these parts which they were to
inhabit, in every bit of ground that was to be the bounds of their habitation
in the times appointed, Act. 17.26.

But yet more explicitly, read his consent to the Proposals made by Jehovah to
his Son Christ, Psalm. 40.6, 7, 8, Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire,
mine ears have thou opened; burnt offering and sin offering have thou not
required. Then said I, lo I come; in the volume of the book it is written of
me, I delight to do thy will O my God; yea, thy law is within my heart. With
Heb. 10.5, 6, 7, Wherefore when he comes into the world, he says, sacrifice
and offering thou would not, but a body have thou prepared me. In burnt
offerings and sacrifices for sin, thou have had no pleasure. Then said I, lo I
come; in the volume of the boook it is written of me, to do thy will, O God.
Concerning these Scriptures, let us observe some things for clearing the point
in hand; to wit, Christ's consent and agreement unto Proposals made to him by
Jehovah. And 1. It is manifest that the words are Christ's words; for the
Apostle makes Christ, not David to be the speaker here, Heb. 10.5, Wherefore
when he comes into the world, he says, i. e. Christ says; for it is of
Christ's sacrifice, and his offering himself that the Apostle has been
speaking. 2. It Is as manifest that Christ speaks these words to God, to
Jehovah; therefore he says, Psalm. 40.8, and Heb. 10.7.9, O God, and O my God.
3. The words presuppose something spoken and propounded by God to Christ, unto
which these words are an answer: there are four words in the Text which carry
this plainly, that there was something that he, i. e. Jehovah desired and
required as a pleasing satisfaction to him, above all typical Sacrifices,
something which Christ calls his fathers will and his command, thy will, O God;
thy law, O God, to which he gave an answer, then I said, etc. 4. That the thing
concerning which he makes answer to God here, was upon the matter, 1. Some
Proposal, for the performance whereof, God had prepared and fitted him, by his
Incarnation and assuming our nature; A body thou have prepared me or fitted me;
and by his taking on a will that might bow to the will of God, Mine ears thou
have opened. 2. It Is an answer to the Proposal of a business unto which Christ
was called, which was the fathers will and command to him, to do thy will and
thy law, O God. 3. It Is an answer and return to God concerning something that
was concluded and agreed betwixt God and Christ beforehand; and therefore is
said to be written in the volume of thy book. 4. It Is something, which however
it was contracted and recorded before; yet was not to be fulfilled until the
due time, when he comes into the world, not till the time of his Incarnation.
5. It Is something that divine Justice required for a satisfaction, and which no
Sacrifices could amount unto; which is held forth in the opposition of this
command to the negation of all satisfaction by other Sacrifices. Sacrifice thou
have not required, but, etc. and this was no other but the obedience of his own
Son, and the giving his Soul an offering and Sacrifice for sin to satisfy the
Justice of God, Isa. 53.10, Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put
him to grief; when thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see
his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper
in his hands.

5. Consider the answer that Christ gives here, how it amounts unto a plenary
consent and agreement unto the will and proposal of his father unto him, which
is a Covenant of Redemption or Suretiship, i. e. that he will undertake and do
the work of our Redemption, according to his fathers will.

1. I say Christ's answer bears a consent, a willing consent, Lo I come; Christ
sists himself before God in readiness to do his Father's will, to be our Surety
and Savior, it is an expression not unlike these of Isaiah and Samuel, whereby
they expressed their free consent and readiness to obey the call of God, Isa.
6.8, Then said I, here am I, send me; in the Original it is behold me, or lo
me; which is equivolent to Lo I come; or I sist my self ready to obey thy
command, to do thy will, to run thy errand, 1 Samuel 3.10, Speak Lord, for thy
servant hears, i. e. does sist himself ready to obey.

2. Christ's answer bears a submissive humble consent, Mine ear have thou
opened, or bored: there seems to be an allusion to a Ceremony that was used
toward the Servant that would not have his liberty, but loved his Master so,
that he would not go out free from his Service, when he might according to Law,
in the seventh year: whereof see Deuteronomy. 15.12, to 17. and Exodus 21.6. So the
opening or boring of the ear is, not only a sign of hearkening and obedience,
as the Phrase is used concerning Christ, Isa. 50.5, The Lord God has opened
mine ear, and I was not rebellious, neither turned away back. But it notes also
his taking on the form of a Servant, such as had their ears bored, in token of
their submission to serve when they might have been free. In place of this
Phrase, the Apostle says, A body thou have prepared me: giving a perspicuous
interpretation of the opening of the ear, that it related to Christ's
Incarnation, and the principal end thereof, which was that he might be found in
the form of a Servant, to obey and do the will of his father, as one who by his
own consent was nailed and pinned to his Service in the work of Redemption,
Phil. 2.7, 8, But made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of
a servant, and was made in the likeness of men. And being found in fashion as a
man, he humbled himself and became obedient unto death, even the death of the
Cross.

3. Christ's answer bears a consent given in contemplation of a satisfaction to
divine Justice; and therefore he mentions the Law of God, and the things that
God required, and offers himself to undergo these; for this he did propose to
himself, that offended divine Justice might have an honorable satisfaction,
and that the Law might have obedience in him, Gal. 4.4, 5, But when the fullness
of the time was come, God. sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the
law: To redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the Adoption
of sons. Zech. 13.7, Awake, O sword, against my shepherd, and against the man
that is my fellow, says the Lord of hosts, smite the shepherd. Gal. 3.13,
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us.

4. Christ's answer bears a complete and plenary consent, which is every way
apted unto the Proposals made to him: for he offers himself to fulfill the Law
(to which he voluntarily subjected himself) in the exact rigor thereof, in
every thing that is written in the bookk of the law, Gal. 3.10. he offers
himself to perform the utmost degree of obedience to the Will of God, to do thy
will, O God; yea, to do not only according to what is written in the book of
the Law, but according to the indenture and contract betwixt God and him, to
which I understand the volume of the book here mentioned, chiefly to relate;
supposing the agreement betwixt God and Christ about the work of man's
Redemption, and all his undertakings to be written as it were in a Book or
Roll, in that sense that the Scripture speaks of a book of life, and the Lambs
book of life, and the writings therein, Rev. 13.8. and 15.8. and 21.27.

5. Christ's answer bears a cheerful consent to the Proposals made by God to
him, I delight to do thy will, O God, and thy law is within my heart; because
his heart was to the business, and a design of love acted him all along his
undertaking and performing the work of our Redemption, Joh. 13.1, having loved
his own; therefore he took pleasure in the work; therefore it was his delight,
Prove. 8.31, Rejoicing in the habitable part of his earth, and my delights were
with the sons of men. Luke 22.15, And he said unto them, with desire I have
desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer. I conclude then, that
this consent upon Christ's part to his Father's Proposals, makes a Covenant
betwixt Jehovah and Christ.

3. Beside the former two, which according to the opinion of Jurists amount to
a Paction, and a Contract, or virtual Covenant, and I think also to a formal
explicit Covenant: there is also vestiges to be found betwixt God and Christ
of all things required unto explicit formal Covenanting.

Let us therefore enquire a little, 1. What are the requisites of formal
explicit Covenanting. 2. What vestiges of these are to be found betwixt
Jehovah and Christ.

1. The peculiar propriety of formal explicit Covenanting, stands in
stipulation and restipulation, in Conditional Proposals, commands, tenders, or
promises upon the one part; and the accepting, consenting, or performing of
conditions required, upon the other part: When the Proposals of whatsoever
quality and kind they be, are expressly conditional, and the conditions
propounded and required, are expressly accepted and agreed unto, there is a
formal explicit Covenant, even in the most strict and rigorous acceptance of
the word Covenant. Hence the Jurists confine mutual contracts and explicit
Covenants, within the compass of these few words, Do ut des, Soto de justitia
and Jure lib. 6. Quest. 2. Art. 1. Jo. Call. lex Jurad. in voce pactum.
and facio ut facias, do ut facias, facio ut des.

2. That there be clear footsteps of such dealing and Transactions betwixt
Jehovah and Christ, may appear from these instances; all which evince
stipulation and restipulation; Conditions upon the one part and upon the other;
Conditions given and taken.

1. Betwixt Jehovah and Christ there are Commands with Promises, holding forth
what was the Will of God to Christ, in the matter of man's Redemption; and what
he should expect from his Father for doing that work, and obeying his Will,
Joh. 6.39, 40, This is the fathers will, -- and this is the will of him that
sent me. Zech. 6.12, 13, -- Behold the man whose name is the Branch, and he
shall grow up out of his place, and he shall build the temple of the Lord --
and the counsel of peace shall be between them both. Mich. 5.4, 5, And he shall
stand and feed in the strength of the Lord, in the majesty of the name of the
Lord his God, and they shall abide, for now shall he be great unto the ends of
the earth. And this man shall be the peace when the Assyrian shall come into
our land. Isa. 42, 1, 2, 3, 4. -- He shall bring forth Judgment to the
Gentiles. He shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the
street. A bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall he not
quench; he shall bring forth Judgment unto truth. And if a command with a
threatening annexed, which had a promise in it implicitly, did amount to a
Covenant in God's dealing with man in his integrity, by a Covenant of works (as
is acknowledged by all Civines); Genesis 2.17, But of the tree of the knowledge of
good and evil, thou shall not eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest
thereof, thou shall surely die: Sure, commands with explicit promises, such as
are betwixt God and Christ, do amount to a Covenant.

2. Betwixt Jehovah and Christ, there are Promises with Conditions; I say
Promises with Conditions (not absolute promises) read Isa. 53.10, 11, 12, --
When thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he
shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand:
He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied. By his knowledge
shall my righteous servant justify many, for he shall bear their iniquities.
Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the
spoil with the strong, because he has poured out his soul unto death, and he
was numbered with the transgressors, and he bare the sin of many, and made
intercession for the transgressors. Now Promises with Conditions, are promises
with re-promissions, or conditions upon the one part, and upon the other; this
is a declaration of what God will do, and what he does require, which is a
formal Covenant, and is plainly reducible to that which the Jurists call Do ut
facias, facio ut des, etc.

3. There is betwixt Jehovah and Christ, not only Commands with Promises
annexed, and Promises with Conditions annexed; but which is yet more,
Conditions with consent, a formal consent and voluntary yielding unto the
Proposals which were made unto him by Jehovah; and this is without question, a
formal explicit Covenant, consisting of stipulation and restipulation,
propounding and answering, or accepting, demanding, and yielding or consenting:
he receives a command from his Father to lay down his life, and he willingly
consents, Joh. 10.18, No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self; I
have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment
have I received of my father. His Father propounds his Will to him, and makes
offer of fair conditions, and he accepts, Isa, 53.10, -- When thou shall make
his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days,
and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. Heb. 10.5, 7, Wherefore
when he comes into the world, he says, sacrifice and offering thou would
not, but a body have thou prepared me. Then said I, Lo I come, in the volume of
the book it is written of me, to do thy will, O God. Here is a formal explicit
Covenant.

4. There is betwixt Jehovah and Christ, Consenting with Performing; not only a
mutual agreement upon the things to be done by Christ, and to be done to
Christ; but a real performance of the mutual conditions agreed upon betwixt
them: and this is more than a consummate Covenant, this is the fulfilling of an
explicit Covenant, and the acknowledgment of both parties, that it was
mutually covenanted, and that the conditions were observed, and were performed
on both sides: Joh. 17.4, I have finished the work which thou gave me to do,
says Christ: and his Father says, Isa. 42.1, Behold my servant whom I uphold,
mine elect in whom my soul delights, I have put my spirit upon him, and he
shall bring forth Judgment to the Gentilss. Phil. 2.8, 9, And being found in
fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the
death of the Cross. Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, and given him a
name which is above every name. There is a reciprocation of
Covenant-performances.

5. There is betwixt Jehovah and Christ, asking and giving: the Father asks a
satisfaction to his Justice for the sins of all the Elect, Isa. 53.10, It
pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief: and the satisfaction
which his Father asked, was, that he should make his soul an offering for sin:
and Christ yields and gives the satisfaction which was asked, Psalm. 40.6, Lo
I come, says he, to do thy will. Isa. 53.5, But he was wounded for our
transgressions, and he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed.

Again, Christ asks of his Father a reward and satisfaction for the travel of
his Soul in that great work of our Redemption and Salvation: And his Father
gives it him according to the encouraging-Proposals, whereby he had invited him
to the undertaking so great a work, Psalm. 2.8, Ask of me, and I shall give thee
the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy
possession. Isa. 53.11, He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall be
satisfied. Joh. 17.4, 5, I have glorified thee on earth, I have finished the
work which thou gave me to do: And now, O father, glorify thou me with thine
own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the world was. This kind
of asking and giving on both sides, amounts to a formal explicit Covenant:
here is emptio and venditio, which is a Covenant strictly so called.

6. There is betwixt Jehovah and Christ, work and wages: there is working
propounded upon the one part, and undertaken upon the other; and a reward
promised upon the one part, and expected upon the other; craved upon the one
part, and paid upon the other; and this is a formal Covenant strictly so
taken, Ad similitudinem contractus inter operarium and locatorem operis --
inter herum and servum, not unlike the manner of Covenants betwixt the workman
and work-master, betwixt the Servant and his Lord. Here is indeed, do ut
faoias, facio ut des, I give this upon condition you do that, and I do this
upon condition you give that.

I fay, there was working and rewarding 'twixt God and Christ, and that by no
necessity of nature, but by a voluntary compact; his work and reward are both
propounded to him, Isa. 53.11, 12, He shall see of the travel of his soul, and
shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many;
for he shall bear their iniquity. Therefore will I divide him a portion with
the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong, because he has
poured out his soul unto death, and he was numbered with the transgressors, and
he bare the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors. And
49.3, 6, And said unto me, Thou art my servant, O Israel, in whom I will be
glorified. And he said, it is a light thing that thou should be my servant to
raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel: I will
also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation
unto the end of the earth. And agreed unto by him, Joh. 10.17, Therefore does
my father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again. Heb.
10.7, Then said I, lo I come, in the volume of the book it is written of me, to
do thy will, O God. Therefore we find upon the one part and the other, God
promising a reward, and Christ expecting it: Isa. 53.12, Therefore I will
divide him a portion with the great, with Isa. 49.4, Surely my judgment is with
the Lord, and my work with my God. Again, we find God proposing the reward for
Christ's encouragement in so hard a work, and Christ eying the reward under all
discouragements, Psalm. 110.7, He shall drink of the brook in the way, therefore
shall he lift up the head; with Heb. 12.2, Looking unto Jesus the Author and
finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before him, endured the
Cross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of
God. We find also Christ craving his reward, and challenging it as due to him,
Joh. 17.4, I have glorified thee on earth, I have finished the work which thou
gave me to do. And his Father paying the promised reward, Phil. 2.8, 9,
Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, etc.

The fourth Proof of a Covenant betwixt Jehovah and Christ, I take from the
Offices, Employments, Trusts, Powers, Authorities, and Relations, which Christ
did bear, and wherewith he was vested for doing the work of his peoples
Redemption: All and every of these prove strongly an eternal Covenant and
Compact betwixt Jehovah and Christ: I put these together, that the proofs may
be more ponderous than numerous; I shall therefore, 1. Reckon up some
particulars that fall under this head, each whereof might afford a particular
proof, and then draw an argument from them.

1. His Offices and Employments; Christ is Lord Mediator of the New Covenant,
Heb. 8.6, and 9.15. He is Lord Ambassador and Messenger of the Covenant, Mal.
3.1. He is the Lord's Shepherd and his Servant in the work of Redemption, Zech.
13.7. Isa. 42.1. Not by nature, but by condescension and agreement, to be in
these employments. Christ Mediator is a King, not by nature but by Covenant and
Agreement, he receives a dispensatory Kingdom, Psalm. 2.6, Yet have I set my
king upon my holy hill Zion. Act. 2.36, God has made the same Jesus both Lord
and Christ. Heb. 1.2, -- whom he has appointed heir of all things, by whom
also he made the worlds. Psalm. 89.27, Also I will make him my first born,
higher than the kings of the earth. Christ is a Prophet and a Teacher of his
people, not by nature but by appointment, Act. 3.22, For Moses truly said unto
the Fathers, a Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your
brethren like unto me, him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall say
unto you. Isa. 55.4, Behold, I have given him for a witness to the people.
Christ is a Priest not by nature, but by divine appointment, and that in the
way of agreement and consent, Heb. 5.4, 5, 6, And no man takes this honor
unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. So also Christ
glorified not himself to be made an high priest; but he that said unto him,
Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee. As he says also in another
place; Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec. And 7.21, --
The Lord swear and will not repent, thou art a Priest for ever, after the order
of Melchisedec.

2. The like I say of the Trusts, Powers, and Authorities, that Christ Mediator
had, concerning the work of his peoples Redemption; how came his name to be in
our bond, and he to take upon him to perform the condition of the Covenant of
works? how came he to be under the Law, and to fulfill the Law? Sure it was not
by nature, nor by any necessity of nature; but by divine appointment, and by
his own voluntary yielding to it, which is Compact; so Jesus was made surety,
Heb. 7.22; and made under the law, Gal. 4.4; how came he to have the disposing
of the eternal interests of all men? Sure he had this trust and authority by
agreement with his Father, who laid it upon him, and he freely received it,
Joh. 5.22, for the Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to
the Son: and 17.2, As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should
give eternal life to as many as thou have given him. How came the keys of the
house of David, to lie upon his shoulder? the great trust and management of all
affairs relating to his Church and People? undoubtedly this was by Compact with
Jehovah, who laid this trust upon him, Isa. 22.23, 24, And the key of the house
of David will I lay upon his shoulder, so he shall open and none shall shut,
and he shall shut and none shall open. And I will fasten him as a nail in a
sure place, and he shall be for a glorious throne to his fathers house. And
they shall hang upon him all the glory of his house, the offspring and the
issue, all vessels of small quantity, from the vessels of cups, even to all the
vessels of flagons. Rev. 3.7. -- He that has the key of David, he that opens
and no man shuts, and shuts and no man opens.

3. I affirm the same also of Christ's Covenant-relations to God and to his
people: Though God the Father was the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ by
eternal generation, and he is the natural Son of God; yet who can declare how
God is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, but by Covenant? 1 Pet.
1.3. God foretold this Covenant Interest of Christ's, Psalm. 89.26, He shall cry
unto me, thou art my Father, my God, and the rock of my Salvation; with Heb.
1.5, For unto which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this
day have I begotten thee. And again, I will be to him a Father, and he shall be
to me a Son. And Christ frequently owns that Covenant-compellation, Mat. 27.46,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. Rev. 3.12, Him that overcomes will
I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no more out, and I
will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the City of my God,
which is new Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven from my God, and I will
write upon him my new name. Joh. 20.17, Jesus says unto her, touch me not, for
I am not yet ascended to my Father; but go to my brethren and say to them, I
ascend unto my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God.

From all which I draw but this one Argument; Christ who did bear all these
offices, employments, trusts and relations, for the work of our Redemption, he
had all these things (I say) either by some necessity that could not stand with
his own free consent; or else he did bear these offices, employments, trusts
and relations by his own willing consent, and they were of his own voluntary
taking up. Now it is sure he was not Mediator, nor Surety, nor Messenger of the
Covenant, nor a servant in that affair, by any necessity that was repugnant to
his own free consnt. I say no necessity that was repugnant to his own free
consent; because there was, 1. Some kind of necessity that Christ should travel
in this work, in regard of the DEcree of God, and Divine Predetermination, that
a satisfaction should be made unto his Justice, and that man should not be
saved without this satisfaction interveening; which decree is in order of
nature, and in that kind of priority, that is in our way of conceiving of God's
eternal decrees, antecedaneous to God's Covenant with Christ: Therefore the
Scripture gives us ground to say, that God first chose Christ to this work of
Redemption, and then made a Covenant with him, Psalm. 89.3, I have made a
Covenant with my chosen. 2. We find that Christ having taken upon him these
offices, trusts, employments, etc. beforementioned, was under a blessed, holy
necessity, to fulfill the things belonging to his offices and trusts; and
therefore the Scripture says, it behoved him to be made like unto his
brethren, Heb. 2.17. and it behoved Christ to suffer, Luke 24.46. and he must
needs go through Samaria, Joh. 4.4. I must work the works of him that sent me,
Joh. 9.4. But neither of these necessities was any ways repugnant to his own
free confent and willingness to bear these offices and trusts: For the first
necessity in regard of the decree of God, that decree being the counsel of his
own will, as well as his Fathers; there was not thereby any necessity upon him,
repugnant to his own free consent. And the second necessity of doing the works
of him that sent him, being a necessity which he voluntarily took upon him by
his willing undertaking the trust of being Lord Mediator, there was not thereby
any imposing upon his free consent, Joh. 10.17, 18, Therefore does my Father
love me, because I lay down my life that I might take it again. No man takes
it from me, but I lay it down of my self. I have power to lay it down, and I
have power to take it again. Phil. 2.8, And being found in fashion as a man, he
humbled himself unto death, even the death of the Cross.

Yet I say, there was not upon Christ any necessity repugnant to his free and
willing acting, in the taking upon him these offices, trusts, relations, etc.
1. Because there was no compellingnecessity, such as is upon a man bound hand
and foot; there was no such necessity upon the Lord to send Christ, and to lay
these offices upon him; for he is a most free foveraign Agent, above counsel,
and much more above compulsion, Isa. 40.13, Who has directed the spirit of the
Lord, or being his Counselor has taught him? Psalm. 135.6, Whatsoever the
Lord pleased, that did he in heaven and in earth, in the seas, and all deep
place. And he was not bound to change the Law-dispensation into a new one of
Grace; Therefore is the thing that was laid upon Christ, so often called the
will of him that sent him, Joh. 6.39, 40. Neither was there any such necessity
upon Christ to take these offices and employments, he could not be compelled to
lay down his life, Joh. 10.18, No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of
my self: I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again; this
Commandment received I of my Father. Phil. 2.6.8, Who being in the form of God,
thought it not robbery to be equal with God. And being found in fashion as a
man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the
Cross.

2. There was no natural uecessity, such as that of the Sun to give light, and
the fire heat; sure there was no such necessity of God's sending of Christ; God
did not by any natural necessity send forth Christ; nor was the Son of God
under any natural necessity to undertake the work of our Redemption, for God
might have done otherwise, he might in Justice have prosecuted the Covenant of
works; yea, there was no kind of necessity upon God to send, or upon Christ to
go this errand, abstracting from his own Decrees, and the purpose of his Will,
Ephesians. 1.5, 6, Having predestined us unto the adoption of Children by Jesus
Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will: to the praise of
the glory of his grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the beloved. Romans
9.20, 21, Nay, but O man, who art thou, that replyest against God? shall the
thing formed say to him that formed it, why have thou formed me thus? Has not
the potter power over the clay, of the same lump to make one vessel unto
honor, and another unto dishonor? 3. There was no moral necessity, not so
much as any command, motive or inducement without himself, either upon God to
lay this employment upon Christ, or upon Christ to take it upon him, and to
undergo the work; for God might have sent his Son or not sent him, as pleased
him; there was not so much as a moral cause inducing him to it, Joh. 3.16, For
God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes on him should not perish, but have everlasting life. Romans 5.6, 8, For
when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly. But
God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ
died for us. And Christ might have refused to undertake the work, or he might
have agreed as pleased him; for who could have laid a command upon him, if the
design of love that was in his heart had not acted him to a consent? Phil. 2.6,
8, Who being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God.
And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself unto death, even the
death of the Cross. It rests therefore that all these offices, employments,
trusts, authorities, and Covenant-relations, that Christ did bear, were
undertaken and undergone by his own free consent; and if they were by his free
consent, this consent was either his own motion without the consent and
agreement of Jehovah concurring in council with him, for the carrying on the
work of our Redemption; or this was transacted and done in the counsel of God,
by the knowledge, will, consent and agreement of God with Christ. Now the
Scripture is plain and express, that all the offices, trusts, authorities,
employments and Covenant-relations which Christ did bear, were not usurped,
were not taken upon him without divine ordination and appointment, without his
Father's consent and command; but that he was designed, chosen and called
thereunto. See Prove. 8.23, I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning,
or ever the earth was. Joh. 5.22, For the Father judges no man, but has
committed all judgment unto the Son. Isa. 42.1, 6, Behold my servant whom I
uphold; I the Lord have called thee in righteousness. And 49.1, 3, -- The Lord
has called me from the womb, from the bowels of my mother has he made mention
of my name. -- Thou art my servant, O Israel, in whom I will be glorified. Heb.
5.5, 6, So also Christ glorified not himself to be made an high priest; but he
that said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee. As he says
also in another place, Thou art a priest for ever, after the order of
Melchisedec. Act. 3.26, Unto you first, God having raised up his Son Jesus,
sent him to bless you, in turning away every one from his iniquities. Psalm.
40.6, Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire, mine ears have thou opened;
burnt offering and sin offering have thou not required, etc. I conclude
therefore, that all these offices, trusts, powers, and Covenant-relations which
Christ did bear, being upon him by mutual agreement and consent betwixt Jehovah
and Christ; all and every one of them does prove a Compact and Covenant betwixt
Jehovah and Christ.

He who desires more proofs of this Covenant, and to have, further light
therein; let him read Jo. Cocc. Summa doctrinae de foedere, chapter 5. and Mr.
Rutherf. Treat. of the Covenant, Part 2. chapter 6. And Fr. Robert's, Gods
Covenants with Man, Book 2. chapter 2. Sect. 3.

Now that this Covenant betwixt Jehovah and Christ, was the foundation of the
Covenant made with us, may be evinced by these particulars. 1. If this Covenant
of Suretiship had not been concluded betwixt Jehovah and Christ, there could
never have been any Covenant-dealing with us upon terms of Grace; for suppose
this Covenant had not been, the Lord should then have prosecuted the Covenant
of works, and followed a course of Justice against all Mankind, the door should
have been shut for ever against all condescensions, and all Gospel ways of
Grace. Therefore we find the Apostle reckons the change of Law-dispensation,
and life by the tenor of the Covenant of works, into a new way of Grace, to
have its foundation, original and rise from Gods gracious eternal transaction
with Christ. 2 Timothy 1.9, Who has saved us and called us with an holy calling,
not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which
was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began.

2. God's Covenant-dealing with us upon the terms of Grace, is nothing else but
the execution of that which was from eternity decreed, transacted and concluded
by God's Compact with Christ; and therefore the Covenant of Suretiship must
needs be the foundation of the Covenant with us, even as all Decrees and Laws
are the foundation of the execution following thereupon: this will appear more
fully and clearly when we come to speak of the tenor of the Covenant of
Redemption, and the things therein transacted: at present this may suffice, 1.
That whatsoever Covenant-favour and Grace is tendered to us by the
Gospel Covenant, and effectually applied unto us by the Spirit of the Lord,
that was promised to Christ, and to us in him; yea, and plighted in him for our
account by the Covenant made betwixt Jehovah and him; as appears from the
Scripture beforementioned, 2 Timothy 1.9, -- According to his own purpose and
grace, which was given us in Christ before the world began; with Tit. 1.2, In
hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie, promised before the world
began. 2. Whatsoever Covenant-Conditions of one kind or another; whether Faith,
the eminent Gospel-condition, or other Gospel-obedience required of us, or to
be performed upon our part; all these were undertaken by Christ's act of
Suretiship in the Covenant betwixt God and him, and were ensured to him by
Jehovah, to be successfully performed. See Ephesians. 2.10, For we are his
workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before
ordained that we should walk in them. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13, But we are bound to give
thanks always to God, for you brethren, beloved of the Lord; because God has
from the beginning chosen you to Salvation, through sanctification of the
spirit, and belief of the truth. Isa. 53.11, -- And the pleasure of the Lord
shall prosper in his hand. He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall be
satisfied; by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, for he
shall bear their iniquities.

3. In personal Covenanting with God, and the engaging of particular Souls to
him, in the way of the Covenant of Grace; Christ's Suretiship is the ground of
all proceeding: till this be eyed, and in some measure believed, there is no
possibility of advancing one step toward a new Covenant-state: for how can
fallen broken man (who understands his condition to be such) think of dealing
with God, unless he bring a Cautioner with him; or how shall he bring to God
Christ, a surety of the better testament, who has not heard of and believed
his eternal act of Suretiship, Romans 10.14, How then shall they call on him in
whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him of whom they
have not heard? and how shall they hear without a preacher? This Covenant of
Surtiship therefore must needs be the foundation of the Covenant of Grace and
reconciliation; hence it is that David and Hezekiah flee to this act of
Suretiship, and lay the weight of their dealing with God on it, Psalm. 119.122,
Be surety for thy servant for good. Isa. 38.14, -- O Lord, I am oppressed,
undertake for me.

4. The Covenant made with us, has its stability from the Covenant of
Suretiship made with Christ, and therefore this must be the foundation of that;
I say, upon the stability of the Covenant made with Christ, does depend the
stability of the Covenant with us; because that stands firm and sure, therefore
does this stand fast also; therefore the mercies of the Covenant with us, are
sure mercies, and the promises of the Covenant are yea, and amen; because they
are the sure mercies of David, which were first promised to Christ, Isa. 55.3.
and because the promises were made to us in him, 2 Cor. 1.20, For all the
promises of God in him are yea, and in him are amen. Therefore the Covenant
made with us is an everlasting Covenant, because of the Covenant by which he
was given to his people, Isa. 53.3, 4, I make with you an everlasting Covenant,
even the sure mercies of David. Behold I have given him for a witness of the
people, a leader and commander of the people: therefore our faith, and
perseverance, and salvation are sure, as sure as Heaven and Earth can make
them, because of the act of Christ's Suretiship, and his undertaking for them;
because they hang upon Christ's fulfilling his Covenant of Suretiship with God,
and upon condition of his doing the work that his Father gave him to do, Joh.
17.4, 8.15.24, I have glorified thee on earth, I have finished the work which
thou gave me to do: -- For I have given unto them the words which thou gave
me, and they have received them. -- I pray not that thou should take them out
of the world; but that thou should keep them from the evil -- Father I will,
that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am. Mat. 16.18, --
And upon this rock will I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not
prevail against it.

5. The Holy Ghost's leading us so frequently in the Scriptures, from the
Covenant made with us, in all the force, efficacy, stability, eternity,
standing, and perseverance thereof, to look up to the Covenant of Suretiship
made with Christ; is a clear demonstration that this Covenant made with us
depends upon the Covenant made with him; and that the Covenant made with
Christ, is the foundation and ground of the Covenant made with us. Read Ezekiel.
16.60, 61, Nevertheless I will remember my Covenant with thee in the days of
thy youth, and I will establish unto thee an everlasting Covenant. Then thou
shall remember thy ways, and be ashamed, when thou shall receive thy Sisters,
thine elder, and thy younger, and I will give them unto thee for daughters; but
not by thy Covenant. Where the efficacy of the Covenant made with us, is
hanged, not upon that same Covenant, but another; to wit, that made with
Christ: And Isa. 22.22, 23, And the key of the house of David will I lay upon
his shoulder; for he shall open, and none shall shut, and he shall shut and
none shall open; and I will fasten him as a nail in a sure place, and he shall
be for a glorious throne to his father's house, etc. Where under a type of
Eliakim's trust, the fixing of Christ in the Covenant is stated, as the ground
of all the gracious efficiency thereof; and Psalm. 89.33, 34, Nevertheless my
loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to
fail. My Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my
lips. Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not lie unto David. The
establishment of the Covenant with Christ's sinful seed (there spoke of by the
name of David and his seed), is reduced to the Covenant, the sworn Covenant
with Christ, as the ground and foundation thereof, whom God laid in Zion for a
sure foundation, to the intent that he who believes may not make haste, nor be
suddenly removed from his Faith and steadfastness, Isa. 28.16.

CHAP. II. Of the necessity of the Covenant of Redemption. And 1. What kind of
necessity for the being of this Covenant. 2. In what Respects, or to what
Intents it is necessary.
WHen we speak of the necessity of the Covenant of Redemption or Suretiship, we
are cautiously to understand that necessity. The Schoolmen distinguish a
threefold necessity. Aquin. Sum. 1. Part. g. 19. Art. 3 Estius in Sentent. li.
1. d. 38. Sect. 7.
1. A most perfect and absolute necessity, or a simple necessity, when a thing
is so, that it cannot not be, nor be otherwise, and that by the power of any
Agent whatsoever. This necessity belongs not to the Covenant of Redemption,
nor to any other the free acts of the will of God; for if so it had pleased
God, he might have not entered that Covenant with his Son; for it was not
absolutely necessary that man should be redeemed: God might have passed by man
as he did the Apostate Angels; which choice of objects, to be redeemed by
Christ, is mentioned for aggravating God's love to man, Heb. 2.16, For verily
he took not on him the nature of Angels; but he took on him the seed of Abraham.

This necessity belongs only to the divine Nature, which is most perfect, and
cannot by any Agent whatsoever, be brought not to be; or to be other, or
otherwise than he is, Jam. 1.17, -- with whom is no variableness, neither
shadow of turning. 2. A natural necessity, when any thing flows necessarily
and merely from the principles of nature; and thus the fire burns, and the
stone descends. Now the Covenant of Redemption is not necessary by this
natural necessity; for God did not enter in Covenant with Christ as the fire
burns, necessarily, and naturally; for, 1. Then it had been impossible for God
not to have showed mercy upon fallen man, and that in this very way of
Redemption by Christ; for natural Agents cannot but act according to their
natural properties; but it is manifest from God's passing by the fallen Angels,
that he might have passed by man also in his sinful state. 2. If God had either
purposed in himself, or exercised justice or mercy, or both (which is
inconsistent, implicant, and impossible) by this natural necessity, then (his
justice and mercy being infinite) he should have showed mercy up on all, or
exercised justice upon all; he should either have punished all that sinned to
the utmost, as soon as they had sinned, or he should have showed mercy upon
all, as soon as there were qualified objects for mercy: the reason is obvious,
because all natural Agents work to the utmost they can. 3. Then there should
have been no Compact nor Covenant betwixt Jehovah and Christ; for supposing
such a natural necessity, we destroy free consent and agreement, which is
essential to this Covenant, and is proved in the foregoing Chapter.

3. There is an hypothetical necessity which arises from God's ordination and
appointment; or as others call it, a necessity of consequence; when any thing
is necessary upon supposition of some other thing; and this is not an absolute
necessity in the things themselves, and their immutability; but a limited
respective necessity, upon connection of one thing with another. Again, this
limited respective necessity (as Mr. Anth. Burgess well observes) is sometimes
from the efficient cause, True Doctrine of Justif. Part 2. Sermon. 11.
because he is thus and thus disposed; as when it is said, there must be
heresies, 1 Cor. 11, 29. That is, partly in regard of the efficient cause
(although the Text mentions there only the final cause), because there will
be Ignorance and Pride always in men. 2. From the material cause: Thus death is
necessary and inevitable, because we have principles of corruptibility within
us.

3. From the formal cause, because that is immutable and unchangeable. 4. From
the final cause supposing such an end.

When we speak of the necessity of the Covenant of Suretiship or Redemption, it
is this third and last kind of necessity we mean; it was hypothetically and
respectively necessary only that God should enter in Covenant with Christ; to
wit, upon supposition of some other thing that God had decreed and purposed in
himself. And here let us a little enquire,

Quest. 1. What were these things which God's entering in Covenant with Christ
does suppose? 2. What was the necessity of a Covenant betwixt God and Christ,
supposing these things? 3. Whether this hypothetical and respective necessity
of a Covenant with Christ, flowed only from the final cause, from the ends
which God had purposed in himself, or from the efficient cause also, that is,
from God's natural propension to Justice or Mercy?

Answ. 1. The Covenant of Redemption wherein God entered with Christ, did
proceed upon supposition of these things mainly (I do not say only, nor do I
determine the order of the things supposed). 1. This Covenant supposes that
God had purposed in himself, and decreed eminently to glorify himself in the
way of justice and mercy, Romans 9.22, 23, What if God willing to show his wrath,
and to make his power known, endured with much long-suffering the vessels of
wrath fitted to destruction? And that he might make known the riches of his
glory on the vessels of mercy which he had before prepared unto glory? 2 This
Covenant supposes that God had purposed and decreed, that there should be
objects qualified, and fit for the glorifying of both these Attributes; and
this was absolutely necessary to that purpose, both quoad exercitium and quoad
specificationem actus, in respect of the exercise of the act and the
specification and manner of it. For to some properties in God there is required
no object, and to others no qualification of the object. To God's Omnipotency
there is required no object, because it makes its objects; and to God's Wisdom
there is required no qualification in the object; for he can order every thing
to a glorious end. Yet to God's mercy and justice, ad extra, there are not only
required objects, but objects so qualified, either with Grace or Sin, as Mr.
Burgess observes. Therefore the Covenant of Redemption does suppose the purpose
and decree of God about the creation of man, in a blessed, but mutable state,
Doct. of Justif. p. 1. p. 105. and p. 2. p. 105.
and his fall from his Primitive blessedness and first Covenant-state, into
Sin; that there might be objects and qualified objects for glorifying the
Attributes of mercy and justice, upon which the Apostle in the place
beforementioned, Romans 9.22, 23. calls vessels of mercy, and vessels of wrath.
3. The Covenant of Redemption supposes God's purpose and free decree, so far
to follow his Covenant-truth and justice upon man, as not to acquit him without
a satisfaction to Justice in his own person, or by a surety of the same kind
that sinned, Heb. 9.15, And for this cause he is the Mediator of the New
Testament, that by means of death for the redemption of the transgressions that
were under the first testament, they which are called might receive the promise
of the eternal Inheritance. 4. The Covenant of Redemption supposes that God
had purposed to have in Makind the objects for plorifying both these Attributes
of mercy and justice, that he would not punish all sin with eternal death; nor
yet let all go unpunished; but would manifest his justice in some objects, and
the riches of his Grace in others, Romans 9.22, 23. 5. The Covenant of Redemption
supposes that God had chosen Christ first to do the work of Redemption, by
satisfying justice, and entreating mercy, Psalm. 89.3, I have made a Covenant
with my chosen. And Heb. 2.17, Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be
made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high
priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the
people. And that he had chosen the vessels of mercy in him, unto grace and
glory, Ephesians. 1.4, 5, According as he has chosen us in him before the foundation
of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love.
Having predestined us unto the Adoption of children, by Jesus Christ unto
himself, according to the good pleasure of his will. I say then, his
suppositis, these and such like things being supposed, God enters in a Covenant
with Christ.

Quest. 2. But supposing that it is decreed, that divine justice shall be
satisfied; and that the truth of the threatening of the Covenant of works,
should be verified upon man offending, or upon a sufficient surety: supposing
also that Christ is designed in the counsel of God unto this work of redeeming
lost man, by performing a satisfaction to the justice of God: It is yet a
question, What needed the Covenant of Redemption or Suretiship betwixt God and
Christ? Might not the work have been done without any Compact, Covenant or
Agreement betwixt the Father and the Son?

Answ. I shall only here give a short answer, referring the more full and
particular satisfaction of this question unto the latter part of this Chapter,
wherein I have purposed the handling of the particular ends and intents for
which the Covenant of Redemption is necessary; For present I say, 1. It might
suffice that God decreed, and plainly revealed that the satisfaction which his
justice will have for sin, and which Christ has given, was agreed betwixt them
by a Covenant: and so in respect of infinite wisdom, which works by deep
counsel, and does nothing without a reason, it was necessary; because God
thought fit that it should be so, he pitched upon this way. But beside this, 2.
Whatsoever necessity was in regard of infinite wisdom, that lost man should be
redeemed, sin should not be pardoned without a satisfaction, that Christ should
be our Redeemer, and should come and give that satisfaction: the same necessity
also requires a Covenant betwixt God and Christ, for carrying on that work in
the way of Agreement; so that if a Mediator, a Savior and Redeemer, a Surety,
a ransom were necessary, in regard of infinite wisdom, which found out this
Gospel Dispensation and new way of life, then was a Covenant of Suretiship and
Redemption necessary also in the same respect. 3. The work of Redemption
performed by Christ, was such as could not be undertaken and performed without
a Covenant; for it required commanding and obeying, sending and going, asking
and receiving, working and rewarding, all which import, and suppose superiority
and inferiority, or subordination, which could not be betwixt the Father and
the Son, who is equal with God, Phil. 2.6, unless that by Agreement, Compact,
Consent and Covenant, the Son of God had humbled himself, and became obedient
unto death, even the death of the Cross, Phil. 2.8. The work of Redemption unto
which Christ was designed in the counsel of God, required several offices,
employments, trusts, and relations to be sustained by him (whereof I hinted
something in the foregoing Chapter) which not being essential to the Son of
God, nor belonging to him by any natural, absolute, or immutable necessity;
upon supposal of the decree of God, that the Son should do the work of
Redemption, there was a necessity of Consequence, that there should be a
Covenant of Redemption and Suretiship; that by the Father's calling and
command, and by the Sons consent and agreement, making up a voluntary Compact,
the Son of God might bear these offices, and trusts, and relations, which
otherwise he should not have born, Isa. 42.1.6, Behold my servant whom I
uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delights. -- I the Lord have called thee
in righteousness, and will hold thine hand. Psalm. 2.7, I will declare the
decree, the Lord has said unto me, thou art my Son, this day have I begotten
thee. Heb. 5.5, 6, So also Christ glorified not himself to be made an high
priest, but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten
thee. As he says also in another place, Thou art a priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedeo.

Quest. 3. Whether did this Hypothetical necessity of God's entering in
Covenant with Christ to pay a ransom; or as others speak, this necessity of
consequence, flow only from a final cause; to wit, God's ends which he
purposed in himself; or from the efficient cause also; to wit, from justice in
God that could not remit sin without satisfaction?

Answ. 1. Concerning the necessity of God's covenanting with Christ, in respect
of the ends which he purposed in himself; there is no question: Which were, 1.
The supreme end, to glorify his mercy and justice; I mean his declarative
glory, that shines ad extra; not the essential glory of God, whereby he was
infinitely glorious from eternity, and should eternally be essentially
glorious, though neither Man nor Angel, nor any other object of his glory had
been created. This is the glory spoken of in these Scriptures, Prove. 16.4, The
Lord has made all things for himself; yea, even the wicked for the day of
evil. Ephesians. 1.6, To the praise of the glory of his grace wherein he has made us
accepted in the beloved. 2. The subordinate end (which also is a medium or
means for advancing the supreme end) the Redemption and Salvation of his elect
people, to be brought about in such manner as might manifest and declare the
glory of justice and mercy both, in saving some, not all, and passing by
others, upon whom he had purposed to declare his justice; and in saving these
whom he purposed to redeem, in such a way as justice might be satisfied, and
mercy also entreated, Romans 3.24, Being justified freely by his grace, through
the Redemption that is in Jesus Christ. Ephesians. 1.7, In whom we have Redemption
through his blood, the forgiveness of sins according to the riches of his
grace. It is manifest, I say, that in regard of these great ends, the Covenant
of Redemption made with Christ was necessary; God having purposed in procuring
our Salvation, to glorify his mercy and justice, a Mediator and Surety behoved
to be engaged; and there being (in regard of infinite wisdom which determined
it) none so fit as the Son of God; he must needs be engaged by his own consent,
and by a Covenant-agreement with Jehovah.

Q. But here is the question about the necessity of the Covenant of Suretiship
in regard of the efficient cause; to wit, whether or not there was any
necessity of nature or natural essential justice in God, which required this
way of Suretiship and Redemption necessarily, in regard that he could not
pardon sin without a satisfaction?

A. Concerning this question, two reasons mainly prevail with me to be sparing
in the agitation of it. Pisc. amica col. cum vorst. Lubbert. 99. Error Vorst.
Par. in c. 2. Genesis and 9. Ad Romans dub. 12. Brotb. animed. in Vorst. Martin de
Pers. Christi Steg. Photin. p. 506, 507.
1. The great difference of Judgment that is among the Orthodox in this point;
Several Learned men holding God's Justice in punishing and correcting sin to be
so natural, that he cannot but punish it, or require satisfaction; otherwise he
should deny himself, and his own nature.

Again, there are others that hold, if God be confidered absolutely in regard
of his power, and not upon a supposition of this decree, which is de facto, to
let no sin go unpunished; but to punish it either in the Person, or in his
Surety: In this absolute sense they say God might freely have remitted sin
without any satisfaction. Aug. Sermon. 3. de Sanct. Dom. and lib. 3. de Trin. 13.
cap. 10. Calv. in Joh. 15.15. Twiss. Vind. lib. 1. de Elect. Digres. 8 Lumhard.


Others again have followed a middle way, and by some distinctions have studied
to reconcile the difference; which whether they reach the end or not, yet have
showed a good spirit in the endeavors.

2. Because it seems the less useful to dispute about the possibility of
another way of taking away sin, and satisfying the curse of the Law, since
whatsoever God might have done, yet he has plainly revealed that he has
decreed and pitched upon this only way, Mr. Burg. True Doct. of Justif. p. 2.
p. 104, etc.
that he will not pardon sin without a price and satisfaction.

For my own poor apprehensions of this point; 1. I look upon the Socinian
opinion in this matter as extreme, and of dangerous consequence; for they deny
Justice and Mercy to be Properties or Attributes of God, making Justice (or as
they call it, Anger) no property in God; but the mere voluntary effect of his
Will; denying any such Justice in God, whereby he propends to punish sin, and
making it wholly arbitrary, to punish, or not to punish. Upon this foundation
they build, that Christ did not die by way of satisfaction; at least there was
no necessity of it: Ibid. and p. 1. p. 107, etc.
The arguments used by Mr. Burgess in confutation of the Socinian opinion, are
thus far cogent, that they conclude justice to be a natural property in God
(understanding the word natural for that which flows from nature; yet by the
help of free will); and that God's punishing of sin, is not merely from his
Will. And indeed the Scriptures which hold forth sin, as not only contrary to
God's holy Law, but also contrary to his holy Nature: I mean morally contrary
to him, though not physically, Heb. 1.13, Thou art of purer eyes than to behold
evil, and can not look on iniquity: and which attribute the punishing of sin,
not only to the justice of his Law, but to the righteousness and justice of his
Nature, Psalm. 11.7, For the righteous Lord loves righteousness, his
countenance does behold the upright. Rev. 16.5, And I heard the Angel of the
waters say, Thou art righteous, O Lord. These also which reckon punitive
justice among his attributes, when his name was proclaimed, Exodus 34.7, -- and
that will by no means clear the guilty. Thief Scriptures and the like (I say)
have weight with me to reckon justice among the properties of God, and to
believe that his punishing sin is not merely from his will.

2. It is another extreme, to infer hence, that because justice is in some
sense a natural property in God, and his punishing of sin is not merely from
his will; therefore God punishes sin by necessity of nature, and cannot but
punish it, or require satisfaction, more than he can deny his own Nature, or
cease to be God. Against this assertion, Treat. of the Covenant of Grace. p. 1.
c. 7.
the Reasons brought by Mr. Rutherford (to which I refer the Reader) do
strongly conclude.

3. I conceive that these extremes may admit of abatement, without prejudice to
the Lord's Sovereignty, and the absolute freeness of his grace, or without
derogation from the satisfaction of Christ, and the respective necessity
thereof. For, 1. Supposing that God does not punish sin by any natural
necessity, and that he does not punish sin, nor require any satisfaction by any
necessity of justice; yet this can be no advantage to the Socinian
superstruction, who conclude that then there was no necessity of Christ's dying
by way of satisfaction, since God has plainly revealed that he will not pardon
sin, without a satisfaction and an atonement made; and this decree of his does
infer an hypothetical necessity of Christ's dying by way of satisfaction. 2.
Supposing that justice, punitive justice, be natural to God, and among his
properties, it will not necessarily follow (upon supposition of the being of
sin) that God punishes sin by necessity of Nature and Justice, more than it
will follow, that because it is natural to man to speak, to laugh, etc.
Therefore he speaks, he laughs from necessity of nature; for he does these
things most freely; and notwithstanding it is natural to him to laugh or speak,
he might notwithstanding never laugh nor speak, as pleases him. For if so, 1.
Then his justice should carry him to punish sin without any moderation; that
is, to punish sin as soon as ever it is committed, to punish sin to the utmost
degree of punishment, to punish sin in every Soul that sins, without mercy
showed to any, and in the same Soul that sins, not in a Surety; because
natural Agents work to the utmost they can. 2. Because the natural properties
of God, as they are essential to him, do not so much as require any objects ad
extra (though the manifestation of these do require objects), for God should
have been infinitely and eternally wise, holy, good, just, etc. though there
had never been any creation of Men or Angels; and if these do not necessarily
require objects, then far less exercise of acts; so that it will not follow, if
Justice be natural to God, then he must punish sin by necessity of Nature. 3.
If we shall place justice among these properties in God, the objects whereof
may be said to be necessary (which must be understood in respect of the
exercise of acts about these objects; otherwise no natural property in God
necessarily requires any object ad extra); yet the objects supposed, the acts
are not, even then necessary by any absolute necessity of nature; but only by a
hypothetical necessity; supposing the decree of God that gave these objects a
being, and ordered their being, qualified objects for exercising justice or
mercy upon, according to his pleasure, which works all things according to
the counsel of his will; and if so, here is no punishing of sin by necessity of
nature. 4. Supposing Justice to be natural to God in that sense that Mr.
Burgess asserts it, Ibid. p. 104.
and supposing the objects thereof to have a being; yet sure he does not punish
sin by necessity of nature, as the fire burns; since the exercise of Justice,
yea, the choice of objects upon which he will exercise it, are subjected to his
free will and sovereignty; as is manifest from Romans 9.18, Therefore has he
mercy on whom he will have mercy; and whom he will, he hardens. Rev. 4.11,
Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive honor and glory, and power, for thou have
created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created. Whereas
natural necessity excludes freedom both in the principle of action, and the act
it self.

Having now showed what kind of necessity there was for the being of the
Covenant of Redemption betwixt God and Christ; and that the necessity does
mainly respect the final cause and ends which God had purposed in himself: Let
us in the next place consider particularly to what intents and purposes it was
necessary that God should enter into a Covenant of Suretiship and Redemption
with his own Son Christ.

These intents and purposes may be reduced to two chief heads; supposing that
God had purposed in himself to glorify his mercy and Justice in procuring our
Salvation; the Covenant of Suretiship and Redemption was necessary for both
these ends and purposes: 1. For the honor of God. 2. For the salvation and
good of his chosen people; both which were attained through the Covenant made
betwixt God and Christ.

1. For the honor and glory of God; I mean, the declarative glory of God, that
shines ad extra, or the manifestation of his glory, as the same is showed forth
and manifested in his dealings with the Creatures; whereof see Psalm. 19.1, The
heavens declare the glory of God. Exodus 15.11, Who is like unto thee, O Lord,
amongst the Gods! who is like thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises,
doing wonders! Not his essential glory that shines ad intra, whereby he was
infinitely and eternally glorious, before any the works of Creation and
Providence; and should have been glorious eternally, though these had never
been, Prove. 8.22. -- 30, The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way,
before his works of old. -- Then I was by him as one brought up with him, and I
was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him.

I say, the being of this Covenant of Redemption, was necessary for the
declarative glory of God; whether we consider God essentially or personally.

1. For the glory of God considered essentially, or in regard of his glorious
nature and essence, or his natural essential attributes; I mean, his wisdom,
goodness, justice, mercy, faithfulness, etc. And that, 1. For glorifying these
universally, even all and every one of his attributes, all which received a new
and glorious luster, through the Covenant of Redemption, and God's sending of
Christ to do that work which should never have been known nor manifested on
Earth, nor in Heaven, but in the face of Jesus Christ, and by virtue of God's
Covenant-dealings with him about our Redemption; therefore says the Apostle, 2
Cor. 4.6, For God who commanded light to shine out of darkness, has shined in
our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face
of Jesus Christ. Therefore also Christ is called the brightness of his glory,
Heb. 1.3. Christ Mediator is the brightness of the glory of God, in and through
whom, his glorious attributes and nature was made conspicuous, and the
declarative glory thereof had a more glorious luster, than by all the works of
Creation and Providence beside: upon the same account also Christ is called the
Image of the invisible God, Col. 1.15, because the glorious excellencies of God
(otherwise invisible) are gloriously revealed by him, and to be seen in him. I
pass this here in a word, referring a more particular consideration thereof to
that part of this subject matter that concerns the Mediator's person and
office. 2. For the glorifying of these harmoniously, that the harmony of
attributes in God might be manifested in this transaction; to wit, how sweetly
mercy and justice did meet, when peace and righteousness, Law-demands and
Gospel-condescentions, Law-severity and Gospel-lenity did meet together, and
were made friends by this Covenant, Psalm. 85.10.11, Mercy and truth are met
together, righteousness and peace have kissed each other, etc. For by this
means God brought forth to heaven and earth, and all the Creatures, the
glorious harmony of Justice, Truth, Mercy, Power, Wisdom, Grace, Rev. 5.12, 13,
Saying with a loud voice, worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power,
and wisdom, and riches, and strength, and honor, and glory, and blessing. And
every creature which is in heaven and on the earth, and under the earth, and
such as are in the sea, and all that are in them, heard I, saying, Blessing,
honor, glory, and power be unto him that sits upon the throne, and unto the
lamb for ever and ever.

2. This Covenant of Redemption was necessary for the glory of God considered
personally; and that, 1. In regard of the distinct subsistences and glorious
persons of the blessed Trinity. 2. In regard of the distinct offices of the
three persons, all which were gloriously manifested in God's Covenant-dealings
with Christ. I say, the greatest declarative glory and clearest manifestation
of the distinct subsistences and Persons of the Godhead, and of the distinct
offices of these Persons in the everglorious and blessed Trinity, that ever the
world saw or heard. of, was in God's Covenant-dealings with Christ about the
work of our Redemption; for where are there any such clear discoveries of these
great mysteries to be found, as in God's foederal dealings with Christ, and the
Scriptures which reveal the same? God was but darkly known in the distinct
subsistences and offices of the Persons of the Trinity, till this light of his
Covenant with Christ did break forth; but in Gods sending his Son, and the
Son's undertaking and offering himself willingly to his Father, to do this
work; and the Holy Ghost's exercising the power of the Godhead, fitting and
enabling him, the man Christ Jesus, to do the work; there was a glorious
manifestation of the distinction of Persons in the Godhead, and of the offices
of these Persons (whereof also more particularly afterward). See Isa. 42.1,
Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delights; I have
put my spirit upon him, he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles. Heb.
9.14, How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal spirit,
offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead works to
serve the living God? And 10.7, Then said I, Lo, I come, in the volume of the
book it is written of me, to do thy will, O God. Psalm. 2.7, 8, I will declare
the decree, the Lord has said unto me, Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. Joh.
14.26, But the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in
my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you. Mal. 3.16, 17, -- And he saw the
spirit of God descending like a dove, and lighting upon him: And lo, a voice
from heaven saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased; and such
like Scriptures. Yea, so much was the Covenant betwixt God and Christ about our
Redemption for the glory of God, even considered personally; that thereby
(beside the glory that was common to all the three Persons) there did accrue a
peculiar glory to the distinct Persons of the Godhead, in regard of their
distinct offices and working in this business of Redemption; a peculiar glory
to the Father, who gave Christ, and who sent him upon this business, and
blessed us in him, even a peculiar honor to the Father from the Lord Mediator
and Redeemer, Joh. 8.49, But I honor my Father, says Christ; and a peculiar
honor to the Father from the ransomed and redeemed People, 1 Pet. 1.3, Blessed
be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant
mercy has begotten us again into a lively hope by the resurrection of Jesus
Christ from the dead. A peculiar honor to the Son, to Christ the Lord
Mediator, and that both upon earth and in heaven, a peculiar glory to the Lamb
that wrought the Redemption, unto which his Father appointed him, Joh. 5.22,
23, For the Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son:
that all men should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father; which the
Son claims, Joh. 17.1, 4, These words spoke Jesus, and lift up his eyes to
heaven, and said, Father the hour is come, glorify thy Son, that thy Son also
may glorify thee; I have glorified thee on the earth, I have finished the work
which thou gave me to do. And which is paid to him in heaven, Rev. 7.10,
Saying, Salvation to our God which sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb.
And 5.9, And they sing a new song, saying, thou art worthy to take the book,
and to open the seals thereof; for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God
by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation. A
peculiar glory unto the eternal Spirit, by whom the Son of God offered himself
without spot to God, Heb. 9.14; and to whom the effectual application of the
purchased Redemption by peculiar office belongs, 1 Cor. 6.11, And such were
some of you; but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in
the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. Joh. 6.63, It is the
spirit that quickens. Gal. 4.6, And because ye are Sons, God has sent forth
the spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, father.

2. The good of the ransomed and redeemed people, required that their
Redemption should be transacted in a Covenant betwixt God and Christ; and to
this intent, and for this end it was necessary, 1. To introduce and usher in
the new way of life through the Gospel Dispensation, which could never have come
to light, nor have appeared upon the stage to act any thing, if God had not by
his eternal transactions with Christ, in whom he found a ransom, made way for
the taking down the transient-time-dispensation of Law and Works, which was
only to continue and stand a Court of righteousness for a short space; and so
opened a door for free Grace to take the Theater, and to act its part more
nobly than the Law-dispensation that was first upon the stage. And this, I say,
was ushered in, and it was necessary that way should be made for it, by God's
Covenant-dealings with Christ, in whom his Justice had a satisfaction; else the
Law-dispensation of Works and Nature had kept the Stage for ever, and there had
been no Court wherein Grace sits upon the throne, and wherein Sinners might
plead righteousness and life on Gospel-terms. Christ's saying from eternity,
Lo, I come to do thy will, O God, Psalm. 40.6. And deliver him from going down
to the pit; I have found a ransom, Job 33.24, (Which words are upon the matter,
and originally true of Christ's dealings with his Father, Jo. Cocc. D^ foed. c.
5. Sect. 88.
and by some Expositors applied to him). This, I say, ushered in, and made way
for the Gospel Dispensation of a Covenant of free Grace. Hence it is that the
Apostle states the rise of life and immortality that is brought to light by the
Gospel, upon the eternal foederal dealings that were betwixt God and Christ, 2 Timothy 1.9, 10, Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not
according to our works; but according to his own purpose and grace, which was
given us in Christ, before the world began: But is now made manifest by the
appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has abolished death, and has
brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel. Romans 8.3, 4, For what
the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh; God sending his
own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh.

2. The Covenant of Redemption betwixt God and Christ was necessary for our
good, that the Covenant of life and righteousness to us in the way of this
Gospel Dispensation, might be pure sovereign Grace. Now the more of Grace and
God's gracious will and heart, is in the business, and the less of the
Creatures will and acting, the better for us, the sweeter and the surer is the
Covenant. But here all is of the Lord, and of his gracious will, all is
transacted betwixt God and Christ, and man is not so much is present at the
first transaction of the Covenant, as he was at the Covenant of works; here he
is neither at the beginning, nor end of it; I mean, that end which it had in
God's foederal dealings with Christ, where the Redemption and Salvation of the
elect was a concluded business, and the conclusion tarried not, nor was
suspended for man's consent; sure this was pure Grace, this was all Grace,
eminent Grace, when there was nothing of the Creature; no, not so much as
acting in a vital formal manner, as now we act under the application of this
Covenant, by these gracious acts which are efficiently from God; but there, all
was the gracious free will of God, without any thing of the Creatures will;
surely that was eminent signal Grace, and the better for us, 2 Timothy 1.9, Who
has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works;
but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus,
before the world began. Ephesians. 2.10, For we are his workmanship, created in
Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before ordained, that we should
walk in them. Ephesians. 1.4, 5, According as he has chosen us in him, before the
foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame, before him
in love: Having predestined us unto the Adoption of children, by Jesus Christ
to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will.

3. A Covenant betwixt God and Christ about our Salvation and Redemption was
necessary, that the business of our Salvation might be far advanced, ere it
come to our working at it with fear and trembling: and if our working out that
which is left to be done by us, for our own Salvation, be with fear and
trembling, when by this Covenant of Suretiship we are set beyond the possible
reach of actual perishing; O what should our working for Salvation have been
without this Covenant of Suretiship, but endless, fruitless toiling, with
desparation! but by the Covenant of Redemption, our Salvation is far advanced,
before our little finger be at the work; nay, it is in some respect finished,
all the hard labor is over, Justice is satisfied, the strength of opposition
is broken, and we have only broken forces, and a beaten adversary to deal with;
we have little more to do but to stand and see him work Salvation for us, and
apply his purchased Redemption; and yet we have work enough to keep us in
continual exercise, about the duties of holiness and faith, Psalm. 2.12. 2 Cor.
7.1. 2 Pet. 1.5, 10. Joh. 17.4, I have finished the work which thou gave me
to do. And 16.11, -- of judgment; because the Prince of this world is judged.
Heb. 12.2, Looking unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith.

4. A Covenant betwixt God and Christ about our Salvation, was necessary, that
the spring and fountain of the life of Salvation to us, might lie out of our
selves; by the Covenant of works, the spring of life and blessedness to man,
lay in himself; all his treasure and store was in his stock of habitual Grace;
but now by this Covenant of Suretiship, the water-cock is indeed within our own
hearts: I mean, Faith, by which we draw life and virtue out of Christ, and
through which he conveys it unto us; but the fountain and wellhead lies on
high: for by the Covenant of Redemption, God was carrying on a design of love
to his elect people; and this was part of the contrivance, that our
Covenant-state through Christ's Suretiship might be Fountain-Love and Grace; a
state of favor settled and bottomed in the fountain of life and grace, Christ:
Whereas Adam's first Covenant-state was but Cistern-Grace, that did not run
continually with a spring of live waters, to afford fresh supplies; the stock
of habitual Grace was to him like water in the Pitcher or Cistern; but by
Christ's Covenant of Suretiship, Grace is to us, as water in the Fountain, that
can never run dry: Joh. 1.16, And of his fullness have all we received, and
grace for grace. And 4.14, -- But the water that I shall give him, shall be in
him a well of water springing up into everlasting life. And 14.19, -- because I
live, ye shall live also. 2 Cor. 9.8, And God is able to make all grace abound
toward you, that ye always having alsufficiency in all things, may abound to
every good work.

5. This Covenant of Suretiship was necessary for our establishment under this
new dispensation, that our Rights might be in a surer hand than our own: Man is
a mutable thing, and free will is a tottering uncertain thing, as experience
has taught; but Christ is a sure foundation; and holding of him, or rather in
him, is a sure renure; the Rights and Charters that are under his custody, are
well kept: And therefore God who instituted this dispensation, did for the
better securing of the believers interests, enter into Covenant with a mighty
responsal person, even Christ; and consolidates our Covenant-right in Christ
our head, and did trust to his keeping and answering all the intents of the
Magna Charta, the great Charter of the Gospel Covenant; hence it is that the
Covenant of peace made with us, is a sure Covenant, because it is thus ordered;
Christ acted that business in the Covenant of Redemption; there were mutual
assurances given between the Father and the Son, which makes all
Covenant-dealing with us sure, and holds all fast, Psalm. 89.34, 35, My Covenant
will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. Once have I
sworn by my holiness, that I will not lie unto David. Hence it is, that the
blessings and mercies of the Gospel Covenant, are sure mercies; because there
was concluded-Articles about them in this Covenant of Suretiship, when Christ
treated for his heirs and children not yet born nor created, Isa. 55.3, 4, --
And I will make an everlasting Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of
David. Behold, I have given him for a witness to the people, a leader and
commander to the people. Heb. 2.13, -- Behold I, and the children which God
has given me. Joh. 6.39, 40, And this is the fathers will which has sent me,
that of all which he has given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it
up at the last day. And this is the will of him that sent me, that every one
which sees the Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting life; and I
will raise him up at the last day. O what strong and everlasting consolation
has God allowed upon his people from these immutable and everlasting grounds!
Heb. 6.17, 18, Wherein God, willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of
promise the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath: That by two
immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a
strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set
before us. 2 Thessalonians. 2.16, Now our Lord Jesus Christ himself, and God, even our
father which has loved us, and has given us everlasting consolation, and good
hope, through grace, etc.

6. This Covenant with Christ, was necessary; not only for the enfuring our
blessedness by this new Gospel Dispensation; but for the bettering of that
blessedness and glorious state unto which we are advanced by this Covenant. I
say, the blessedness, the glory, the heaven of the redeemed people, of the many
Sons, who are by the force of this Covenant brought to glory, Heb. 2.10, is
better than the reward and crown of blessedness which man should have enjoyed
by the tenor of the Covenant of works; and this bettering, it has from
Christ's Covenant of Suretiship with God, which was the chief cause why this
Gospel Dispensation is a better Covenant than that of the Law of works; and the
promises thereof are better promises, and the crown and heaven thereof a better
crown; even because Christ is in this Covenant, and the foundation of it was
laid in his Suretiship, by this means the blessedness and heaven of this
Covenant is bettered: For, 1. It is the glory of new heavens, created of
purpose for the residence of the redeemed, in the company of him that redeemed
them by his own blood, 2 Pet. 3.13, Nevertheless, we according to his promise,
look for new heavens, and a new earth, wherein dwells righteousness. Rev.
21.1, 5, And I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the first heaven and the
first earth were passed away, and there was no more sea. And he that sat upon
the throne, said, Behold, I make all things new. Jh. 14.2, 3, In my Father's
house are many mansions, etc. And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will
come again and receive you unto my self; that where I am, there ye may be also.
Mr. Ball Treat. of the Covenant. c. 2. p. 10. Camer. de tripl. foed. These. 9.
Mr. Baxt. Aphorism, p. 5.
Whereas the blessedness and glory of man by the Law-Covenant (if it was any
thing beyond an immortality of blessedness and enjoyment of God in an earthly
Paradise; which is questioned by some) should yet have been in this old or
first heavens, not in these new ones. 2. It is the glory of a Paradise wherein
is the tree of life, and the river of the water of life, which were not
Ingredients of the Law-glory; neither were placed in the first Paradise. Rev.
2.7, To him that overcomes will I give to eat of the tree of life, which is in
the midst of the Paradise of God. And 7.17, -- and shall lead them unto living
fountains of waters. And 22.1, 2, And he showed me a pure river of water of
life, clear as cristal, proceeding out of the throne of God, and of the Lamb.
In the midst of the street of it, and of either side of the river was there the
tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and yielded her fruit every
month; and the leaves of the tree were for the healing of the Nations. 3. It is
a heaven and glory where the new Song is sung, and where the Musicians are all
redeemed, and where the meeting of these redeemed ones to sing together, is the
sweeter, that they once were all lost, and that they came out of tribulation
and a Land of sighing, Isa. 35.10, And the ransomed of the Lord shall return
and come to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their heads; they shall
obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee away. Rev. 5.9, And
they sung a new song, saying, Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open the
seals thereof; for thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood
out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation. But there should not
have been any new Song, nor redeemed Musicians in the glory and heaven of
Law-dispensation. 4. It is a heaven and glory wherein all the Inhabitants wear
crowns; for Christ has made them kings unto God, and to his Father, Rev. 1.6.
And 2.10, -- Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life;
but there should have been no crowns worn in the first Paradise; nor should the
happiness thereof have amounted so high as a crown and a throne; there being no
occasion for it, nor any promise to that effects. 5. It is a heaven and glory,
where the Inhabitants are all conquerors, each has a palm in his hand, in sign
of his victory, Rev. 7.9, -- clothed with white robes, and palms in their
hands; this Garland should not have been in the first Covenant-glory; where
there was no fighting, there could be no victory, at least over the world, and
sin and death. 6. It is a heaven and glory, where all the Inhabitants are
clothed with long white robes, and with fine linen clean and white, Rev.
7.13, -- What are these which are arrayed in white robes, and whence came they?
And 19.8, And to her was granted, that she should be arrayed in fine linen,
clean and white: for the linen is the righteousness of Saints; but there
should have been no such robes in the Law-heaven: whatsoever shining-beauty and
whiteness should have been on Adam's skin; yet there should have been there no
garments of glory, no righteousness should have been worn there, but that which
should have been of our own working. 7. It is a heaven wherein there is a
throne for the Lamb, where the man Christ in our nature is upon the throne,
where the greatest beauty of all the Kingdom, and the most highly exalted
person, is the man Christ; where the Lord Mediator is the glorious light of all
the Land, Rev. 3.7, -- he that opens and no man shuts, and shuts and no
man opens. And 21.22, 23, And I saw no temple therein; for the Lord God
almighty and the lamb, are the temple of it. And the City had no need of the
Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it; for the glory of God did lighten it,
and the lamb is the light thereof. And 5.12, Worthy is the lamb that was slain,
to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and glory, and honor,
and blessing; there was no such glory in the first Covenant, nor in the heaven
thereof; which no doubt should have made it less glorious, and speaks forth the
greater glory of this latter Covenant-happiness. 8. It is a heaven that was
purchased at a dear rate, that was the price of blood; for which Christ paid a
condign price, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19, For as much as ye know that ye were not
redeemed will corruptible things; but with the precious blood of Christ as of a
lamb without blemish, and without spot; but the Law-heaven and glory, should
have been obtained at an easier rate; working, without the price of blood,
should have done that business; the different price shows the different value.
9. It is a heaven wherein is a lovely and numerous assembly, a fair mystical
body, whereof Christ is the head, and whereof each redeemed Soul is a member. O
so lovely a Company with the Captain of their Salvation! so glorious a body
with their glorious head! so beautiful a bride with so fair a husband! such a
lovely couple, such a body corporate, such a complete society, when Christ
mystical is perfected, and all the members compacted together, and joined unto
their glorious and blessed head! Ephesians. 4.13, Till we all come in the unity of
the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. And 5.27, That he might
present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any
such thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish. Heb. 12.23, To the
general assembly and church of the first born, which are written in heaven, and
to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect; and to
Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant. Rev. 19.7, Let us be glad and rejoice,
and give honor to him; for the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has
made her self ready. But there should have been no such body-corporate in the
Law-heaven, no such mystical body of Christ, no marriage of the Lamb, nor any
melodious rejoicing at that solemnity. I conclude therefore, that the glory,
and crown, and heaven of the Covenant of Redemption, is better, and far more
glorious, than should have been the lot of man, by Law-righteousness and works,
without Christ's Suretiship.

7. This Covenant was necessary, for having in readiness a Physician, before we
should be sick; God foresaw and had decreed man's fall, and his rising again;
and he well knew that it would be a wretched hopeless condition, for man to
provide a Physician to himself, and to have him to seek when his sickness
should be desparate; he therefore by a foresight and providence of pure,
sovereign, free, transcendent Grace, did provide one; and indeed it was
necessary for our good, that it should be so; for had man fallen sick of sin,
before this Covenant for sending a healer to him, he had died ere the cure
could come.

8. This Covenant was necessary for cutting off all matter and occasion of
self-gloriation from man in his own Redemption and Salvation; for if the
business of our Redemption and Salvation was transacted, concluded, done and
ended betwixt Jehovah and Christ, without our knowledge or consent, before we
had a Being; what have we to boast of? If the agreement ahout the price to be
paid and accepted, tarried not for man; wherein can we glory that we have
contributed to our own happiness? 2 Timothy 1.9, Who has saved us, and called us
with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own
purpose and grace which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began.
Ephesians. 2.10, For we are his workmanship created in Christ Jesus unto good works,
which God has before ordained, that we should walk in them. 1 John 4.10, 19,
Herein is love, not that we loved God; but that he loved us, and sent his Son
to be the propitiation for our sins. -- We love him, because he first loved us.

CHAP. III. Of the Nature, Properties, and Parties of the Covenant of
Redemption.
THE general Nature of this Covenant is common to it, with all other Covenants;
whatsoever different peculiarity they have, this is essential and common to all
Covenants; they are Agreements: and this is an eternal transaction and
agreement betwixt Jehovah and the Mediator Christ, about the work of our
Redemption.

The peculiar propriety of its nature, will appear by enquiring a little into,
1. The various eternal acts of the will of God that concurred to make up this
agreement. 2. The distinction and order of these eternal acts of his will, and
the right manner of our conceiving of them.

1. Supposing, as we have said before, that God purposed in himself not to save
man without a satisfaction to his Justice: These eternal acts of the will of
God, or rather the things which we conceive under these various acts, and their
denominations among men (for we need to multiply acts in this matter, but for
the helping our own understanding) did concur and meet together in this
agreement. 1. The designation of a Person to do this work; there must needs
have been a Person set apart and designed from eternity unto the doing of the
work of Redemption, and this Person was the Son only; not the Father, not the
Spirit, 1 Pet. 1.20, Who verily was foreordained before the foundation of the
world; but was manifested in these last times for you. 2. The preparation and
fitting of the Person set apart to take our Law-place, and room, that Justice
might smite him in our stead; which also was by an eternal act of the will of
God decreed, that the Son of God should be Immanuel, God with us, or God made
manifest in the flesh, Isa. 7.14. 1 Timothy 3.16, and unto this incarnation of the
Son of God, his own words have reference, as unto the grand qualification
whereby he was destinated beforehand, that he might be in a capacity to do
this work, Heb. 10.5, A body have thou prepared me. 3. The calling of the
Person designed: calling is an act different from designation, it is something
further. Christ was by an eternal act of God's will called to this work, and
that long before he came into the world, Psalm. 89.19, Then thou spakest in
vision to thy holy. One, and said, I have laid help upon one that is mighty;
I have exalted one chosen out of the people. And Isa. 42.6, I the Lord have
called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and
give thee for a Covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles. Heb. 5.5,
So also Christ glorified not himself to be made an high priest; but he that
said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee. 4. The investing
of the Person designed, with offices, powers and authorities, for the doing of
this work, such as his Mediatory-office, and the powers and authorities
thereunto belonging, which was not suspended until the time of his actual
discharge of the offices of King, Priest, and Prophet; but by an eternal act of
the will of God, he was set up and vested with these offices and powers from
everlasting, and had the glory of the designed, called, invested Mediator; as
he plainly insinuates, Prove. 8.23, I was set up from everlasting, says Wisdom;
several Expositors render it, I was called, or I was anointed. Joh. 17.5, And
now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I had
with thee before the world was. 5. The mission of the Son, Christ designed,
sitted, called, invested for this work, was also by an eternal act in the
counsel of God, sent to do this work; he had a solema eternal, authoritative
mission, a command to go, and was bidden go; he had the will of God by an
eternal act or commission given out to him concerning all this work, long
before he was actually made under the Law; to which he has respect, when he
says, Lo, I come to do thy will, O God, Heb. 10.7. even that will of God that
was in the book of his eternal decrees, Joh. 6.39, And this is the Fathers will
which has sent me. And 10.18, This Commandment have I received of my Father:
But in all these, we do not so much multiply the distinction of acts, as we
take notice of the distinction and difference of Phrase used by the Holy Ghost,
speaking of this mystery in the Scriptures. Upon the other part, there
concurred unto this agreement, an eternal personal consent and compliance upon
Christ's part, unto all these eternal acts of the will of God; for Christ God,
equal with the Father, does not begin to consent and agree unto any thing in
time; nor can the eternal Son of God will any thing in time, which he did not
will and consent unto from eternity. But Christ was present with the Father,
and did from eternity consent and agree to these eternal acts. 1. To the
designation of himself to be the person that should satisfy the Justice of
God, he heartily acquiesced and offered himself; he said, Lo, I come to do thy
will, Heb. 10.5, 7. He poured out his Soul unto death, Isa. 53.12. 2. He
consented unto the putting himself in that low capacity that the working of
this work required, Heb. 2.7, Thou made him a little lower than the Angels;
to leave the throne of glory, and come down to his footstool, there to be in
disgrace; the Lord of the Law, to be made under the Law, Gal. 4.4. the holy one
that knew no sin, to be made in the likeness of sinful flesh, Romans 8.3. Phil.
2.6, 7, 8, Who being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal
with God. And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself, and became
obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross. 3. He consented and agreed
unto the eternal act of his calling to this work; no sooner was it his Fathers
will that he should travel in the business, but it was his also. He was as a
ready Servant, whose ear was bored in token of his love and willingness to
serve his Master, when he might have been free, Psalm. 40.6, Mine ears have thou
opened or bored, Isa. 50.5, 6, The Lord has opened mine ears, and I was not
rebellious, neither turned away back. 4. He consented to the taking on these
offices and trusts that the work of our Redemption required; there was no force
nor constraint upon, no necessity of nature that he should step in betwixt the
disagreeing parties, that he should step into the fire that we had kindled,
that he should make himself a Sacrifice for our sins, that he should receive a
dispensatory Kingdom; but frankly and freely he consented to do all these
things, Joh. 10.18, No man takes my life from me; but I lay it down of my
self. Joh. 17.2, As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should
give eternal life to as many as thou have given him. Prove. 8.23, I was set up
from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was. 5. He consented
unto his mission, his Father's sending of him, and was well content to go that
errand; yea, so hearty was his consent, that he took delight in it, Psalm. 40.8,
I delight to do thy will, O my God; yea, thy Law is within my heart. Joh. 4.34,
Jesus says unto them, my meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to
finish his work. And to all these things he gives a personal consent from
eternity, and with so much delight, that he solaced himself, and took pleasure
in the future accomplishment of these eternal acts of the will of God
concerning the Sons of men, Prove. 8.23, 30, 31, I was set up from everlasting,
from the beginning, or ever the earth was. Then I was by him as one brought up
with him, and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him: Rejoicing
in the habitable part of his earth, and my delights were with the Sons of men.
This is the nature of this eternal transaction, which will appear also more
clearly afterward from the tenor of this Covenant, with the reciprocal
engagements of the parties.

2. Concerning the distinction and order of these eternal acts of the will of
God, and for preventing gross and unbecoming thoughts of them; I give these
cautions. 1. All the acts of God's will, his decrees, and eternal transaction
with Christ, are in regard of God, one most simple and pure act of his will;
but in regard of our conceptions of them, who cannot take up many particular
acts together in one; they are distinguished and expressed so in the word, that
we may take them up distinctly: The Lord in his way of expressing these great
mysteries of the counsel of his will, accommodating himself to our way of
conceiving things: we are therefore accordingly to take heed how we conceive of
the distinction of acts in the eternal counsel of God's will. 2. When we speak
of the order of these eternal acts, we mean only the order of Nature, and which
of these acts are to be conceived by us antecedaneous to the rest in that
respect; for there is no order of time, no priority nor posteriority of that
kind among the decrees of God, and acts of his will, which are all eternal.

3. We are to conceive of this order (which only agrees to the decrees of God)
according to these rules:

1. According to the futurition of things; that is, these decrees and eternal
acts of the will of God about things ad extra without, which do suppose the
futurition of things about which these decrees are past; these decrees (I say)
do necessarily suppose some other acts of the will of God antecedent to these
in order of nature, whence the things supposed in that decree, had their
futurition; for it is to me above question, that things which did not exist from
eternity, had their futurition no where, but from the decrees of God's will,
which made them future things before they existed; neither is it possible that
God could foresee any thing as future, before his decree, and some act of his
will gave it futurition; whatsoever the device of Scientiae media, tell us to
the contrary. And according to this rule, we say, the decree of God's entering
in Covenant with man, whether by Law or Grace, does suppose some antecedaneous
act of the will of God (in order of nature) concerning the Creation of man,
some decree whence man had a futurition, and existed in the prescience of God
as a future thing.

2. We may conceive of the order of the decrees of God, according as he orders
things in execution, by that rule so much made use of by the Learned Dr. Twiss,
Twiss. Vind. gratiae and potest Divin.
Quod prius est in intention posterius est in executione and contra: that
which is first in the intention of God, is last in the execution; and that
which is last in the intent, is first in the execution. Understand this rule,
as that Author does, without subordination of the coordinate means whereby God
intended to make himself glorious in the way of mercy and justice; and
according to this rule, we say that God first decreed the glorifying of his
mercy and justice upon all mankind, before he decreed any thing concerning his
creation, or his fall: for the creation and fall of man, were first in
execution, before justice and mercy was glorified in him.

3. Another rule (which also is a qualification of the former) is, that these
eternal acts of the will of God which recipient finem, relate to the end, are
in this kind of order before; these acts of his will which recipient media
relate unto the means which lead unto these ends, Et illud quod habet rationem
finis est prius, quod vero habet rationem medii est posterius; And that which
has the place of the end, is the first; and that which has the place of the
mean, is last in order among the eternal acts or God's will. And this rule
holds not only with respect to the supreme and chief end; to wit, God's
glorifying of himself in the way of manifesting his mercy and justice, which is
first in order among the eternal acts of the will of God relating to man; and
all the other acts of his will, concerning the creation, fall, sending of
Christ, etc. (which are co ordinate means in respect of this supreme end, to
which they are subordinate): These, I say, are posterior in this kind of order,
among the decrees of God, and eternal acts of his will; but this rule holds
also in respect of that subordination that may be conceived among these acts of
the will of God, about the creation and fall of man, and the sending of Christ
(which are coordinate means in respect of the supreme end beforementioned);
yet because one of these may have the place of an end, with respect to another
of these same coordinate means, which may be also a means for carrying on some
next immediate end, as well as the supreme ultimate end; as the Salvation of
the elect is a mean subservient to the great end of glorifying Grace, and yet
may be, and is also, an end of God's sending Christ; so that the sending of
Christ, is both a mean subordinate to the glory of Grace, and the Salvation of
God's elect people. Now, I say, which way soever we look upon the acts of God's
will about the glorifying of his justice and mercy on Mankind, we are still to
conceive of the eternal acts of his will, that respect the ends which he has
proposed to himself, both supreme and subordinate, as first in order; and these
acts of his will that relate to the means, as last: for God first purposed the
end, then the means that lead to it.

By this time it may appear that there is no great cause to contend for the
order and distinction of these eternal acts of the will of God, that concurred
to the making up this eternal transaction betwixt Jehovah and the Mediator,
since they are all coordinate acts of the counsel of his will, and means for
the carrying on the glory of his mercy and justice in saving man. This much is
manifest, 1. That the Covenant of Redemption made with Christ, does suppose
other eternal acts of the will of God, about the saving of man in the way of
satisfaction to justice, etc. whereof I have spoken before, Chap. 2. 2. That
the designation, calling, and eternal mission of the Son of God to do this
work, must in order be before the person designed and called, gave his actual
consent, and closed the bargain from eternity. And if any will contend about
the order of these eternal acts beforementioned, I do not see why we may not
fitly conceive of them in this order, designing, calling, fitting, investing,
sending of Christ; these were the eternal acts of the will of God, which were
entertained by the Son of God with consent and delectation.

The Properties of the Covenant of Redemption, are, See Mr. Rutherf. Treat. of
the Covinant. p. 2. c. 12.
Freedom, Graciousness, Eternity, Equality, Order, and Stability.

1. The Covenant that was transacted betwixt Jehovah and Christ, was a most
free Covenant: it was an act of mere liberty and sovereign freedom. There was
eminent freedom upon both sides, in both the parties Covenanting. 1. Upon the
Father's side (abstracting from his own decrees and purposes), it was free to
Jehovah to have followed a strict Law-course according to the rigor of the
Covenant of works; or to follow a Gospel-way of mitigation and condescension as
pleased him; it was free to him to send, or not to send a Savior to suffer for
man; to take a satisfaction by a Surety, or only in the Soul that sinned, as
pleased him. 2. Upon Christ's part, it was as free to him to be a suffering
Redeemer and Surety, or not, as pleased him; to undertake the work of our
Redemption, or not to undertake it; to humble himself unto this service, or
not; to go this errand, or not, as pleased him. Hence it is observed, Jo. Cocc.
Summum Doct. de soed. c. 5. Sect. 90.
that it was otherwise with the second Adam, than with the first; for it was
not free to Adam to withdraw from, or to deny subjection to the first Covenant;
neither could he withdraw himself from the Law of Nature, nor slight the
promise thereof, without the violation of that Law: but the Son of God was
free, and tied by no Law antecedent to his own consent.

This Property of the Covenant of Redemption, is established and confirmed, 1.
From these Scriptures which attribute this transaction to the free pleasure and
sovereign freedom of both parties, the Father and Christ; therefore the
Scripture speaking of God's eternal transactions with Christ about our
Redemption, does so frequently call them, deeds and acts of will, and of the
Father's pleasure; and that the whole procedure was according to his good
pleasure, and the pleasure of his will, Ephesians. 1.5.9. And Col. 1.19, It pleased
the Father that in him should all fullness dwell. 2 Timothy 1. (...), according to
his purpose and grace, etc. And upon the other part, Christ's concessions in
this matter, are attributed to his mere will and liberty, Phil. 2.6, 7, 8, Who
being in the form of God, having the very same divine essence which the father
has, thought it not robbery to be equal with God; counted it no usurpation to
carry himself as God, equal with the Father; made himself of no reputation,
freely, and of his own accord, he hionbled himself; not using nor manifesting
the glory that was competent to him, and took upon him the form of a servant;
he took upon him a real service in the assumption of the humane nature, for the
ends he assumed it, and was made in the likeness of men; and in this service he
did behave himself, as other men, and sutably to that employment, and not as
equal with God, which was his natural condition; and while he was in that habit
and condition, he obeyed unto the death of the Cross. All this he acted with
eminent freedom in time; and consented to with like freedom from eternity,
where he freely took upon him whatsoever he acted within time.

2. If it was free with God, whether he would give to man a Being, and whether
he would conclude this in the counsel of his will from eternity, or not, as
pleased him; sure it was also free to God whether he would send a Savior to
him when he should be lost, or not, as pleased him: Now it is manifest that it
was free with God, whether he would so much as give to man a being; for he was
under no necessity to create the World, or Men, or Angels, all which are for
his pleasure; and therefore are whatsoever they are, by his pleasure, Rev.
4.11, Thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were
created.

3. If it was free to God from eternity, whether he would choose objects in
Mankind, to magnify his Grace and Mercy upon, when he had purposed to create
Angels and men; or whether he would let them all perish, and not take any of
their natures upon him; then the Covenant of Suretiship has this property of
freedom; but it is manifest that it was free with God from eternity, whether he
would recover any of the race of fallen man, or not, as pleased him; since he
was no more tied to Men than to Angels, to whom he sent no Savior when they
fell, nor has designed any of the fallen Angels unto Redemption, 2 Pet. 2.4,
For if God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell, and
delivered them into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto the day of
Judgment. Heb. 2.16, For verily he took not on him the nature of Angels; but he
took upon him the seed of Abraham. It remains therefore, that the Covenant of
Redemption is an act of sovereignty and freedom upon God's part who designed a
Redeemer, and upon Christ's part who consented unto the designation.

4. This Property of the Covenant of Redemption is further confirmed, by the
negation and removal of all things contrary to sovereign freedom. 1. There was
nothing from himself (abstracting from his own decrees, and love-designs) that
could trench upon the freedom of this eternal act of his will; for there was no
necessity of nature upon Jehovah, nor upon the Son of God, that did determine
God to enter in this Covenant (as is already cleared). 2. There was nothing
from without that could trench upon the freedom of this eternal act; as nothing
could necessarily determine, so neither compel nor constrain God to lay such a
service upon his own Son Christ, nor him to undertake it; For 1. This
transaction having been from eternity, it was a concluded bargain before the
creatures had a being, Prove. 8.23, I was set up from everlasting, from the
beginning, or ever the earth was. 2. Put case they had then had a being; what
could the being of Men and Angels, and all the works of his hands have trenched
upon the sovereign freedom of their Makers will and actings? for who has
resisted his will? -- has not the potter power over the clay? Romans 9.19, 21.
3. The Father and the Son were not only free from all natural necessity and
outward compulsion; but also from all hire, allurement or motive from any thing
without their own will; there was nothing in man, no not foreseen, that could
allure or move; far less hire the Father to give Christ, to engage him in this
work, nor Christ to engage his name in our bond; since he well foresaw what it
would cost him; It Is true he values his seed as a satisfying return of his
travel, Isa. 53.11, He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall be
satisfied; but beside that, there is no proportion betwixt his work, and this
poor wages: was man a price for the Lord of glory to work for? or was he a
reward for him to wrestle for? could he be hired for so low a wager, if the
sovereign freedom of his own will had not acted him? Consider, I say, who gave
this price to the Lord: did man give himself to the Lord, or did the Lord give
his elect people to Christ from eternity, and afterward he is the first giver
also? Now there can be no hire given by man to the Lord, unless he were the
first giver, Romans 11.35, For who has first given to him, and it shall be
recompensed to him again? 1 Chr. 29.14, Of thine own have we given thee. Jer.
30.21, And I will cause him to draw near, and he shall approach unto me; for
who is he that engages his heart to approach unto me, says the Lord?

2. Another Property of this Covenant is Graciousness; it is not only the
Covenant transacted with us, the Gospel Covenant, that is, pure Grace; but this
also that was transacted betwixt Jehovah and Christ, even while it was yet in
his purpose, and as it was the eternal act of his will, is frequently called
(...) and (...), Grace and his good pleasure, or gracious pleasure, Ephesians. 1.5,
6, 9. 2 Timothy 1.9, his purpose and grace. Now Graciousness is attributed to the
Covenant of Redemption, in a far other sense than it is attributed to the
Covenant of reconciliation: For, 1. Graciousness is attributed to the Covenant
of Redemption, in regard of both Parties transacting; it was pure Grace that
determined both the Parties, and engaged them both; the Father to send, and the
Son to come; and this Grace was equally in both the Parties, and did shine
equally and by way of efficiency in them both, Zech. 6.13, The counsel of peace
was between them both. But graciousness is attributed to the Covenant of
reconciliation; because of the shining glory and activity of the Grace of God
through Jesus Christ, that is therein manifested; which Grace is in us
subjectively; and though the acts thereof be ours in a vital formal manner; yet
it is from God by way of efficiency, and it is his Grace, not ours, from which
the Covenant has its name of Grace, Tit. 2.11. 1 Timothy 1.14. Ephesians. 1.6, 7. And
2.5, 7, 8. 1 Cor. 15.10. 2. Graciousness is attributed to the Covenant of
Reconciliation; not only in regard of God's making such a Covenant with us; but
also in regard of the tenor of that Covenant, and whole dispensation; the
promises, conditions and reward therein is all pure Grace; as the same is
opposed unto, and contra-distinguished from works, which signify nothing in
that Covenant, as it is a Court of Righteousness and Life, Ephesians. 2.8, 9, For by
grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift
of God. Not of works, lest any man should boast. But of this Covenant of
Redemption, Graciousness is a property thereof; mainly, because of the reasons
following; but not because the whole tenor thereof, as well the conditions as
promises were pure Grace considered as such, and contra-distinguished from
works: For though pure Grace made this Covenant of Redemption; yet the
condition thereof upon both sides were works. 1. Christ is a doer and fulfiller
of the Covenant of works most exactly in all points, both the command, and the
curse and penalty of the Covenant, is satisfied by him; this is works, and this
was the condition required upon his part, Heb. 10.7, Then said I, lo I come, in
the volume of the book it is written of me, to do thy will, O God. Gal. 3.13,
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us.

2. Christ as a doer and obedient fulfiller of the Law, has a reward in
Justice by the promise of this Covenant: For (I humbly conceive) he had his
reward of debt, and merit, having paid a condign price to the Justice of God;
therefore his reward is due to him, by commutative Justice, Phil. 2.7, 8, But
made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was
made in the likeness of man; And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled
himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross; wherefore
God also has highly exalted him, and is craved by him, Joh. 17.4, 5, I have
glorified thee on earth, I have finished the work which thou gave me to do.
And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self.

But Graciousness is attributed to the Covenant of Redemption. 1. Efficiently,
or in regard of the efficient cause thereof; the spring whence it came was
Grace, pure Grace, and nothing else made it and gave it a being; it was not
only an act of will, pleasure, freedom and sovereignty; but an act of gracious
will, and the good pleasure of his will, that made it, Ephesians. 1.5. Col. 1.19.

2. Graciousness is attributed to this Covenant ultimately, in regard that the
ultimate end and scope thereof is the manifesting the glory of the richness and
freeness of Grace; it is a design of Grace that is driven and carried on in the
Covenant of Redemption, Ephesians. 1.6, To the praise of the glory of his grace,
wherein he has made us accepted in the beloved. 2 Timothy 1.9, Who has saved us,
and called us with an holy calling; not according to our works, but according
to his own purpose and grace which was given us in Christ Jesus before the
world began.

3. Graciousness is attributed to the Covenant of Redemption, because Grace was
in it fundamentally; the whole contrivance and dispensation of Grace is
bottomed upon this eternal transaction, and turns upon the hinge of this
Compact betwixt Jehovah and Christ; therefore all the mercies and faithfulness
of the Lord that we are made to sing of within time, are laid upon this
foundation, Psalm. 89.1, 2, 3, I will sing of the mercies of the Lord for ever,
with my mouth will I make known thy faithfulness to all generations. For I have
said, mercy shall be built up for ever, thy faithfulness shall thou establish
in the very heavens. I have made a Covenant with my chosen.

4. Graciousness may be attributed to the Covenant of Redemption, because Grace
was here originally; for here the first draughts of pure, sovereign, free
Grace, and the unsearchable riches thereof, were drawn and portrayed; here is
fountain-Grace, and from thence came the streams; here were the beginnings of
that noble design of Grace laid, and from hence did they come forth, Col. 1.26,
27, Even the mystery which had been hid from ages and from generations; but
now is made manifest to his Saints. To whom God would make known what is the
riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in
you, the hope of glory.

5. Graciousness is attributed to the Covenant of Redemption, because Grace is
here comprehensively; even all that God has been driving and acting upon the
spirits of his people, by the Gospel Covenant and Ordinances thereof, and the
work of his Spirit since the beginning of the world; and all that he shall do,
until the day that the ransomed and redeemed company be perfected; even the
whole plot of Grace, is all comprised in this eternal transaction with Christ,
and to it are we led as the comprehension of all Covenant-grace and mercy, Isa.
55.3, Incline your ear and come unto me, hear, and your soul shall live; and I
will make with you an everlasting Covenant, even the sure mercies of David.

6. Graciousness is attributed to this Covenant, because Grace is here
eminently; and indeed if the comparison might be fitly made, pure Gospel free
Grace is more in the Covenant of Redemption, than in the Covenant of
Reconciliation; for it is in the Covenant of Redemption principally, as water is
in the fountain; and in the Covenant of Reconciliation by participation, and
consequentially; because God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself by
that Covenant; therefore he is now in Christ reconciling the world to himself
by this Covenant of reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20, 21, God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trospasses unto them,
and has committed unto us the word of reconciliation. Now then we are
ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in
Christ's stead, be ye reconciled unto God; for he has made him to be sin for
us, who knew no sin, that we might be the righteousness of God in him.

7. Graciousness is attributed to the Covenant of Redemption, because Grace was
therein exemplarily; for hereby God did act Grace in Christ, and made him a
Samplar, and the first copy of free Grace to all his brethren, seed and heirs,
that they might share with him, upon whom the first acts of eternal
Covenant-love, and Grace fell, and that God might show forth in him a pattern
of Covenant-dealings, and out letting of Covenant-favour and promises, Psalm.
89.26, He shall cry unto me, thou art my father, my God, and the rock of my
salvation. With Heb. 1.5, For unto which of the Angels said he at any time,
thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee? And again, I will be to him a
Father, and he shall be to me a Son. Gal. 4.6, And because ye are Sons, God
has sent forth the spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, father.
Col. 1.18, And he is the head of the body, the Church, who is the beginning,
the firstborn from the dead, that in all things he might have the
pre-eminence. Romans 8.17, And if children, then heirs, heirs of God, and
joint-heirs with Christ, if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also
glorified together.

3. Another Property of the Covenant of Redemption, is Eternity: For, 1. Both
the Parties are eternal, the eternal God who is from everlasting to
everlasting, Deuteronomy. 33.27. and the eternal Son of God, whose eternal power and
Godhead, Romans 1.20, is equal with God his Father. Phil. 2.6, And who shall
declare his generation? Isa. 53.8. Joh. 1.1, 2, In the beginning the word was,
and the word was with God, and the word was God, the same was in the beginning
with God. Rev. 1.8, I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, says the
Lord; which is, which was, and which is to come.

2. The union of the two natures in the Person of the Redeemer, which was
transacted in this Covenant, is an eternal union; I mean, the humane nature,
which was from eternity designed unto a substantial union with God; being once
assumed, stands in that substantial union for ever; so that it is impossible
that the personal union which was transacted in the Covenant of Redemption, can
be dissolved unto all eternity: for it is unquestionable that Christ shall stand
glorified in our nature in heaven for ever; for even there is a throne for the
man Christ, for the Lamb slain, for ever, Rev. 22.3, But the throne of God, and
of the lamb, shall be in it, Act. 17.31.

3. The New Covenant-relations which were established betwixt Jehovah and
Christ, by this Covenant of Redemption, are eternal relations, which shall
never cease, Heb. 1.5, For unto which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou
art my Son, this day have I begotten thee? And again, I will be to him a
Father, and he shall be to me a Son. This Covenant Relation (I say) whereby God
is the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and whereby he has a new
Sonship, 1 Pet. 1.3, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ:
Even this, shall stand eternally; therefore Christ speaking of the promised
glorious state of his people in heaven, does four times own that
Covenant Relation to his Father, even with respect to his and their being
together in his Kingdom, Rev. 3.12, Him that overcomes, will I make a pillar
in the temple of my God, and he shall go no more out: and I will write upon him
the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, which is new Jerusalem,
which comes down out of heaven from my God; and I will write upon him my new
name. And if our Covenant Relation to God which did spring out of his, shall
stand, and not cease in our glorified state in heaven, much more his, Rev.
5.10, And have made us unto our God Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on
the earth. There the redeemed Musicians, that have the new Song in their
mouths, own their Covenant Relation to God, and the Covenant-compellation, our
God, is a note in their new Song.

4. The offices which Christ did take on by this Covenant, are eternal offices,
such as shall never cease, and whereof he shall never be divested; that his
Mediatory-office, his Kingdom and Priesthood, are partakers of the eternity of
this Covenant, is plain Scripture, Luke 1.33, And he shall reign over the house
of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no end. Heb. 1.8, But unto
the Son, he says, thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever, a scepter of
righteousness is the scepter of thy kingdom. And 5.6, Thou art a priest for
ever, after the order of Melchisedec. And 7.25, Wherefore he is able also to
save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to
make intercession for them. The only question is, whether or not this Covenant
shall then cease, and Christ's Mediatory-office shall then cease, when Christ
shall render up the Kingdom to the Father? 1 Cor. 15.24, to 29.

Concerning the full answer whereof, Rutherf. Treat. of the Covenant, p. 2. c.
12. p. 363.
I refer the Reader to what is written by Mr. Rutherford upon that question:
For my part it satisfies me, that I see vestiges in the Scripture. 1. That
after the last Judgment, there shall be no use of such exercise and acts of
Christ's Mediatory offices, as King, Priest, and Prophet to his Church as we
are now under in this last Economy and dispensation of the Covenant of Grace;
because there shall be no sin then, nor any enemy unsubdued; Christ having
perfected his people, and presented them without spot to God, Ephesians. 5.27. and
having subdued all his foes, and broken all opposition to his Kingdom, and the
elect people being brought out of danger, so as they need no Temple or
Ordinances, Rev. 21.4.22. 1 Cor. 15.25. 2. That Christ Mediator shall
unquestionably cease from, and leave off such acts and exercise of his
Mediatory-office, as his body the Church has no need of; he shall be no
Mediator of Reconciliation then, because there shall be no sin then; no
Mediator to apply his death, or to interceed for sinners, for there shall be no
sinners; he shall be no Mediatory King then to beat down his foes and opposers
of his offices; for there shall be none, when he shall have put down all rule,
and all authority and power, 1 Cor. 15.24. that is, all Magistracy and
Government that now is, either in Church or State. 3. It is manifest that after
the last Judgment, there shall be a change of the Oeconomick government, and
that Christ shall render the kingdom Oeconomick or dispensatory, to his father:
but after what manner this change of government shall be, I do not so clearly
understand: whether it shall be only by Christ's rendering an account to his
Father of his deputed and delegated charge, having now saved all the elect, and
subdued all the rebels; or if it shall be by laying down his Commission, no
more to rule in the former way of government; or whether the government shall
be so changed, as the Father, Son, and Spirit, shall immediately govern the
glorious Church, which seems to be insinuated, Rev. 21.22, 23, And I saw no
temple therein; for the Lord God almighty and the Lamb are the temple of it.
And the City had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it; for
the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. 1 Cor.
15.28, that God may be all in all. 4. That Christ shall not then leave off to
reign as Mediator, even when the forementioned change is made; yet he remains
the substantial glorified head of his mystical glorified body for ever, who
shall appear eternally for us, as a pledge of the satisfaction once given, whose
presence is a speaking token of the standing Confederacy and Peace betwixt God
and us, in whose righteousness we stand clothed before God; in whose
transactions and acting in the work of Redemption, God is eternally
well-pleased, and by whose Covenant we stand and reign with him eternally and
indefectibly in a confirmed glorified state: else, 1. To what end shall Christ
stand glorified in our nature in heaven for ever? 2. Why is the Lambs throne in
heaven eternal? Rev. 22.3. 3. Else what means the Lambs servants in heaven for
ever? Rev. 22.3. and the new Song that is to the Lamb in heaven for ever, Rev.
5.12. and 7.10. 4. Else what means the Lambs being in the midst of the
glorified company, his leading them, being a temple, and a light unto them?
Rev. 7.17. and 21.22, 23. Sure the Lord Mediator as a glorified head of his
glorious body in heaven, acts as Mediator, though not as he acts now; and
though we cannot well determine what fort of leading, and what dispensation of
influences from him are there (and no wonder if his union with us and headship
over us even here, be a mystery, the knowledge whereof is referred to his
coming again, Joh. 14.20, At that day ye shall know that I am in my father, and
you in me, and I in you): yet the Lambs throne there, and his leading the
redeemed, and being a light and temple to them, proves his peculiar headship to
them. ^. The blessings purchased by this Covenant of Suretiship, are partakers
of eternity, they are eternal blessings: the Redemption obtained by the
Mediator, is eternal Redemption, Heb. 9.12. and eternal ^^beritance, Heb. 9.15.
and eternal life, Tit. 1.2. eternal Salvation Heiv. 5.9. eternal Glory, 1 Pet.
5.20. You see then, that eternigy (...) of the Covenant of Redemption, and that
many things belonging to it are partakers of eternity^ In (...), it is a
Covenant which was transacted from eternity, before the foundation of the world
was laid; it is as old as the Ancient of days; so that we cannot reckon the
beginning thereof, Prove. 8.23, I was set up from everlasting, from the
beginning, or ever the earth was: and which shall endure throughout eternity;
for the righteousness of this Covenant, even the Surety-righteousness of Christ
the Redeemer, shall be worn in glory for evermore, by all the redeemed people;
and through the force and virtue of the blood thereof, shall the glorious
Church stand and reign for ever, Rev. 19.8, And to her was granted that she
should be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white; for the fine linen is the
righteousness of Saints. And 5.9, And they sung a new song, saying, thou art
worthy to take the book, and to open the seals thereof; for thou wast slain,
and have redeemed us to God by thy blood out of every kindred, and tongue, and
people, and nation.

4. Another Property of the Covenant of Redemption, is equality: They who
distinguish Covenants into equal and unequal Covenants; by equal Covenants they
understand such wherein there is equality in the parties or conditions, when
the parties stand in equal terms, and do agree upon equal or like conditions.

No Covenant betwixt God and mere Man, ean properly and strictly be called an
equal Covenant; neither the Covenant of works made with man in his integrity,
nor the Covenant of Grace made with fallen man; for beside the infinite
distance and inequality of the parties, there is no proportion betwixt the
terms and conditions given and required in these Covenants: And upon strict
examination, there are but few equal Covenants betwixt man and man; for it is
rare to find the condition and affairs of Parties entering in Covenant in such
an equal poise, as that the inequality of their condition, and the moment and
exigent of their affairs, does not influence the terms and conditions of their
Covenants, so as to render them unequal.

But sure the Covenant betwixt Jehovah and Christ, is an equal Covenant. 1.
This Covenant was betwixt parties equal; I do not say that the Man Christ, or
Christ Mediator was equal with God; for in this respect there was an
inferiority and subordination unto which Christ humbled himself, by giving his
actual consent in this Covenant unto the designation of him to be the Person
that should do the work of our Redemption; but considering Christ as the
eternal Son of God, and antecedently to his actual consent to humble himself;
yea, and after that consent too, considering Christ the second Person as the
natural Son of God, the parties transacting this Covenant (though not quatenus,
as they were considered in this Covenant-transaction) were equal in Power,
Greatness, Wisdom, Honor, etc. as has been before showed from Phil. 2.6, Who
being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God. Joh.
10.29, 30, My Father which gave them me, is greater than all. -- I and my
Father are one.

2. This Covenant was betwixt equal parties, when they stood in equal terms,
and were at a perfect freedom to choose or refuse, to give consent to this
Covenant or refuse it, as pleased either party; there may be sometimes equality
betwixt parties covenanting; yet the inequality of the condition and freedom at
the time of transacting, may render the Covenant betwixt them unequal; as when
the one party is not at freedom, is concluded by some pressure or necessity
that is not upon the other party; hence often the terms are unequal: but in the
Covenant of Suretiship (whatsoever inequality and subordination was subsequent,
by the tenor of this Covenant) at the time when it was transacted from
eternity, the parties stood both on equal terms, and were at perfect freedom to
transact or not, as pleased either (as I have already proved); there was
nothing in the condition of either party (abstracting from the purpose of the
parties own will, and the design that acted them, which was common to both)
that could conclude either party to enter into such a Covenant (If I may call a
transaction that had no beginning, by the name of entering a Covenant in regard
of our manner of conceiving thereof); for this Covenant was not only consented
to by Christ, a person equal with God; but by him being in the form of God,
Phil. 2.6, 7, that is, while he stood in equal terms with God, and was under no
necessity to be found in the form of a servant, till he humbled himself, and
made himself of no reputation, etc.

3. The design that acted both parties in this transaction, was equal; for it
was one and the same, a design of love acted both the Father and the Son; the
carrying on a purpose of Grace and design of love which God had laid upon his
elect people, acted Jehovah in sending Christ to do this work of Redemption,
and in making him Surety for his people; and the same design also acted Christ
in his consenting to take our Law-place, and in his coming accordingly to act
our part, Joh. 3.16, For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting
life. With Gal. 2.20, -- I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me,
and gave himself for me. Even this Love-design which took up the delight and
the thoughts of both the patties equally, and wherewith both parties were
solacing themselves in the works without themselves; when as yet there was no
world, nor Inhabitants thereof created, Prove. 8.31, Rejoicing in the habitable
part of his earth, and my delights were with the sons of men.

4. This Covenant of Suretiship was made upon equal or like conditions and
terms; there was an equality betwixt the stipulation and restipulation; the
conditions promised to Christ, and these required from him by this Covenant;
not that worthless man was a wager for God to work for; for he was far below
the price that love put upon him. But understand it thus, 1. There was an
equality of Justice betwixt the conditions on the one part and the other;
punitive Justice could exact no more of man, by the curse of the broken
Covenant, than that which Christ suffered as his Surety, Gal. 3.13, Christ has
redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us; and
remunerative Justice could give no less to his perfect obedience unto the Law
of works, than the righteousness and life which he purchased, Romans 8.4, That
the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us. 2. There was an equality
of proportion or merit betwixt the conditions required from, and performed by
Christ, by virtue of this Covenant, and the conditions promised and performed
unto Christ by this Covenant. Not a merit and satisfaction upon Christ's part
de congruo (as the Schoolmen speak) whereby the friendship and love of the
party injured does accept of that which is not equivalent to the offense,
Durand. lib. 3. did. 21. quest. 2.
which Vorstius calls God's Divine acceptilation (which properly had no place
here, though the friendship and love betwixt God and Christ, be such as renders
any thing done by him, acceptable); but a merit and satisfaction de condigno,
there being a just and equal proportion betwixt the fault committed, and the
satisfaction given, and betwixt the reward promised and given to Christ, and
the obedience required from and performed by him, Joh. 17.4, 5, I have
glorified thee on the earth, I have finished the work which thou gave me to
do. And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self. Phil. 2.7, 8, But
made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was
made in the likeness of man. And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled
himself. -- Wherefore God has highly exalted him, etc.

5. The advantage redounding to both parties by this Covenant is equal; I mean,
the glory and honor of this transaction; for no other profit and goodness can
redound unto the all-sufficient good, Job. 35.7, If thou be righteous, what
give thou him? or what receives he of thine hand? Psalm. 16.2, 3, -- My
goodness extends not unto thee: But to the Saints that are in the earth, and
to the excellent, in whom is all my delight. I say of the Covenant of
Suretiship, that though the profit is ours, and extends only to the redeemed
people; yet the advantage of honor and glory, does equally reach both the
parties transacting in their own order; for thereby there is a peculiar honor
of our Redemption and Salvation to God, the Author thereof, who gave Christ,
and sent him to work this Redemption; and a peculiar honor to Christ Mediator,
to the Lamb the grand Instrument that wrought it, and whose soul traveled in
it. So that the honor accrewing hereby is not peculiar to any one of the
parties, but parted betwixt them, Joh. 5.23, That all men should honor the
Son, even as they honor the Father. Rev. 7.10, And cried with a loud voice,
saying, Salvation unto our God which sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb.

5. Another Property of the Covenant of Redemption, is order: that which is
said of the Covenant of Reconciliation, that it is ordered in all things; is
eminently true of the Covenant of Redemption: It is a well-ordered Covenant;
and how can it be made otherwise, since he that made it is the God of order, 1
Cor. 14.33. and God only wise, 1. Tim. 1.17. who knew well how to contrive the
comely order which he designed. The order of this Covenant does chiefly consist
in these two things. 1. In God's beautiful contriving and ordering the methods
and ways of our Redemption and Salvation. 2. In his comely ordering and
adapting these Methods of Redemption to answer the ends and intents, which were
purposed and proposed in this transaction. Under the first of these, I
comprehend, 1. His ordering and sending of a Savior and Redeemer to fallen
man. 2. His ordering the things that the Person designed should do and suffer
for purchasing this Redemption. 3. His ordering the means whereby the purchased
Redemption should be applied to the Redeemed people. 4. His ordering the
efficacy of means toward the ends purposed by him, that there might be no
misgiving in all the matter. Under the fecond, I comprehend God's ordering, 1.
That the satisfaction of Divine Justice shall be, by a Surety. 2. That the
satisfaction of the Surety shall meet with, and fully come up to the demands of
the Law and Covenant of works, by his obeying the command, and bearing the
curse. 3. That the Sureties satisfaction shall stand for the broken man's; he
taking our Law-place upon him, and acting our part. 4. That Justice shall be so
satisfied, as mercy be also entreated; that the means and methods of
Redemption, may answer the intent of God, to glorify these two attributes,
Justice and Mercy, in Man's Redemption. I do not say that the beautiful order
of this Covenant consisted in these things only; but in these, and the like;
which will appear further, when we come to speak of the subject matter of this
Covenant, and the things that were therein concluded.

6. Another Property of the Covenant of Redemption, is stability; God's
Covenant with Christ is an immutable, inviolable transaction; and all the
things therein concluded are firm and unalterable, nothing thereof can fail;
for, 1. It is transacted in the unchangeable counsel of God's will, where all
the decrees and conclusions are unalterable, Heb. 6.17, Wherein God willing
more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise, the immutability of his
counsel, confirmed it by an ^^th. Isa. 14.27, For the Lord of hosts has
purposed, and who shall disannul it?

2. It must be an inviolable Covenant, being transacted betwixt two parties who
have all imaginable Properties that can ensure then dealings and transactions,
and render them firm: For it is, 1. Betwixt God unchangeable, with whom there
is no variableness, nor shadow of turning, Jam. 1.17. I am the Lord, I change
not, Mal. 3.6. And Jesus Christ, the s ^one yesterday, and to day, and for
ever, Heb. 13.8. 2. It is betwixt God the strength of Israel, who is not as the
son of man, that he should repent, 1 Samuel 15.29. who has sworn to Christ, and
will not repent, Heb. 7.21. and Christ Jesus, in whom all the promises of God
are yea, and amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. 3. It is betwixt the true God, Jer. 10.10. the
God of truth, Deuteronomy. 32.4. and Jesus Christ, who is the truth it self, Joh.
14.6. 4. It is betwixt the faithful God which keeps Covenant, Deuteronomy. 7.9. who
abides faithful, and cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2.13. and Jesus Christ the
faithful witness, Rev. 1.6.

3. This must be a sure and inviolable Covenant, being a sworn confirmed
Covenant; for God has not only sworn and confirmed his Covenant with us, but
he has also confirmed this Covenant with an oath, and sworn to Christ, Psalm.
89.35, Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not lie unto David. Heb.
7.21, For those Priests were made without an oath, but this with an oath, by
him that said unto him, The Lord swear, and will not repent; thou art a Priest
for ever, after the order of Melchisedec. Now the Argument used by the Apostle,
from the confirmation of a Covenant, to the stability thereof, holds good and
firm of this Covenant also (though it be not the thing principally intended
there), Gal. 3.15, Though it be but a man's Covenant, yet if it be confirmed,
no man disannulleth or adds thereunto.

4. Stability and Inviolableness most eminently agree to that Covenant; for
which, and because of which the Covenant of Reconciliation made with us is
firm, sure, and inviolable. Now it is manifest, that the stability of that
Covenant springs out of this; and the inviolableness of the one, is given by
the Holy Ghost, for the ground and cause of the stability of the other; See
Psalm. 89.33, 34, 35, 36, Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly
take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. My Covenant will I not
break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. Once nave I sworn by my
holiness, that I will not lie unto David. His seed shall endure for ever, and
his throne as the Sun before me. Isa. 55.3, 4, I will make an everlasting
Covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. Behold, I have given him for
a witness to the people, a leader and commander to the people.

5. This Covenant is above the possible reach of all causes of occasions
whatsoever, that render Covenants unstable and uncertain; for here, 1. There
can be no place in either of the parties for unskilfulness nor rashnese, in
contriving or entering this eternal Compact, being the deed of parties, whose
understanding cannot be searched out, Isa. 40.28, the depths whereof are to be
admired, Romans 11.33, O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge
of God; whose foolishness is wiser than men! 1 Cor. 1.25. who does all his
matters by counsel and eternal deliberation, Ephesians. 1.11, who works all things
after the counsel of his will. Nor, 2. Is there place in either of the parties
for unrighteousness, Romans 3.5, 6, Is god unrighteous? God forbid: nor for
inconstancy or unfaithfulness (as is already proved) or any other thing that is
contrary to Covenant-keeping. 3. Nor is there any weakness or wearying in
either of the parties to perform their undertaking, against discouragement and
opposition that stands in the way of performing what is mutually engaged; no
such thing is incident to Jehovah, Luke 1.37, For with God nothing shall be
impossible. Isa. 40.28, The creator of the ends of the earth faints not,
neither is weary. Nor can Christ Mediator be impeached of such things, Isa.
42.4. He shall not fail nor be discouraged, till he have set judgment on the
earth; and the Isle^ shall wait for his Law. And 63.1, -- traveling in the
greatness of his strength: I that speak in righteousness, mighty to save.

The Parties in this eternal transaction about the work of Redemption, were
Jehovah on the one part; and the only Son of God on the other part. That these
were the parties, and these only, is generally acknowledged; and it is plain
Scripture, Psalm. 89.3, I have made a covenant with my chosen. Heb. 1.5, For
unto which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this day have I
begotten thee? And again, I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a
Son. And 5.5, 6, So also Christ glorified not himself to be made an high
priest; but he that said unto him, thou art my Son, to day have I begotten
thee. As he says also in another place, thou art a priest for ever, after the
order of Melchisedec. And 10.5, 7, Wherefore when he comes unto the world, he
says, sacrifice and offering thou would not; but a body have thou prepared
me. Then said I, lo, I come (in the volume of the book it is written of me) to
do thy will. The only difficulty lies in the right understanding how these
parties are to be considered: for clearing whereof, I shall lay down four
Assertions.

Assert. 1. Although God be on both sides of this Covenant; yet God is not to
be the same way considered upon both parts of the Covenant; for upon the one
part God is to be considered essentially, and it is opus essentiale, an act
common to all the three Persons of the Godhead. The one party covenanting is
Jehovah; God is common to all the three: upon the other part the Son of God is
to be considered personally, an act peculiar to the Son of God, the second
Person; else there could be no distinction of parties, no distinction of
consents, and consequently no Covenant of Redemption, no compact about that
work; and according to this distinction, we are to understand the Scriptures
beforementioned.

Assert. 2. The Covenant of Redemption is transacted with Christ personal, not
with Christ mystical, not with the elect Company, but singly with the Captain
of Salvation; not with the head and body, the Church; but with the chosen head,
unto whom God promised and had appointed a numerous seed, that should become a
body to him. It was made with Christ, not as a public person, representing
many; but as an eminent chosen person, chosen out among his brethren, Psalm.
89.19, I have laid help upon one that is mighty, I have exalted one chosen out
of the people. Heb. 5.1, For every high priest taken from among men, is
ordained for men in things pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and
sacrifices for sin; for though the mystical body of Christ were to reap the
benefit of this transaction; yet they were not parties in the transacting their
own Redemption. The Covenant of peace, kindness, reconciliation and life, was
indeed made with Christ mystical, head and members; with him as a public
person, representing all his seed and heirs that were chosen in him; but the
Covenant of Redemption was not so.

These things confirm this Assertion. 1. The work and business transacted by
this Covenant, was peculiar to Christ's person, the satisfying divine Justice,
by paying a price; the act of Suretiship, and taking the broken-man's
Law-place, etc. Sure this was peculiar to Christ personal. 2. It was he to whom
a seed of his own begetting, comprehending all the elect, was promised; to whom
a bride and a body, whereof he should be head and husband, with whom this
Covenant was transacted. Now this was Christ's personal: for it could not be,
that God promised this seed to the seed; he did not promise a people to
themselves; but to Christ their chosen head. 3. By this Covenant, God did
promise and give the headship to Christ over that body, and did vest him with
powers and authorities suitable; even with all power in Heaven and Earth: Now
the headship and these great Authorities, were neither promised nor given to
the head and body, to Christ mystical; but to Christ personal. 4. Christ
plainly claims the work of this Covenant to himself singly and personally
considered, and leaving out all others, even his own body, as having no
accession to this that he was singly engaged in, Heb. 2.10, For it became him,
for whom are all things, and by whom are all things; in bringing many Sons to
glory, to make the Captain of their Salvation perfect through suffering. And
5.9, And being made perfect, he became the Author of eternal Salvation unto all
them that obey him. Joh. 17.4, I have glorified thee on the earth, I have
finished the work which thou gave me to do. Isa. 63.3, I have trodden the
wine press alone, and of the people there was none with me.

Assert. 3. The Covenant of Redemption which was transacted with Christ
personally considered, even with the only Son of God, the second person: was
not made with Christ God; but with Christ God-man; the person transacting with
Jehovah, was not the Son of God, considered as God, as the natural Son of God;
but considered as God-man, as Mediator; this Covenant was stricken with Christ
(...), not (...). And 1. That it was not made with Christ God, or considered as
the natural only Son of God, is manifest: For, 1. Christ God could not be under
the Law. 2. Nor represent man, and take his Law-place. 3. Nor can Christ God
suffer and pay a price of blood. 4. Nor could Christ God receive a Mission and
Mandates; he could not be a Messenger, nor be sent, if we speak properly. 5.
Nor to Christ God could there be promises made, or any reward given, etc.
These, and many such instances may serve for establishing the negative part of
this Assertion; to wit, that the Covenant of Redemption was not made with
Christ God: beside, that this will receive further confirmation by establishing
the affirmative part of the Assertion.

2. The Covenant of Redemption was made with Christ God-man: For, 1. In this
respect only, Christ could make a party distinct from the other party
covenanting; to wit, Jehovah; it could not have been a Covenant except there
had been two parties agreeing together. Now Christ God, the second person,
could not constitute a party covenanting distinct from God considered
essentially, as common to all the three, Father, Son and Spirit, Joh. 10.30, I
and my Father are one: It was therefore Christ God-man, that made the Covenant
of Redemption. 2. Christ had a will distinct from Jehovah's will, only as he
was God-man: for as God, his will is one and the same with his Father's will,
and undistinguished from it, Joh. 1.13, Not of the will of man; but of God. Now
where there is a Conant betwixt two, there must be two wills, else how can
there be any agreement or consent of two; for consent is an act of the will: It
follows therefore, that the Covenant was made with Christ God-man, since in
this respect only, there are two wills meeting, consenting, and agreeing on the
same thing. 3. In what respect only Christ had a will capable of howing,
yielding, and obeying, in that respect he is to be considered in the Covenant
of Redemption; whereby he voluntarily yielded to do these things, which no
natural necessity obliged him to, Heb. 10.7. Then said I, lo, I come (in the
volume of the book it is written of me) to do thy will, O God. Now it is
evident, that Christ only as he was God man, had a will capable of howing and
yielding, Mat. 26.30, Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will; for the
will of Christ as God was not capable of bowing and yielding, for who has
resisted his will? Romans 9.19. the Govenant therefore was made with Christ
God-man. 4. In what respect Christ was inferior to God, or subordinate to him,
and did receive offices, trust, mission, commands, etc. and did obey: In that
respect only, was the Covenant of Redemption stricken with him; for by the
tenor of that Covenant he did all these things, Joh. 10.18, This commandment
have I received of my Father. And 6.38, 39, For I came down from heaven, not to
do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me. And this is the fathers
will that has sent me. And it is manifest, that in this respect only, Christ
as God-man is inferior to God, Joh. 14.28, My Father is greater then I; for
Christ God is equal with his Father, Psalm. 2.6. It follows therefore
necessarily, that the Covenant of Redemption was made with Christ God-man. 5.
In this consideration only as Christ is God-man, the conditions and
satisfaction performed by him, are performed by one party, and accepted by
another; in this respect only there is sending and coming, asking and
receiving, commanding and obeying, giving satisfaction and receiving it; for if
Christ be considered as God, then there could be no performing and accepting of
satisfaction; for so the party giving and receiving, sending and going, working
and rewarding, being the same, all satisfaction is taken away; for the party
the same every way, cannot be the giver and receiver of the satisfaction; so
all distinction of parties is taken away, and consequently all
Covenant-dealings enervated. 6. The Covenant of Redemption must be with Christ
God-man, in regard that the satisfaction required upon God's part to be
performed by Christ, and undertaken by him, was such as might stand in Law for
our sin. Now it is not imaginable how the satisfaction of Christ God, could
meet with the curse of the Law of works that had gone forth against man, Gal.
4.4, 5, But when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of
a woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law, that we
might receive the Adoption of Sons. It rests therefore, that it was a
satisfaction undertaken by God-man in the Covenant of Redemption. 7. In that
consideration that Christ was Surety for his people, and Mediator betwixt God
and man; in the same consideration was the Covenant of Suretiship and
Redemption made with him; for he could not he a Surety in one respect, and act
himself unto it in another; but it is plain Scripture that it was not Christ
God that was Mediator and Surety; but Christ God-man, 1 Timothy 2.5, For there is
one God, and one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus. Heb. 7.22,
By so much was Jesus made surety of a better testament. 8. In what
consideration Christ did perform the Covenant of Redemption, in the same
respect he is to be considered as a party undertaker (for no man can probably
think that one party undertook, and another performed); but it is above
question, that Christ God-man did perform this Covenant, and fulfill the
conditions therein required, 1 Timothy 3.16, And without controversy, great is
the mystery of Godliness, God was manifested in the flesh, justified in the
spirit, seen of angels, weached unto the gentiles, believed on in the world,
received up into glory: Gal. 4.4, But when the fullness of time was come, God
sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under the draw. Romans 8.3, For what the
Law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son
in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh. I
conclude therefore, that with Christ God man was the Covenant of Redemption
made. Besides these arguments, many more might be framed, from the particular
commands, conditions and promises of the Covenant of Redemption, which are
competent only to Christ God-man, and no ways to Christ God.

From this which has been said of Christ considered as God and as God-man, we
may answer the question, How the Justice of God can have a satisfaction from,
and by a person or party who is God? Ans. 1. If Christ God had been the party
with whom the Covenant of Redemption had been transacted, then indeed the party
giving, and the party receiving the satisfaction, had been the same. But the
Covenant being made with Christ God-man, a person different from offended God
essentially considered; so it is another party that makes the satisfaction,
than the party which was offended, and does receive the satisfaction. 2. Christ
God-man in one person, having man's nature that offended, united into a
personal union with the Godhead; was thereby fitted so to stand in our place,
and upon our side, as a party different from God, that he might therein
satisfy wrath, and therein merit by making a full and real compensation to
offended Justice. 3. Christ God-man, who makes the satisfaction as he is God,
being one with the Father, while he satisfies the Father's Justice, he
satisfies his own; but as he is God-man, being a party different from the
Father, he is by the Sovereignty of free Grace given to be a Surety; and the
satisfaction which he makes in our Nature as our Surety, is accepted by his
Father, as by another party.

Assert. 4. Christ was chosen and predestined Lord Mediator, and we are
chosen in him before he is a party covenanting with Jehovah, about the work of
our Redemption: I say, 1. He is first in order, in the eternal purpose of God,
designed and set apart to do this work, before he gave an actual consent unto
the Covenant of Suretiship. This follows necessarily upon the former
Assertion; for if the Covenant be made with Christ God-man, with Christ
Mediator betwixt God and man, then he must needs be Mediator by some eternal
act of the counsel of God antecedent in order of nature to this Covenant with
him, which is made with him considered as God to be made manifest in the flesh.
2. I say, not only Christ is chosen; but we also are chosen in him, unto the
fruit of that great labor and service which he was designed to undergo; for a
Covenant of Suretiship and Redemption, does not only suppose a Redeemer and
Surety predestined to be undertaker for a lost people; but also a people
designed to be partakers of the Redemption which he was to work. So that I say,
this Covenant that was made with Christ God-man; does suppose Christ's
headship, and our membership by eternal predestination, and by a co-ordination,
which may be expressed in this order; first, the chosen head, and then the
body; God did not not first choose a body, and then had a head to seek for them;
nor did he choose a head to be without a body, or as one that knew not of a body
for that head; but Election, which was the first act of God's love in eternity,
fell first upon Christ, whom God did chu^^ to be the head of his body the
Church, and the Captain of Salvation to all the chosen company; and having
chosen him, he chused us in him, as our head, and as the firstborn of the
elect house and family, Romans 8.29, For whom he did foreknow, he also did
predestinate, to be conformed to the Image of his Son, that he might be the
first born among many brethren. Ephesians. 1.4, According as he has chosen us in
him, before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy, and without
blame before him in love.

CHAP. IV. Of the Tenor, Articles, and Subject Matter of the Covenant of
Redemption; or of the Commands, Conditions, and Promises thereof.
THE Subject Matter and Articles of the Covenant of Suretiship, which were
agreed and concluded betwixt Jehovah and Christ by an eternal Compact (which
also may be divided into commands, conditions, and promises of that Covenant),
were mainly these seven. Who should be the Redeemed? Who the Redeemer? What his
work? When to be done? How to be applied? What his reward? And what assurance
given betwixt the parties for mutual performance?

Now because some of these Articles may seem to be the same upon the matter,
which I have before asserted to be supposed as antecedent in order of nature to
the Covenant of Redemption; Let it be remembered, that they may well be supposed
in our manner of conceiving thereof, as antecedent in God's purpose; and yet be
Articles of this Covenant, and fall under Christ's actual consent, which makes
a closed Covenant about them for it is not repugnant, that the same thing be
concluded in the eternal purpose of God's Will, and in his eternal agreement
with Christ.

1. By this Covenant it was agreed betwixt Jehovah and Christ God-man, who
should be the Redeemed people; there was a definite certain number of Redeemed
ones agreed upon, for whom Christ should pay a price; he was not Surety and
undertaker for all Mankind, nor for all the visible Church to whom the Gospel
shall be preached; for his undertaking is no wider nor larger than his dying,
purchasing Redemption, bearing Iniquity, Praying, etc. these being of equal
extent and efficacy: for whom Christ was undertaker to his Father, for them he
dyed, and purchased Redemption by his death; for them he did pray and make
intercession, etc. Now it is manifest that he did not purchase Redemption, and
make intercession for all Mankind; but for a chosen people, Heb. 9.15, And for
this cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by means of death for
the redemption of the transgressions that were under the first Testament, they
who are called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance. Joh. 17.9, I
pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for them that thou have given me;
for they are thine. Neither was Christ undertaker for a people under any
general notions or qualifications (such as them that should believe in him, or
the like), not knowing definitely who the persons were: but he was Surety and
undertaker only for the elect, and for a definite number of people, who were by
number and name given to him by his Father, and received by him, to be redeemed
by his blood; which does plainly appear by the description of the Redeemed
people, who are ordinarily called those whom the Father gave unto Christ, Joh.
17.3, 6, 9, 11. and 6.37, 39. and who were chosen in him, Ephesians. 1.4. and whose
names are written in the book of life, and in the Lambs book of life; as if the
Father, who gave them to Christ, had kept one record of their number and names,
and the Lord Mediator, who undertook for them, had kept another; Rev. 20.12.
and 21.27.

2. By this Covenant it was agreed betwixt Jehovah and Christ, who should be
the Redeemer; I say, it was agreed who should be the person to undertake this
great work of Redemption and Salvation for these elect people; for although we
may conceive that Christ was predestined unto this work before his actual
consent; yet we must conceive the agreement is by his own actual consent and
compact with God. See the agreement and consent of both the parties, that
Christ shall be the Lord Jehovah his servant in this work, Isa. 49.5, 6, And
now says the Lord that formed me from the womb to be his servant, to bring
Jacob again to him; though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in
the eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be my strength. And he said, it is a
light thing that thou should be my servant, to raise up the tribes of Jacob,
and to restore the preserved of Israel; I will also give thee for a light to
the Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation unto the end of the earth. And
under this part of the agreement, I comprehend, 1. The designation of the
person who shall be the redeemer, that it shall be the second person, the Son
of God only, not the Father, nor the Spirit, Isa. 59.20, And the Redeemer shall
come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, says the
Lord. Act. 3.26, Unto you first, God having raised up his Son, sent him to
bless you, in turning away every one of you from his Iniquities. 1 John 4.9,
God sent his only begotten Son unto the world, that we might live through him.
2. The constituting of that Person, Surety and Mediator to take that place upon
him, which the work of our Redemption did require, Heb. 7.22, By so much was
Jesus made a surety of a better testament. 3. The consent and agreement of
Christ to both these, to be the person that shall work this work, and to be
substitute in this place for doing the work, Heb. 10.7, Then said I, lo I come
(in the volume of the book it is written of me) to do thy will, O God; thus did
the Creditor and the Cautioner strike hands together.

3. By this Covenant it was agreed betwixt Jehovah and Christ, What should be
the Redeemer's work; or what should be the price that he should pay, and the
satisfaction that he should make to divine Justice, for the sins of the elect
that were given to him; under this, I take in, 1. The concluding betwixt the
parties, that Christ shall take upon him our Law-place and room, and in order
to that his taking our nature upon him, that Justice might reach him in our
stead and place, Gal. 4.4, God sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under
the Law. 2. That Christ as our Surety should dye, and lay down his life for us,
that he should pay for us the whole sum that was owing; even all that the Law
and Justice could exact of the broken man, Joh. 10.18, No man takes is from
me; but I lay it down of my self. Romans 8.3, God sending his own Son in the
likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh. Gal. 3.13,
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us;
this is at length held forth, Isa. 53.5, 6, 7, 10, 12. 3. That the payment and
satisfaction that should be made to Justice, by our Surety in our nature, and
in our room, should be accepted as our payment, and as a condign price for our
right to Heaven, Heb. 9.15, And for this cause he is the Mediator of the new
Testament, that by means of death for the redemption of the transgressions that
were under the first Testament, they which are called might receive the promise
of eternal inheritance.

4. By this Covenant it was agreed betwixt Jehovah and Christ, what should be
the term of paying this price, and making this satisfaction to Justice. A time
and term-day is condescended upon, such as seemed fit to infinite wisdom to
appoint, Gal. 4.2, 4, -- until the time appointed of the Father. -- but when
the fullness of the time was come. Heb. 9.10, 11, until the time of reformation.
But Christ being come, an high priest of good things to come. Dan. 9.26, And
after threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be cut off; but not for himself. I
say, though the price was agreed upon from eternity; yet God in his wisdom
thought fit to put off the time of actual paying this price, till the Redeemer
that should come out of Zion should be long waited for, Luke 2.38, -- and spoke
of him to all them that looked for redemption in Jerusalem; but though the
payment was suspended till the fullness of time; yet neither Christ's acting as
Mediator, nor the force of the blood of this Covenant; but in contemplation of
the price to be paid at the time appointed by the Father, he was the Lamb
slain from the foundation of the world, Rev. 13.8.

5. By this Covenant it was agreed betwixt Jehovah and Christ, how the
Redemption wrought by him should be applied to his elect people. And under
this, I comprehend, 1. The eternal appointment of the Gospel Ordinances,
especially the Covenant of Grace and Reconciliation, as means by divine
appointment, fitted to give the knowledge of the Redeemer, and of the
Redemption and Salvation wrought by him, Luk 1.77, 78, 79, To give knowledge of
Salvation unto his people, by the remission of their sins: Through the tender
mercy of our God, whereby the dayspring from an high has visited us; To give
light to them that sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, to guide our
feet in the way of peace. 2. The conclusion, that the Gospel should be preached
to all Nations; that for the Elect's sake it might come unto all the Societies
of men in the world, among whom there are any of the redeemed ones, Psalm.
110.2, The Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion, rule thou in
the midst of thine enemies. 3. The appointment of the times and seasons, and of
the particular Instruments that should carry the Gospel to the bounds of each
elect Soul's habitation, that it might meet with them, Act. 17.26, 27, And has
determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their habitation. That
they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel after him, and find him,
though he be not far from every one of us. According as we see it brought to
pass in the execution, so it was concluded from eternity, Act. 8.29. and 2.6,
17. and 9.15. and 18.9, 10. 4. The pouring out of the Spirit to make the
Gospel Ordinances and means of Salvation effectual to the Redeemed people; this
also was comprehended under this Article of the agreement, that this should be
procured by him, for his elect people, Joh. 16.7, 8, Nevertheless I tell you
the truth, it is expedient for you that I go away; for if I go not away, the
Comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto you.
And when he is come, he will reprove the world of fin, and of righteousness,
and of judgment. Psalm. 110.3, Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy
power, in the beauties of holiness from the womb of the morning.

6. By this Covenant it was agreed betwixt Jehovah and Christ, what should be
the reward and wages that he should have for this great Service, for working
the work of our Redemption; his reward and wages in the general Notation
thereof, was, ask and have; it was a grant of whatsoever he would ask of God
for so great a work and service; his recompense was at his own asking, Psalm.
2.8, Ask of me, and I shall give thee, etc. and according to his own heart,
full content and satisfaction, Isa. 53.11, He shall be satisfied, etc. but more
particularly, his reward and wages, which was all his own asking, comprised
these three things (which speaks these particulars to have been much upon his
heart, and in his design). 1. That he should have a seed, and a people; that
for all his labor he might have a redeemed people: when he had his reward and
satisfaction at his own asking, he made the redeemed ones, his end, his asking,
his satisfaction; this was the result of his transcendent love, that he might
be Immunuel, God with us; that he might enjoy his poor worthless people, Isa.
53.10, 11, Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief:
when thou shall make his Soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he
shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord-shall prosper in his hand.
He shall see of the travel of his Soul, and shall be satisfied. 2. That he
might have a Crown to himself; I mean, a peculiar glory of being Lord Mediator
and Redeemer, and of working this great work; and this he had in Heaven before
the foundation of the world, even since the eternal designation and destination
of him unto this work; for thenceforward he was the Lamb of God slain from the
foundation of the world, Rev. 13.8. And was set up from everlasting, Prove.
8.23, and was glorified with the Father, not only with the essential glory that
is common to all the three persons, which was obscured in his humiliation for
the work of Redemption; but also with a peculiar glory, as Lord Mediator, which
he had with him before the world began, Joh. 17.5. and this glory he shall have
in Heaven, throughout eternity, even after the last Judgment, there shall be in
Heaven a peculiar throne, and glory following, and a peculiar song to the Lamb;
whereof read Rev. 22.3. and 7.10, 17. and 5.9. 3. That he might have a crown
and throne for each of these redeemed ones, whom he took for a satisfaction to
his Soul, their crown, and throne, and robes was part of the reward and wages
that he wrought for, and asked of his Father, Joh. 17.24, Father, I will that
they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold
my glory which thou have given me. And 14.3, I will come again and receive you
unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be also. Luke 12.32, Fear not
little flock; for it is your father's good pleasure to give you the Kingdom.
Rev. 3.21, To him that overcomes will I grant to sit in my throne with me;
even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father in his throne.

7. By this Covenant it was agreed betwixt the parties, what should be the
mutual assurances given betwixt the parties for the performance of the Articles
agreed upon. There needed no Solemnities betwixt parties who knew one another,
and trusted one another so perfectly; but for our sakes, that we might be
helped to conceive of this eternal inviolable transaction: Therefore upon the
one part, 1. Jehovah gives his word and faithful promise unto Christ, Psalm.
110.1, The Lord said to my Lord; and not his faithful promise only, but his
oath also, Psalm. 89.35, Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not lie
unto David. Heb. 7.21, For those priests were made without an oath, but this
with an oath, by him that said unto him, The Lord swore, and will not repent,
Thou art a priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedee. 2. Upon the other
part, Christ does not only give his word of promise and consent to do this
work, Psalm. 40.6, Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire, mine ears have
thou opened, burnt offering and sin-offering have thou not required, etc. But
he also comes under a Judicial and Law-act of Suretiship, whereby he did from
eternity act himself, in the volume of the book of God's eternal Records, that
he would fulfill all his undertaking, Heb. 10.7, Then said I, lo I come, in the
volume of the book it is written of me, to do thy will, O God. And under this
act of Suretiship, I comprehend, 1. His eternal consent to take our Nature and
Law-condition upon him. 2. His plighting of his faith and truth to act our
part, and to answer the Law, and Demands of Justice in our Law-place and
condition. 3. His eternal agreement that by his own consent a Judicial act
should be put upon him, and stand in record for ever in Heaven, and in the
volume of books that are there, that this person had voluntarily undertaken,
and promised by striking hands with Jehovah, to answer all demands of Law and
Justice against his elect people.

Having offered the beforementioned sum of the Articles concluded and agreed
upon the Covenant of Redemption betwixt Jehovah and Christ; I come in the next
place to distribute and divide that sum, and the things comprised under it,
into the reciprocal and mutual engagements of the parties covenanting; to wit,
1. What were the commands and conditions laid upon Christ, and voluntarily
yielded unto by him, in the Covenant of Redemption. 2. What the promises and
engagements that were given to Christ by the same Covenant.

And, 1. Concerning the commands, conditions and engagements; which were
required of Christ Mediator by the Covenant of Suretiship: I shall in these
eight Assertions open the nature of them, and what they were.

Assert. 1. All the commands of the Covenant of Redemption, are conditions; and
are to be considered as such, when they are laid upon Christ, who came not
under commands, but upon terms and conditions. It is not so in God's
Covenant-dealings with us, all the commands of the Gospel are not to us
conditions of righteousness and life (unless we understand conditions in a very
large and improper sense); neither is it of the essence of commands laid upon
us to be conditions; for God owes nothing to our obedience, nor is he obliged
to make any promises to it; but the commands of the Covenant of Redemption are
all of them conditions of that same Covenant: For, 1. They are commands, to the
obedience whereof, promises are made, Isa. 53.12, Therefore will I divide him a
portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong, because
he has poured out his soul unto death, and he was numbered with the
transgressors, and he bare the sin of many, and made intercession for the
transgressors. 2. They are commands unto which Christ yielded upon terms, Phil.
2.7, 8, But made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a
servant, and was made in the likeness of man. And being found in fashion as a
man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the
Cross; therefore God has highly exalted him.

Assert. 2. All the conditions of the Covenant of Redemption; both these more
general of obeying the Law, and fulfilling all righteousness, Mat. 3.15, For
thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteausness; and the more special condition
of laying down his life, were voluntary free acts of Christ's will and infinite
love, wherein he was acted by no necessity, without his own free consent, Joh.
10.18, No man takes my life from me; but I lay it down of my self; I have
power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again; this commandment have
I received of my Father.

Assert. 3. All the conditions required of Christ, and undertaken by him in the
Covenant of Redemption, were ensured and certain conditions, there was no
hazard of failing, nor coming short upon his part in any the commands or
conditions of that Covenant: therefore it was said of him, Isa. 42.4, He shall
not fail, nor be discouraged till he have set judgment in the earth. Three
things evidence this. 1. The personal union of the two Natures, exempted the
man Christ from all hazard and possibility of sinning or coming short in the
obedience of any command or condition required of him. 2. Christ as man had the
Spirit above measure, and the confirming Grace which is given to elect Angels
in their head Christ; he had not only the promise of the Spirit and heavenly
influences to all duties and conditions required of him; but he had these
actually, even from his Mothers womb, Isa. 42.1, I will put my spirit upon him:
Isa. 11.2, The Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him. 3. There were no
threatenings in the Covenant of Redemption (though there were promises); because
there was no hazard of Christ's failing in the conditions thereof; nor
possibility of his falling short of the promised reward.

Assert. 4. Although it was eminent pure Grace that made the Covenant of
Redemption; yet the conditions thereof required from Christ, were works; it was
doing, not believing, that was required of him, Romans 5.19, By the obedience of
one shall many be made righteous. Joh. 9.4, I must work the works of him that
sent me. I acknowledge there was a kind of faith required of Christ-man, which
cannot be excluded the conditions of this Covenant (understanding conditions in
that large sense as comprehending all these ties, obligations and duties which
the man Christ took upon him, by taking on our Nature, and our Law-place);
whereof he makes profession, Isa. 50.7, For the Lord God will help me,
therefore shall I not be confounded; therefore have I set my face like a flint,
and I know that I shall not be ashamed. And Psalm. 16.8, I have set the Lord
always before me; because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved, etc.
compared with Act. 2.25, for David speaks concerning him, I foresaw the Lord
always before my face; for he is on my right hand, that I should not be moved.
And Heb. 2.13, I will put my trust in him. But, 1. This faith professed by
Christ, was faith of another kind, than that faith which is the condition of
the Gospel Covenant to us; it was the faith of dependence and relying on God,
for assistance and acceptance in doing the work, which was the eminent
condition of the Covenant of Suretiship; but not a faith whereby he went out of
himself to rely on another for righteousness; it was works, not Grace; not the
Evangelical Instrument, but the act and work of faith. 2. This faith professed
by Christ, was upon another account, and for another use; it was a debt which
the holy humane nature of Christ, being a creature, owed unto God; a debt, I
say, such as did not exclude that from being meritorious, and part of his
satisfaction (since it was part of his obedience taken on by voluntary compact)
no more than his being made under the Law, whereby he was debtor to satisfy
the penalty thereof, did exclude his suffering from being satisfactory; yet he
was not by this kind of believing justified, and constituted righteous, by any
righteousness received by his faith, or imputed to him; as we are justified by
faith. 3. This faith professed by Christ, was neither the whole condition of
the Covenant of Suretiship, nor the chief and eminent part of it (as shall be
made to appear); but at most it could amount to no more of the condition of his
Suretiship, than such a faith of dependency in Adam before his fall, should
have been in the conditional part of the Covenant of works that was made with
him, and that was but one single act and work of righteousness; which was a
small part of the condition of that Covenant.

Assert. 5. The conditions of the Covenant of Suretiship made with Christ, did
fully and perfectly answer the intent of the Covenant of works; and that in
both the parts of it copulatively, which did but alternatively oblige man; for
the Law does not oblige man in an absolute sense, both to perfect doing and
suffering, but to one of them; for if we keepthe Law, we are not obliged to
suffer, Genesis 2.17, But of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shall
not eat of it; for in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die. But
Christ by the conditions of the Covenant of Redemption, 1. He is a full doer
and obedient fulfiller of the commands thereof in all points, Mat. 3.15, For
thus it behooves us to fulfill all righteousness. 2. He fully suffers the
penalty of that Covenant, and satisfies for the broken commands thereof, Isa.
53.5, 6, He was wounded for our transgressions. -- The Lord laid upon him the
iniquity of us all. Hence, 3. By the conditions of this Covenant which he
performed, he had right to Law-justification, and life eternal, even by the Law
of works; for the righteousness which he wrought was perfect Law-righteousness,
though the imputation of it to us be an act of Grace; and our receiving it by
faith, make it Gospel-righteousness to us, 1 John 1.7, But if we walk in the
light as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood
of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin. Compared with Romans 4.5, But
to him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his
faith is counted for righteousness.

Assert. 6. Neither Christ's active nor passive obedience are to be excluded
from making up the adequate condition of the Covenant of Suretiship: For, 1.
The man Christ his passive obedience could not have amounted unto a
satisfaction for us, if by his active obedience, his habitual and actual
conformity unto the holy Law of God, he had not been such a high priest as
became us, as is holy, harmless, etc. Heb. 7.26. 2. Although Christ as man was
obliged to obey the Moral Law; yet considering that he voluntarily took that
obligation upon himself, and being Lord and Law giver, he made himself under
the Law by this Covenant of Suretiship. I do not see how his obedience to the
Law can be excluded from among the conditions of this Covenant. 3. The whole
course of Christ's obedience, from his Birth to his Grave, by doing and
suffering, is to be considered as the doing and suffering of so excellent a
person who was God-man; and so all these being acts so excellent, and so undue
(except by voluntary condescension), they must needs be such conditions as were
part of the price paid by him. 4. The obedience of Christ, and all that he did
in obedience to the Law, being performed by him in the state of his humiliation
in which he was, whatsoever he was, for us, 2 Cor. 8.9, for your sakes he
became poor; all these must have respect of conditions of his Covenant with
Jehovah, which he performed for us.

Assert. 7. The conditions of the Covenant of Redemption required from Christ,
and performed by him, were meritorious; that is, they were not consequent
conditions, which denote only a connection and order betwixt the thing promised,
and the condition required; but they were antecedent conditions, when the
condition is the cause of the thing promised; as in contracts of Justice, where
one thing is given for another. So the conditions of this Covenant performed by
Christ, did by order of strict Justice, and jure emptionis, claim the reward
that was promised and covenanted with him, to be given to himself the head, and
to his elect people, in whose stead he satisfied Justice by paying their debt
with a price of blood; hence it is that he craves the reward to be given, and
that in Justice, for the work he had done, Joh. 17.4, 5, 24, I have glorified
thee on the earth, I have finished the work which thou gave me to do. And
now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine own self. -- Father, I will that
they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold
thy glory which thou have given me; for thou lovedst me before the foundation
of the world. Hence it is also, that his Advocation is grounded upon Justice,
and he stands in Heaven, Jesus the righteous, 1 John 2.1. who being now
justified and acquitted of the debt that he took upon him by his bond of
Suretiship, whereby he was made sin, and made a curse for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. Gal.
3.13. He pleads now the merit of blood.

Assert. 8. The condition of the Covenant of Suretiship, is either more general
and adequate, or more special and forwal; and accordingly we must answer the
question, when it is asked, what was the condition of this Covenant? Answ. 1.
The general adequate condition of the Covenant of Suretiship can be no narrower
than Christ's whole undertaking; so that whatsoever he undertook to do, whether
in his own person, or in his people; for carrying on, and perfecting the word
of Redemption from beginning to end, must be part of the conditions required at
his hand; whereof read Psalm. 40.6, to 11. compared with Heb. 10.5, to 11; all
which may be summed up in six comprehensive heads, 1. Christ's accepting the
grand charge of this work of Redemption, even the Mediatory office that was put
upon him; he receives the keys of the house of David, the trust and weight of
the lost, but elect world; and all the burden and care of them is devolved
upon him, with this office, Isa. 22.22, 24. And the key of the house of David
will I lay upon his shoulder; so he shall open, and none shall shut; and he
shall shut, and none shall open: And they shall hang upon him all the glory of
his Father's house, the offspring and the issue; all vessels of small
quantity, from the vessels of cups, even to all tho vessels of flaggons. 2. His
taking out nature upon him, and that not in its primitive virgin integrity, but
when it was at the worst; it was a condition of this Covenant, that Christ
should humble himself to take on him the likeness of sinful flesh, Romans 8.3,
that he should take the same nature that offended divine Justice, even the same
flesh and blood, whereof the children are partakers, and no other, Heb. 2.14.
3. His taking our Law-place, was another condition; not our nature only, but
our Law-place and room; that is, to put his Soul in our Soul's stead, that the
Law of God might reach him, who otherwise could not be reached by the Law; and
that Divine Justice executing the curse and penalty of the Law, might smite
him, as the guilty man being by his own consent, and his bond of Suretiship
become legally the debtor and sinner (though not intrinsecally), Gal. 4.4, made
under the Law, and made sin for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. though he knew no sin. 4. His
acting our part, not in a scenick, but in a real manner; he came upon the stage
to represent our person, and in our nature and Law-place he really acted our
part; and this was another condition required of him, who perfectly obeyed the
command of the Law, and suffered the threatening thereof for us, even all that
Justice had threatened to inflict upon the offender and transgressour of the
Law, Gal. 3.13. he was made a curse for us, Isa. 53.5, the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, etc. 5. His taking a new Covenant-right unto God his own
Father, and not to God only, but to heaven, and glory, and all the New Covenant
blessings, whereby the Covenant-right and rites of his redeemed people might be
consolidated in him, as their head; and whereby he might for ever carry their
names and interests before his Father, as being there represented by him, Psalm.
89.26, He shall cry unto me, thou art my Father, my God, and the rock of my
Salvation. Heb. 2.11.13, For both he that sanctifies, and they who are
sanctified, are all of one; for which cause he is not ashamed to call them
brethren. And again, I will put my trust in him; and again, behold I, and the
children which thou have given me. And 9.24, For Christ is not entered into the
holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the true, but into heaven
it self, now to appear in the presence of God, for us. 6. His effectual
application of the Redemption purchased by his Suretiship unto all his redeemed
ones. And under this, I comprehend Christ's undertaking for the pouring out of
the Spirit, to send to them his Spirit, to draw them to him, to cause them to
believe and receive his Surety-righteousness, to keep them in his favor and
love, to cause them to persevere, to present them perfected, and without spot
to God, Joh. 15.26, But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you
from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceeds from the Father, he
shall testify of me. Joh. 12.32, And if I be lifted up from the earth, I will
draw all men unto me. Joh. 6.37, All that the Father gives me shall come to
me: and him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. Joh. 6.39, 40, And
this is the Father's will that has sent me, that of all which he has given
me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up at the last day. And this is
the will of him that sent me, that every one which sees the Son, and believes
on him, may have everlasting life, and I will raise him up at the last day.
Joh. 14.3, And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again and
receive you unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be also.

2. But if ye enquire after the formal condition of the Covenant of Suretiship,
I say it was his whole obedience active and passive, even unto death, Phil.
2.8, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross; though the
special, principal eminent condition of this Covenant may be referred to the
principal, eminent, last act of his obedience to that signal special command of
laying down his life for the elect, Joh. 10.18, No man takes it from me, but I
lay it down of my self; I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take
it again; this commandment have I received of my Father. For, 1. This Covenant
being a bargain betwixt Jehovah and Christ, of buying a people to God; then the
whole price and ransom told down and paid for them, must be the formal
condition of that Covenant, whereby we are bought with a price, 1 Cor. 6.20. 1
Pet. 1.18, 19, For as much as ye know that ye were not redeemed with
corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your vain conversation received by
tradition from your Fathers: but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a
Lamb without spot, and without blemish. 2. Christ was under a special explicit
command for the performance of this condition of laying down his life; as is
clear from Joh. 10.18, and Christ was under a special act to obey this command,
as himself acknowledges, Heb. 10.7, Then said I, lo I come, in the volume of
the book it is written of me, to do thy will, O my God; and therefore we may
well call it the special condition of the Covenant of Suretiship. 3. This
solemn act of obedience, in offering himself a Sacrifice to death for our sins,
is the condition of his bond of Suretiship, that is most notised by the Holy
Ghost, and frequently referred unto; as may be gathered from Heb. 9.14, 15, 26,
How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered
himself without spot to God, purge your consciences from dead works, to serve
the living God. And for this cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament,
that by means of death for the Redemption of the transgressions that were under
the first Testament, they which are called might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance. -- but now once in the end of the world has he appeared to put
away sin by the sacrifice of himself. Romans 8.3, -- God sending his own Son in
the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh. And
therefore when we speak of the condition of the Covenant of Suretiship, this is
to be held the special eminent condition thereof. 4. The Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ states the condition of this Covenant upon this eminent solemn act
of his obedience, even his making his soul an offering for sin, etc. for-vent
which he makes the great promises of his glorious reward, Isa. 53. throughout.
5. Our Lord Jesus Christ himself does own this as the special condition of his
Coovenant of Suretiship; and that both at his entering into the world, Heb.
10.5, 7, Wherefore when he comes into the world, he says, sacrifice and
offering thou would not; but a body have thou prepared me. Then said I, lo I
come, in the volume of the book it is written of me, to do thy will, O God: And
about, or at the time of his leaving the world, when he had fulfilled, or was
about to fulfill all his undertaking and conditions to his Father, Joh. 17.4, I
have glorified thee on the earth, I have finished the work which thou gave me
to do. With 19.30, When Jesus therefore had received the vinegar, he said, it
is finished, and he bowed his head, and gave up the ghost.

These being the sum of the conditions required from Christ, See Mr. Rutherf.
Treat. of the Covenant, p. 2. chapter 11. And Mr. Robert's Medul. Bibl. b. 2. c. 2.
and undertaken by him; let us enquire also after the promises made to Christ,
and the encouraging-conditions that were made to him by Jehovah, for
undertaking so hard a work as was the redemption and recovery of lost man:
These were of eight sorts.

The first kind of promises made to Christ in the Covenant of Redemption, were
such as relate to the offices, authorities, trusts and powers that were
covenanted to him, for the doing of this work. 1. I say, Jehovah promises to
invest Christ with offices suitable to that great work of Redemption, to make
him Lord Mediator of the new Covenant; to make him great Lord Ambassador, that
he might go and travel in that business of our Redemption; to make him a King,
a Priest, and a Prophet, for effecting this business, Psalm. 110. throughout,
The Lord said to my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, -- he shall judge among
the heathen, -- the Lord has sworn, and will not repent, thou art a Priest for
ever, Isa. 49.6. And 42.6, 7, I will also give thee for a light to the
Gentiles, that thou may be my Salvation unto the ends of the earth, -- to
open the blind eyes, etc. Psalm. 2.6, 7, Yet have I set my King upon my holy
hill of Zion; I will declare the decree, the Lord said unto me, etc. 2. God did
not only promise to invest Christ with offices and trusts; but with authorities
and powers also, with headship and power of Judgment over Men and Angels, that
shall make them all bow to him, Romans 14.10.11, We shall all stand before the
judgment seat of Christ; for it is written, As I live, says the Lord, every
knee shall bow to me, and every tongue shall confess to God. He was not a
titular King or Priest, nor a scenick one, a King upon a stage; but a King upon
a throne, Luke 1.32, 33, And the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his
father David. And he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his
kingdom there shall be no end. A King that had power to bow the hearts of his
Subjects, and to crush the greatest Heads and Rulers in the world that oppose
him, Psalm. 110.3.5, 6, Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power. --
The Lord at thy right hand shall strike through kings in the day of his wrath.
He shall judge among the heathen, he shall fill the places with the dead bodies,
he shall wound the heads over many countries. And 2.9, Thou shall break them
with a rod of iron, thou shall dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel. And
45.3, 4, 5, Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O most mighty, with thy glory and
thy majesty. And in thy majesty ride prosperously, because of truth and
meekness, and righteousness, and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible
things. Thine arrows are sharp in the heart of the kings enemies, whereby the
people fall under thee. A person in offices, who had all judgment committed
unto him, who had power given him over all flesh, Joh. 17.2. and all power in
heaven and earth, Mat. 28.18. this was he to whom all the honorable offices
and absolute powers of his Father's house was promised, that he might act and
give orders, and set up, and put down, and none to control him, Isa. 22.22,
24, And the key of the house of David, will I lay upon his shoulder, so he
shall open and none shall shut, and he shall shut and none shall open. And they
shall hang upon him all the Glory of his Father's house, the offspring and the
issue, all vessels of small quantity, from the vessels of cups, even to all the
vessels of flaggons. 3. I say, the Lord Mediator had all these offices and
authorities by Covenant; the Lord promised to him, and covenanted with him to
give him these offices, for doing the work of Redemption; therefore we read
Psalm. 89. that Christ (who there is called David) is constituted a King by
Covenant, v. 3, 4, and by what Covenant? even by that Covenant whereby the help
of God's elect people was laid upon him, v. 19. and this was the Covenant of
Suretiship and Redemption; and in the same place we read of the standing fast
of God's Covenant with him, v. 28. even that Covenant whereby he was made
higher than the Kings of the earth, v. 27. And again, we find the same Covenant
whereby he had a lasting Kingdom sworn with him, v. 34, 35, My Covenant will I
not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips: Once have I sworn
by my holiness, that I will not lie unto David. To the same purpose also, there
is an oath interposed with the promise of his Priesthood, to show that he was
in that office by a more unalterable Covenant than that which was made with
Levi, Mal. 2.5, My covenant with him was of life and peace; compared with Heb.
7.21, For those Priests were made without an oath; but this with an oath, by
him that said unto him, the Lord swear and will not repent, thou art a Priest
for ever. The second kind of Promises made to Christ, are such as relate to the
gifts, endowments, and habitual furniture which was necessary unto the man
Christ, for performing this great work; he had an instrumental fitness for this
extraordinary work, Isa. 11.2, 3, 4, And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon
him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might,
the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord. And shall make him of
quick understanding in the fear of the Lord: and he shall not judge after the
sight of his eyes, neither reprove after the hearing of his ears. But with
righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of
the earth: and he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the
breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked. And under this sort of Promises, I
comprehend, 1. The Sanctification of our nature to be assumed by him, and
infusion of habitual Grace in the holy humane nature of Christ, from the very
first moment of his conception, and of the personal union of the two natures,
Luk 1.35, Therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee, shall be
called the Son of God. Heb. 7.26, For such an high priest became us, who is
holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from sinners, and made higher than the
heavens. 2. The growth of Grace, whereof the man Christ was capable, who was
made in all things like his brethren (except sin); we must therefore conceive
of his growth, to have been without sinful weakness, and to have been in
experience, and in physical intention, and bendedness of acts of obedience,
which the Law does not require in like degree from the young as from the old,
Luke 2.52, And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God
and man. Heb. 5.8, Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things
which he suffered. Zech. 6.12, Behold the man whose name is (...) ^ranch, and
he shall grow up out of his place, and he shall build the temple of the Lord.
3. The anointing in its fullness without measure, and above his fellows;
whereby the man Christ was full of Grace, and had a fullness for this work,
whereof no other creature was capable, Psalm. 45.2, 7, -- Thou art fairer then
the children of men; Grace is poured into thy lips; therefore God has blessed
thee for ever. -- Thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy
fellows. Joh. 1.14, And the word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, and we
beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of
grace and truth. And 3. 34, for God gives not the spirit by measure unto him.
4. The overflowings of his fullness, whereby the Spirit and All-saving Grace,
being placed in him as in a Storehouse and Treasure, not for himself only, but
for his elect people; did run down and flow out from the Mediator, from Christ
God-man, as water from a fountain and fresh spring, as dropping showers from
full clouds, Joh. 1.16, And of his fullness have all we received, and grace for
grace. Col. 2.3, In whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. And
1.19, But it pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell. 5. The
bodily inhabitation of the fullness of the Godhead in him: By virtue of that
unconceivable mystery of the personal union, he had a personal fullness, Col.
2.9, for in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily.

The third kind of Promises made by Jehovah to Christ, and covenanted to him,
were such as relate to his actual support in the execution of this office, and
performing of the work which he undertook; for the man Christ being a creature,
needed more than habitual Grace, and anointing with gifts for such a work;
there was a necessity that he should not act independently, without influence
from God. And to this kind of promises may be referred the promises of heavenly
influences to all the acts of his Mediatory-office, and his Surety-obedience;
so that as the man Christ needed the Spirit and Influences, these were ensured
by Covenant unto him; so that it was impossible that the man Christ could sin,
or come short in performing all his Father's pleasure (as Adam sinned, and fell
short of the command), having actual influences ensured unto him, as well as
habitual Grace: hence he says of himself, Joh. 16.32. and 8.16, I am not
alone; it was imposs^^^ that he could be left alone of his Father; and to him
was the promise made, Isa. 11.12, The spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him;
the Spirit and heavenly influences, were his constant companions, Isa. 50.4, He
wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the learned. The
promise of help, strength, support, and assistance, which are the immediate
effects of actual influences, and in which the heavenly influences of the
Spirit have a proper efficiency and causality; there is a divine furniture of
strength and assistance promised to him in the discharge of his office, and in
every act of his obedience, Isa. 42.6, I the Lord have called thee in
righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee. Psalm. 89.21, With
whom my hand shall be established, mine arm also shall strengthen him. The
promise of confirming Grace: the man Christ had the promise of the same
confirming Grace in his obedience, and office, and covenant state of favor,
which is now given to the elect Angels in Christ their head, Isa. 49.1, 2, 3,
Listen O Isles unto me, and hearken ye people from far; the Lord has called me
from the womb, from the bowels of my mother has he made mention of my name.
And he has made my mouth like a sharp sword, in the shadow of his hand has he
hid me, and made me a polished shaft, in his quiver has he hid me. And said
unto me, thou art my servant, O Israel, in whom I will be glorified. And 42.4,
He shall not fail, nor be discouraged, till he have set judgment in the earth.
To him is the promise made, that he shall never be bowed nor broken; he shall
not be turned off his work nor his way, by any thing that he can meet with.

And this kind of Promises is made to Christ-man, to encourage him (as Mr.
Roberts observes), Medul. Bibl. b. 2. c. 2.
1. Against the utmost extremity of his sufferings, when he should make his
Soul an offering for sin, when the wakened up sword of divine Justice should
smite him, Zech. 13.7, Awake, O sword, against my shepherd, etc. and against
the man that is my fellow, says the Lord of hosts. Though he was forsaken for
a time, and wanted influences of consolation; and felt-fruition of the presence
of God, Psalm. 22.1. Mat. 27.45; yet these promises were verified to him, and
God stood by him with influence of strength, support, assistance, and
preservation in all this Mediatory-administrations, till he said, the work is
finished, Joh. 19.30. Psalm. 22.9, But thou art he that took me out of the womb,
thou did make me to hope when I was upon my mothers breasts. 2. Against all
oppositions and enemies: There was much opposition made to Christ, and many
were against him; but against all the rage, plots, combinations of Jews and
Gentiles, the Lord stood by him, and set up his Kingdom, Psalm. 2.2, 6, The
kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together against
the Lord, and against his anointed; -- Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill
of Sion. Act. 4.27, 28, For of a truth against the holy child Jesus, whom thou
have anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the people
of Israel were gathered together, for to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel
determined before to be done. 3. Against the deepest discouragements that he
should meet with in the discharge of his office: He is supported by these
promises made to him, and accordingly he encourages himself, Isa. 49.4, 5, 6,
Then: said I, I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught, and
in vain; yet surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my work wiith my God. And
now, says the Lord that formed me from the womb to be his servant, to bring
Jacob again to him: Though Israel be not gathered; yet shall I be glorious in
the eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be my strength. And he said, it is a
light thing that thou should be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob,
and to restore the preserved of Israel; I will also give thee for a light of
the Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation unto the end of the earth.

The fourth kind of Promises made by Jehovah unto Christ in the Covenant of
Redemption, were such as relate to the successfulness and prospering of the
work of Redemption in his hand And unto this head, I refer, 1. The promise of
God's making Christ the man of his right hand; and that not only in respect of
special love and honor, but especially in respect of instrumentality; whereby
God promises to make him the main Instrument of action, that should be made
serviceable to his ends in the work of Redemption, Psalm. 80.17, Let thy hand be
upon the man of thy right hand, upon the Son of man whom thou made strong for
thy self. 2. The promise of a successful issue of his undertakings; the Lord
covenanteth to Christ, and gives to him assurances that he shall effect the
work which he undertaketh; as if Jehovah had been Surety for this, he strikes
hands with him, that he shall go and prosper, Isa. 53.10, The pleasure of the
Lord shall prosper in his hand. -- He shall see of the travel of his soul. --
by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many. Isa. 49.6, 7, 8, And
he said, it is a light thing that thou should be my servant to raise up the
tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel; I will also give thee
for a light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation unto the end of
the earth. Thus says the Lord, the Redeemer of Israel, and his holy One, to
him whom man despises, to him whom the nation abhors, to a servant of
rulers; Kings shall see and arise, Princes also shall worship, because of the
Lord that is faithful, and the holy One of Israel; and he shall choose thee.
Thus says the Lord, in an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of
salvation have I helped thee; and I will preserve thee, and give thee for a
Covenant of the people, to establish the earth, to cause to inherit the
desolate heritages. 3. The promises of victory over all his enemies: the Lord
covenanteth with Christ, that whosoever makes opposition to him in any of his
offices, in any part of his work, of working Redemption and Salvation for his
elect people, shall be trodden down, and shall fall before him, Psalm. 110.1, 5,
6, Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool. The
Lord at thy right hand shall strike through kings in the day of his wrath. He
shall judge among the heathen; he shall fill the places with the dead bodies, he
shall wound the heads over many countries. Psalm. 89.23, Aed I will beat down
his foes before his face, and plague them that hate him. 4. The promises of
triumph: God covenanteth with him, not only to give him the victory, but a most
glorious public triumph over Principalities and Powers, and all oppositions
and enemies to his undertakings, Isa. 53.12, Therefore will I divide him a
portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong. Ephesians.
4.8, Wherefore he says, when he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive,
and gave gifts unto men. Col. 2.15, And having spoiled principalities and
powers, he made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it. It was in
the faith of these Promises made to Christ concerning his Father's standing by
him in this work, and crowning it with success in his hand, that he put on that
holy hardness against all opposition, and walked as unconcerned who stood in
his way, since his Father was with him, engaged by so solemn an act of promise
and covenant made with him, Isa. 50.6, 7, 8, 9, I gave my back to the smiters,
and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair: I hid not my face from shame
and spitting. For the Lord God will help me; therefore shall I not be
confounded; therefore have I set my face like a flint, and I know that I shall
not be ashamed. He is near that justifies me, who will contend with me? let us
stand together; who is mine adversary? let him come near to me. Behold, the
Lord God will help me, who is he that shall condemn me? lo, they all shall wax
old as a garment, the moth shall eat them up.

The fifth kind of Promises made by Jehovah to Christ in the Covenant of
Redemption, were those that relate unto his Fathers acceptance of the travel of
his Soul in this work of our Redemption. And under this I comprehend, 1.
Whatsoever was spoken to him of his Father's delectation, and taking pleasure
in the person of Christ God-man, and in his Mediatory-transactions; all delight
arises from sutableness, and this from Christ's sutableness unto the Lords
ends, and the service unto which he was chosen, and his suitable actings unto
these ends, Luke 3.21, 22, Now when all the people were baptized, it came to
past that Jesus also being baptized, and praying, the heaven was opened: And
the Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape like a dove upon him, and a voice
came from heaven, which said, then art my beloved Son, in thee I am
well-pleased. Prove. 8.30, Then I was by him as one brought up with him, and I
was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him. Isa. 42.1, Behold my
servant whom I uphold, mune elect, in whom my soul delights. 2. The promise
of gracious acceptance to whatsoever he should act or request, on the behalf of
his Redeemed ones, within the time of Grace. Isa. 49.8, Thus says the Lord, in
an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of salvation have I helped
thee. Joh. 11.41, 42, Father I thank thee that thou have heard me: And I knew
that thou hear me always. Heb. 5.7, Who in the days of his flesh, when he
had offered up Prayers and Supplications, with strong crying and tears, unto
him that was able to save him from death, and was heard in that he feared. 3.
The Promises of Justification: there was some sort of Justification covenanted
to him, which he eyeth, and wherewith he encouraged himself under hard and
reproachful usage, Isa. 50.8, He is near that justifies me, who will contend
with me? and accordingly it is said of him, 1 Timothy 3.16, he was justified in
the spirit; and though he was not capable of remission of sin, and
justification, from intrinsecal guilt; for he had none, being holy, harmless,
undefiled, and separate from sinners, Heb. 7.26. because he had done no
violence; neither was there any deceit in his mouth, Isa. 53.7. Yet
justification is promised to him, and he is said to be justified, 1. Because he
was a perfect doer and obeyer of the Law, 1 John 1.7, But if we walk in the
light as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood
of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin. Christ did in all things
give consummate and perfect obedience to the Law: and this is to be justified
by a Law-justification and title to life, which Adam should have had; if he had
obeyed the Law and Covenant of works. 2. When his cause is justified, he
himself is formally justified, in respect of these sins for which he undertook
to satisfy: the cause that he stood for in the Covenant of Redemption, the
action is win in Law that he stood for, and that was his elect peoples cause,
for whom he stood when Justice smote him; he is justified and acquitted from
our sins, though he had none of his own, Romans 6.9, knowing that Christ being
raised from the dead, dies no more; death has no more dominion over him. 3.
He is justified as a public person (though in no private capacity) as head of
the party whom he represented, and whose Law place he took upon him, as one who
personated and acted the part of another by allowance and warrant of Law, Heb.
2.10.13, For it became him for whom are all things, and by whom are all things,
in bringing many Sons unto glory, to make the Captain of their salvation
perfect through sufferings. -- And again, I will put ^^y trust in him; and
again, Behold, I, and the children which God has given me. 4. He is justified
declaratively, in regard that he was declared by a Law, act and
Judicial-declaration, to he Jesus the righteous, 1. Joh. 2.1. who had fatisfied
the Law, Romans 1.4, And declared to be the Son of God with power, according to
the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead; he was declared
justified by his resurrection, even as he was declared condemned by his death.
5. He is justified by cancelling his bond of Suretiship which he gave to
Jehovah; and now having completely satisfied for our debts, which was the
intent of that bond of Suretiship, the right is cancelled, according to the
manner of the Creditor's delivering back the bond to the Debtor when it is
satisfied: And thus we are to conceive, when he blotted out the handwriting of
ordinances that was against us, Col. 2.14. that he had then a discharge of his
bond of Suretiship for our debt; for his bond could not lie for our debt, when
ours was cancelled And though the precise scope of that Scripture and Context
lead us to understand the cancelling there mentioned, as firstly relative to
the Ceremonial-Law; yet I know no reason why we should restrict it to that
only; but, we may extend it to the sins against, and threatenings of the Moral
Law also, in so far as that is a writing against us, especially since the words
immediately before, speak of Justification and remission of all sins, as a
fruit of Christ's death; and the words following, declare the extent of his
death in this glorious conquest and triumph over all his peoples enemies. 6. He
is justified, because it is acted and recorded in the volume of the book of the
written word, that he has fulfilled what was written of his undertaking in the
book of God's eternal Decrees; and in this sense a person may be said to be
justified, who being acted in the record of a book to perform any thing, or to
pay any debt, or to become bail for any person, when it is thereafter also
recorded of him, that he satisfied and performed his undertaking. And thus we
find that his undertaking and suretiship that was recorded ere he came into the
world, Psalm. 40.6, Sacrifice and offering thou did not desire, mine ears have
thou opened, burnt offering and sin offering have thou not required, etc. Is
also recorded of him to have been satisfied by him, when he came into the
world, Heb. 10.5, 6, 7, Wherefore when he comes into the world, he says,
sacrifice and offering thou would not; but a body have thou prepared me. In
burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin thou have had no pleasure. Then said I,
to I come, in the volume of the book it is written of me, to do thy will, O
God. 7. He is justified, because he is openly relaxed and dismissed the Prison,
after that he had entered his person for payment of the broken man's debt: the
Debtor being under lash and execution of Law at the Creditor's pursuit, and let
go again, is justified and acquitted. And thus was Christ judicially and by
authority of God loosed from death, from the Prison and Fetters; because the
Prison could not hold him, nor the gripes and fetters of death detain him
Prisoner, when the Sentence of the Law was satisfied, and the Judge declared him
free, Act. 2.24, Whom God has raised up, having loosed the pains of death,
because it was not possible that he should be holden of it; it is a Phrase like
to that Psalm. 105.20, The king sent and loosed him, even the ruler of the
people, and let him go free. Romans 6.9, Knowing that Christ being raised from
the dead, dies no more; death has no more dominion over him.

The sixth kind of Promises made by Jehovah unto Christ, were these that relate
to the reward that should be given to him for this great work and service in
our Redemption: And such were, 1. The promise of exaltation, after the
debasement and ignominy that he should humble himself unto, in the execution of
his Suretiship; Jehovah covenanteth with him to advance him to the greatest
height of dignity and honor that is in earth or heaven, Psalm. 89.27, Also I
will make him my first born, higher than the kings of the earth. And 110.7, He
shall drink of the brook in the way; therefore shall he lift up the head. Isa.
53.12, Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall
divide the spoil with the stoong; which was performed unto him, Phil. 2.8, And
being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself and became obedient unto
death, even the death of the Cross; therefore God has highly exalted him, etc.
Heb. 1.3, When he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand
of the Majesty on high: Which promises and performances have a peculiar respect
to the exaltation of Christ in his resurrection from the dead, ascension unto
heaven, and session at the right hand of God; whereof read Psalm. 16.8, 9, 10,
11, compared with Act. 2.25, to 32. And 13.32, 33. and Psalm. 110. 1. compared
with Act. 2.34, 35. 2. The promise of satisfaction, a reward that should
satisfy him, a reward that should be according to his own heart, and at his
own asking and craving, Isa. 53.11, He shall be satisfied. Psalm. 2.8, Ask of
me, and I shall give. 3. The promise of a seed: Since a redeemed seed was one
of Christ's ends for which he served; he endured hard labor, he suffered, he
died: which, next unto the honor of God, was upon his heart. The Lord by
Covenant with him, promises that he shall not want offspring, he shall
neither want children nor heirs, he shall have the satisfaction which he
desired, Isa 53.10, 11, When thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, he
shall see his seed. -- He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall be
satisfied. Heb. 2.13, Behold, I, and the children which God has given me. Ephesians.
5.25, 26, 27, Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he
might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word: That he
might present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or
any such thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish; and if this was
one of Christ's ends for which he wrought, and a part of his reward which his
Father promised to him; then, 1. Sure he is Lord and Master of the will of man,
and has a forcible sovereignty and dominion over man's free well, See Mr.
Rutherf. Treat. of the Covenant, p. 2. c. 9. p. 327, etc.
to bow and determine it (which Arminians and Socinians deny), else how can he
promise a seed to Christ, and undeclinably and insuperably make that promise
good, and cause them believe and persevere unto the end, whereby they come and
abide his seed? Then, 2. There is no more desirable sight to the eye of Christ,
than to see all his Redeemed seed about him in his Father's house, fairly
landed, and without the reach of all possible danger of perishing, Joh. 17.24,
Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am.
Heb. 2.13, Behold, I, and the children which God has given me. Then, 3. There
can be nothing more certain than the faith, perseverance and salvation of
Christ's elect and redeemed seed; in regard it is both undertaken by Christ in
his part of the Covenant of Suretiship, and promised to Christ by his Father;
and so undertaken by Jehovah also, in the articles of the Covenant of
Redemption. 4. The promise of a large Dominion and Kingdom: the Lord promises
to Christ, that a large and flourishing Kingdom shall be given him, over many
countries, and that he shall have many subjects, and these conquering too, who
shall stand last in the fields, and have a prosperous war until the day of
their Redemption, Psalm. 2.8, Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen then
for thy inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.
And 72.8, 9, 11, He shall have dominion from sea to sea, and from the river
unto the ends of the earth. They that dwell in the wilderness shall bow before
him, and his enemies shall lick the dust; yea, all Kings shall fall down before
him, all Nations shall serve him. And 110.3, Thy people shall be willing in the
day of thy power, in the beauties of holiness, from the womb of the morning.
Mal. 1.11, For from the rising of the Sun, even unto the going down of the
same, my name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense
shall be burned unto my name, and a pure offering; for my name shall be great
among the heathen, says the Lord of hosts Zech. 9.10, His dominion shall be
from sea to sea, and from the river, even to the ends of the earth. Dan. 7.14,
And there was given him dominion and glory, and a Kingdom that all People,
Nations and Languages should serve him; his dominion is an everlasting
dominion, which shall not pass away, and his Kingdom that which shall not be
destroyed. 5. The promise of glory, a peculiar glory in heaven, throughout
eternity to the Lord Mediator and Redeemer, to the Lamb that was slain, who
wrought this great and glorious work of our Redemption; this glory he craveth
as his wages, Joh. 17.4, 5, I have glorified thee on earth, I have finished the
work which thou gave me to do: And now, O Father, glorify thou me with thine
own self. This glory he eyed when he was at hard labor about the work, Isa.
49.4, 5, Surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God. --
Though Israel be not gathered; yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord,
and my God shall be my strength. Heb. 12.2, Who for the joy that was set before
him, endured the cross. This glory was promised to him, Zech. 6.13, He shall
build the temple of the Lord, and he shall bear the glory. Isa. 22.24, And they
shall hang upon him all the glory of his Father's house; this glory is actually
paid to him in heaven, where the Lamb has a throne, Rev. 22.3, But the throne
of God, and of the Lamb shall be in it. And 7.17, For the Lamb which is in the
midst of the throne, shall feed them; where there is a new Song sung unto the
Lamb, Rev. 5.9, 10, And they sung a new Song, saying, thou art worthy to take
the book, and to open the seals thereof; for thou wast slain and have redeemed
us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and
nation: And have made us unto our God Kings and Priests, and we shall reign on
the earth. Yea, and a crown and glory for his redeemed seed, was part of the
reward promised to him, and for which he wrought, Joh. 17.24, Father, I will
that they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may
behold my glory which thou have given me. Luke 12.32, Fear not little flock;
for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the Kingdom. 2 Pet. 5.4, And
when the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of glory.

The seventh kind of Promises made by Jehovah to Christ, were these that relate
to interest; I mean, the new contracted interests, Covenant-interests that were
promised to him, as part of this agreement betwixt Jehovah and Christ Mediator,
out of which did spring all the new Covenant-interests and relations that we
have to God: And such were, 1. The interest in God as his God by Covenant; for
to him was the great Mother promise of the Covenant made, I will be his God,
Psalm. 80.26, He shall cry to me, thou art -- my God. This interest is bound up
with him in the Covenant of Suretiship. 2. The interest in God as his Father by
Covenant, to Christ was promised, and with him was bound up a new Sonship and
Covenant-title to God as his Covenanted Father, Psalm. 89.26, He shall cry unto
me, thou art my Father. Heb. 1.5, I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to
me a Son; and these Covenant-relations and interests, and the compellations
arising from them, we find Christ own and acknowledge, Joh. 20.17, I ascend unto
my Father and your Father, and to my God and to your God. Hence he calls us
brethren, children of the same Father; who have one Covenant Relation with him,
to the same God, Hell. 2.12, I will declare thy name unto my brethren; hence
God is called the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 3. The
interest of Saviorship, for to the man Christ it is promissed that Jehovah
shall be the rock of his Salvation; Psalm. 89.26. he shall cry to me, Thou art
my God, and the rock of my Salvation: hence he cried, Father save me from this
hour, Joh. 12.27, Jehovah was a Savior to the man Christ from the things that
he suffered as our surety; he saves the head and body: therefore it is said,
Heb. 5.7, that he cried to him that was able to save him from death. 4. The
interest of headship: when Christ was given to be head of his body the Church,
he took upon him the man Christ, the Mediator took upon him a new relation to
God as his head, which is founded and bound up in the Covevenant of Suretiship;
by which this comely order was established, that Christ should be a head to his
Church, and God should be a head to the man Christ: In this respect it is said,
that Christ is God's, 1 Cor. 3.23, and how? As ye are Christ's, and all things
are yours; that is, in a subordination to do service, 1 Cor. 11.3, and the head
of Christ is God; the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ must be the head
of Christ; a head by union, to which Christ is united by bonds of union, not
natural only, but foederal, Joh. 10.30, I, and my father are one. Joh. 1.1, And
the word was with God; a head by influence of Spirit and Grace to the man
Christ, who lives by the Father, Joh. 6.57, As the living father has sent me,
and I live by the father; a head by way of order, who is over Christ Mediator,
and to whom the man Christ is subject, 1 Cor. 15.28, Then shall the Son also
himself be subject to him that put all things under him. 5. The interest of
hearing Prayer, Psalm. 89.26, He shall cry unto me; this is bound up among the
Covenant-interests, which he took upon him by his Suretiship, and by this
relation: when Christ should humble himself to pray, Jehovah promises to hear
him, and he has hearing by Covenant, as his seed also have it, Isa. 49.8, In
an acceptable time have I heard thee. Joh. 11.41, 42, Father, I thank thee that
thou have heard me: And I knew that thou hear me always. Heb. 5.7, Who in
the days of his flesh, when he had offered up Prayers and Supplications with
strong crying and tears unto him that was able to save him from death, and was
heard in that he feared. These and the like interests and relations were
covenanted to Christ; and out of these Covenant-interests engaged unto him, did
our Covenant-relations spring.

The last kind of Promises made by Jehovah to Christ, were these which relate
to the whole design and intent of his Suretiship: And the great and public
effects which it should produce in the whole frame of the creation, for the
elect redeemed peoples sake. And such were, 1. The promise of delivery of the
whole creation from bondage and vanity, unto which it was made subject for
man's Sin, and whereof the whole world is sick, like a woman traveling in
birth, Romans 8.20, 21, 22, For the creature was made subject unto vanity, not
willingly, but by reason of him that has subjected the same in hope: Because
the creature it self also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption
into the glorious liberty of the children of God: For we know that the whole
creation groaneth and travelleth in pain together until now. 2. The promise of
restoring all things to their primitive perfection: all things were broken,
defaced and marred by man's sin; insomuch that the beauty of them all is gone,
and nothing remains upon these inferior creatures, but the old ruins of
glory; but there shall come a time of the restitution of all things, Act. 3.21.
and who shall do this? Christ mends and makes all things new again by his
Surety-covenant, that were broken by the rupture of the Covenant of works, Rev.
21.15, And I saw a new heaven, and a new earth; for the first heaven, and the
first earth were passed away, and there was no more sea. And he that sat upon
the throne, said, behold, I make all things new. 2 Pet. 3.13, Nevertheless, we
according to his promise, look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein
dwells righteousness. 3. The promise of restoring the broken league that was
betwixt man and the rest of the creatures in their original condition, when all
obeyed Adam, and were dependers upon him; after the violation of which there
was continual war and jarring betwixt man and the rest of the creatures; sin
did make a breach in the whole creation; when man sinned, all the creatures
became enemies to him, and one to another; but now in Christ all the creatures
are reconciled, Ephesians. 1.10, That in the dispensation of the fullness of times he
might gather together in one, all things in Christ, both which are in heaven,
and which are on earth, even in him. Hos. 2.18, And in that day will I make a
Covenant for them with the beast of the field, and with the fowls of heaven,
and with the creeping things of the ground; and I will break the bow, and the
sword, and the battle out of the earth, and I will make them to lie down
safely. By Christ's Suretiship and the Covenant-promises through him, the
creatures are brought in a new league with man, Job 5.23, For thou shall be in
league with the stones of the field, and the beasts of the field shall be at
peace with thee. Psalm. 121.6, The Sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the Moon
by night. 4. The promise of removing the Law-curse out of all dispensations,
and writing the Gospel-blessing upon them, that all and every of them may be
blessings in Christ to his Redeemed people: Deuteronomy. 28.4, 5, Blessed shall be the
fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground, and the fruit of thy cattle,
and the increase of thy kine; blessed shall be thy basket, and thy store; that
even the rods and chastisements, which are curses of the Law to the wicked, (
Deuteronomy. 28.15, 16, But it shall come to pass, if thou will not hearken unto the
voice of the Lord thy God, to observe to do all his commandments and statutes
which I command thee this day, that all these curses shall come upon thee and
overtake thee. Cursed shall thou be in the city, and cursed shall thou be in
the field, etc.) should be covenanted-mercies, and written in the book of the
Covenant of Grace to God's elect people, Psalm. 89.30, 31, 33, If his children
forsake my Law, and walk not in my judgments; If they break my statutes, and
keep not my commandments, then will I visit their iniquity with the rod. --
Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer
my faithfulness to fail. Heb. 12.6, For whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth,
and scourges every Son whom he receives. 5. The promise of establishing and
settling all things that were set a reeling by the breach of the Covenant of
works: it is promised that Christ shall be the repairer; it is he that
establishes the earth, so that the creatures that are for man's use, are not
destroved; for Justice did require as speedy vengeance upon men, as it did upon
the Angels; and the Sentence had been executed immediately, had not the
Covenant of Suretiship prevented it; and in this respect the very reprobate
have some temporal advantage by way of Concomitancy, and for the elects sake,
Isa. 49.8, Thus says the Lord, in an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in
a day of Salvation have I helped thee. Col. 1.17, And by him all things
consist. Heb. 1.3, Upholding all things by the word of his power. All these,
and promises of like nature, were made to Christ the first heir, whom God
appointed heir of all things, Heb. 1.2. and for his sake they redounded unto
them. who shall be heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1.14. and it is upon this very
account that the whole Creation are commanded to sing, because Christ the
restorer of all things, is come to the throne, Psalm. 96.11, 12, 13, Let the
heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad: let the sea roar and the fullness
thereof. Let the field be joyful, and all that is therein: then shall all the
trees of the wood rejoice before the Lord, for he comes; for he comes to judge
the earth; he shall judge the world with righteousness, and the people with his
truth. And 98.7, 8, 9, Let the sea roar, and the fullness thereof: the world,
and they that dwell therein. Let the floods clap their hands, let the hills be
joyful together before the Lord, for he comes to judge tht earth; with
righteousness shall he judge the world, and the people with equity. 6. The
promise of the respecitive eminent change of the Government from the sole
essential Government of Jehovah, to the dispensatory Government of the
Mediator, Joh. 5.22, For the Father judges no man; but has committed all
judgment unto the Son. 1 Cor. 15.25, For he must reign till he has put all
enemies under his feet; for supposing that the Covenant of works shall be
broken, the world cannot now any more be ruled according to the rules of that
Covenant, to wit, by God the Father immediately; for then he must destroy man:
therefore together with the change of the Covenant, there must needs be a
change of the Government; Christ as Mediator must govern the world, Isa. 9.6,
The government shall be upon his shoulder: and he must judge the world in our
nature, Act. 17.31, The man whom God has appointed: and he reigns not only
over the Church; but also (though in a far different way) over all the Kingdoms
of the world, and all things in the world, for the Churches sake, Ephesians. 1.21,
22, Far above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every
name that is named, not only in this world, but also in that which is to come.
And has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be the head over all
things to the Church. Heb. 2.5. -- 7.8, For unto the Angels has he not put in
subjection the world to come, whereof we speak -- Thou made him a little
lower than the Angels; and thou crownedst him with glory and honor, and did
set him over the works of thy hands. Thou have put all things in subjection
under his feet; for in that he put all in subjection under him, he left nothing
that is not put under him: But now we see not yet all things put under him. 7.
The promises of the service of all the world, and of all the creatures; God
promises, and will have the services of all the creatures brought about;
first, to Christ, and then to him by Christ; he has the service of all the
world promised him, and indeed he paid for it; for he bought it with a price;
the service of some as Sons to live with him, and enjoy him for ever, Psalm.
110.3, Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties of
holiness, from the womb of the morning; and the service of others as slaves,
Psalm. 2.9, Thou shall break them with a rod of iron, thou shall dash them in
pieces like a potters vessel. And 72.9, 11, They that dwell in the wilderness
shall bow before him, and his enemies shall lick the dust; Yea, all kings shall
fall before him, and all nations shall serve him. The whole vessels of this
great house, the world; whether they are vessels of honor or dishonor, Men or
Angels, elect Men or Reprobate, elect Angels or Devils; yet all must be for the
Master's use, 2 Timothy 2.20, But in a great house there are not only vessels of
gold and of silver, but also of wood and of earth; and some to honor, and some
to dishonor. Prove. 16.4, The Lord has made all things for himself; yea, even
the wicked for the day of evil.

CHAP. V. Of the Harmony of the Covenant of Suretiship made with Christ, and
the Covenant of Reconciliation and Grace made with Sinners. 1. Wherein they
agree. 2. Wherein they differ. 3. What Conjunction and Connection is betwixt
these Covenants.
THere is a great affinity between the Covenant of Redemption made with Christ,
and the Covenant of Reconciliation made with Sinners; but it is not the same
Covenant that is made with Christ, which is made with us: We are therefore to
take heed to two extremes, That we neither confound, nor divide these two
Covenants. There is a likeness betwixt them, but not a sameness; there is an
union here, but not an evenness; there is here a distinction, but not a
division; a conjunction, but not a confusion: Let us therefore look upon these
two Covenants, 1. As agreeing in many things, yet not being the same, but still
to be distinguished. 2. Differing in many things; yet not to be divided nor
separated. 3. Connected and conjoined many ways; yet not to be confounded.

1. The Covenants of Redemption and Reconciliation, agree together (beside
these things that are essential, and so common to all Covenants, which I do not
here mention); in the first rise of both, pure, sovereign, free Grace was the
fountain of both; hence did both these Covenants spring: There was no cause,
reason, motive, nor allurement from without, nor any necessity of nature
within, that made Jehovah upon the one part, nor Christ upon the other, enter
into this agreement of Suretiship; it was his mere good and gracious pleasure,
as is already proved; See Ephesians. 1.9, Having made known unto us the mystery of
his will, according to his good pleasure, which he purposed in himself. 2 Timothy
1.9, Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling; not according to
our works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in
Christ Jesus before the world began. And the same is the fountain-cause, the
first spring and rise of God's Covenant of Reconciliation with us; it is not
from any reason, cause or motive in us, nor from any necessity upon God; but
merely his gracious pleasure, Ephesians. 1.7, In whom we have Redemption through his
blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace. Deuteronomy.
7.7, 8, The Lord did not set his love upon you, nor choose you, because ye were
more in number than any people: But because the Lord loved you, and because he
would keep the oath which he had sworn unto your fathers. Mat. 11.25, I thank
thee, O father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things
from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes; even so father,
for so it seemed good in thy sight.

2. These two Covenants agree in this; That it is the same design and business
that is carried on in both: The Redemption of a lost or lapsed elect people, or
as the Apostle calls it, Heb. 2.10, The bringing many sons to glory: This was
the business that Christ did undertake by the Covenant of Suretiship, and which
he does prosecute and perfect by the Covenant of Reconciliation: This was the
thing that was treated and agreed betwixt Jehovah and Christ, and is now over
again treated and agreed betwixt Christ and us, Tit. 1.2, In hope of eternal
life, which God that cannot lie promised before the world began. 2 Cor. 5.19,
God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their
trespasses unto them; and has committed to us the word of Reconciliation. Joh.
17.4, I have glorified thee on the earth, I have finished the work which thou
gave me to do.

3. These two Covenants agree in this, That the grand Instrumentality of doing
the work in both these Covenants, is upon Christ; he was to be the main
Instrument of action in the work of these two Covenants, and is therefore (as
for other reasons, so also upon this account) called the man of God's right
hand, Psalm. 80.17. whose instrumentality and service God did use, from
beginning to end, in all this business, both of Redemption and Reconciliation,
Ephesians. 1.7, In whom we have redemption through his blood. Col. 1.20, And having
made peace through the blood of his cross, by him to reconcile all things to
himself.

4. They agree in this, that both these Covenants are commensurable with Gods
election of the parties with whom he made the Covenants: He first chused
Christ, and by an eternal destination, elected him to be the only person that
should work the great work of Redemption, and be the Captain of Salvation to
his people; and with him only he makes the Covenant of Redemption, Psalm. 89.19,
I have exalted one chosen out of the people. Again, he makes choice of an elect
Company to follow this Captain, to be a people saved by the Lord, and with this
elect company only, chosen in Christ, he makes a Covenant of peace and
reconciliation in him, Luke 1.68, 69, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he
has visited and redeemed his people: And has raised up an horn of Salvation
for us in the house of his servant David. In both (I say) the Covenant is
commensurate to God's election; the parties with whom God made both these
Covenants, were first chosen; he first chooses, and then covenanteth with the
elect head, and with the elect body and members, and with them only; See Psalm.
89.3, I have made a Covenant with my chosen. 2 Thessalonians. 2.13, God has from the
beginning chosen you to Salvation, through sanctification of the spirit, and
belief of the truth.

5. These Covenants of Redemption and Reconciliation agree in this, that the
principal ends of both, are the same; which were, 1. The highest manifestation
of all the Lords glorious attributes, which were so manifested in Christ, as
they were never known before (whereof in its proper place); this was one of the
principal ends which the Lord had before him, both in the Covenant of
Redemption, and the Covenant of Reconciliation, Ephesians. 3.9, 10, 11, And to make
all men see what is the fellowship of the Mystery, which from the beginning of
the world has been hid in God, who created all things by Jesus Christ. To the
intent that now unto the principalities and powers in heavenly places, might be
known by the Church, the manifold wisdom of God, according to the eternal
purpose, which he purposed in Christ Jesus our Lord. 2. The highest and nearest
union of man with God, was one of the Lords ends in both these Covenants, to
make up such an union betwixt God and Man, as might be a ground and foundation
of suitable communion, Joh. 14.20, At that day ye shall know that I am in my
father, and you in me, and I in you. 1 Cor. 6.17, But he that is joined to the
Lord, is one spirit.

3. Another principal end which God had before him in his Covenant-dealings,
was the highest and fullest communication of himself to man; this end was
proposed in both these Covenants of Redemption and Reconciliation; God would
dispense nothing of himself unto the creatures, but by his Son; and through his
Covenant with him, and with us, he purposed to communicate himself to us, 1 John 5.11, And this is the record, that God has given to us eternal life, and
this life is in his Son. And 1.3, And truly our fellowship is with the Father,
and with his Son Jesus Christ.

6. The Covenant of Suretiship made with Christ, and the Covenant of Redemption
and Grace made with sinners, agree in this, That the good and advantage of both
these Covenants redounded unto us, even as the honor of both accrues unto the
Lord, who after the opening of this subject of his Covenant-dealings with
Christ, and through him with us, Isa. 42.1, to 8, immediately subjoyns, I am
the Lord, that is my name, and my glory I will not give to another; both these
Covenants were transacted to the praise of the glory of his grace, Ephesians. 1.6.
But the profit and advantage of both is ours, not his; and if these words,
Psalm. 16.2, 3, My goodness extends not unto thee, but to the Saints that are
in the earth, and to the excellent, in whom is all my delight, be the words of
Christ (or relating to Covenant-transactions betwixt Jehovah and Christ), as
most part of that Psalm is, J^. Coce. D^ soed. c. p. p. 106.
and some Expositors apply it; and I do not see why it may not more fitly be
applied to Christ, than to David; I say, if these words be Christ's, they speak
the point in hand fully. Besides, see Romans 5.15, The grace of God, and the gift
by grace, which is by one man Jesus Christ, has abounded unto many. 2 Cor.
4.15, For all things are for your sakes, that the abundant grace might through
the thanksgiving of many, redound to the glory of God.

7. They agree in this, That there is exchange of places betwixt Christ and his
elect redeemed seed, in both these Covenants. In the Covenant of Suretiship he
takes our Law-place and room, and puts himself in the sinners stead (as
has been said), Heb. 10.7, Lo, I come, to do thy will. And again, in the
Covenant of Reconciliation, we take Christ's Law-place, or rather have bestowed
upon us that place and room with God, which the Law allowed to him that obeys
the Law, and satisfies the Law to the full: Hence it is said, that we are made
the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. This is our place by the Covenant
of Reconciliation, to have that high righteousness of our Surety, unto which
the Godhead gave excellency, and the righteousness of the Law (is said) to be
fulfilled in us, Romans 8.4. to wit, the passive righteousness thereof, in
suffering for the breach of the Law: and how was this? only by commutation and
exchange of places with Christ our Surety, who put himself in our place, and
put us in his.

8. The Covenant of Redemption, and the Covenant of Reconciliation, agree in
many properties; both these Covenants are free, gracious, everlasting, ordered
in all things, sure, etc. as may fully appear by what is already spoken of the
properties of the Covenant of Suretiship, and by the second part of this
Treatise, which relates to the properties of the Covenant of Grace.

2. In the next place let us take notice of the difference between the
Covenants of Redemption and Reconciliation, whereby it may appear that these
are two Covenants, and not one and the same. These Covenants differ,

1. In the rise: although they agree thus far in the rise, See Mr. Rutherf.
Treat. of the Covenant, p. 2. c. 8.
that both these Covenants had the rise from Grace (as I have showed), yet they
differ in this, that the Covenant of Redemption and Suretiship did spring out
of Grace in both the parties; for therein did the Grace of Jehovah, and the
Grace of Jesus Christ appear; it was the gracious pleasure and good will of
both the parties, which equally gave it the first rise. But the Grace that
gives the rise to the Covenant of Reconciliation, is not shared between the
parties, but it stands all upon one side: Grace in God, and in our Lord Jesus
Christ, without any gracious disposition or qualification upon our part (till
it be wrought in us by the Grace of Christ) gives the first rise to the
Covenant of Reconciliation and Grace made with sinners, Tit. 2.11, For the
grace of God that brings Salvation, has appeared unto all men. 1 John 4.10,
19, Herein is love, not that we loved God; but that he loved us, and sent his
Son to be the propitiation for our sins. -- We love him, because he first loved
us, Romans 5.6, 8, For when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died
for us. -- But God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet
sinners, Christ died for us.

2. These Covenants differ in the property of eternity; for although both are
everlasting Covenants, yet both are not eternal: The Covenant of Redemption is
eternal; for the Lord does not begin in time to design Christ a Surety and
Mediator; nor does the Son begin in time to be a Consenter; but we are to
understand the Apostles saying, he was made surety, Heb. 7.22. by Christ's own
saying, I was set up from everlasting, etc. Prove. 8.23. 1 Pet. 1.20, Who verily
was foreordained before the foundation of the world; but was manifest in these
last times for you. But the Covenant of Reconciliation is no more eternal, than
all other things which come to pass in time, which were from eternity decreed
with God, Act. 15.18, Known unto God are all his works, from the beginning of
the world; for although the Covenant of Reconciliation was decreed from
everlasting; yet it had no being as a Covenant, nor could have any, till first
there were objects created to deal with in the way and terms of a Covenant;
till first the Covenant of works were entered with man, and broken too; till
first man by his breach of the first Covenant, and his fall into sin and enmity
with God, became a qualified object for reconciliation, and the Grace that is
peculiar to this Covenant: Then came the news and knowledge of a Redeemer to
Adam, immediately after his fall (for the Grace and love of Christ which longed
for this opportunity, to be made manifest, made haste, when man was now a
qualified object); then tidings came in all haste to lost man, of a Savior,
when he was lying sick unto death of his fall, Tit. 1.2, 3, In hope of eternal
life, which God that cannot lie, promised before the world began: But has in
due time manifested his word through preaching; then came the ransom to be
testified in due time.

3. The Parties are different. In the Covenant of Suretiship and Redemption,
the Parties are Jehovah and his only Son Christ (as is before proved); but in
the Covenant of Reconciliation, the Parties are God the Father, Son and Spirit,
and lost Sinners, 2 Cor. 5.19, God was in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them. The one is stricken betwixt
God and Christ God-man, a person that is not mere man, considered in the
precise notion of Reconciliation, as betwixt God and mere men, 1 Timothy 2.5, For
there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus.
The one is a Covenant betwixt God and his only begotten natural Son, Heb. 5.5;
the other is betwixt God and many Sons, even his adopted Sons, Heb. 2.10. the
Covenant of Redemption is made with Christ personal (as has been proved); the
Covenant of Grace (as it comprehends the whole business of Grace, from
beginning to end) with Christ mystical, head and body, Heb. 2.13. with him and
the children whom God has given to him; the Covenant of Suretiship is made
with Christ as a peculiar chosen person, Psalm. 89.19, I have exalted one chosen
out of the people; who did by that Covenant take upon him a public capacity,
wherein he did ever thereafter act, in heaven and earth; but the Covenant of
Grace is made with Christ as a public person, representing many with Christ,
as the second Adam, who stood and covenanted for all his seed, Heb. 2.13,
Behold, I, and the children which God has given me. Romans 5.19, For as by one
man's disobedience, many were made sinners; so by the obedience of one, shall
many be made righteous. Gal. 3.16, Now to Abraham and his seed were the
promises made: he says not, and to seeds, as of many; but as of one, and to
thy seed which is Christ. The Covenant of Redemption was betwixt God, and the
man who is his fellow, Zech. 13.7. the Covenant of Reconciliation is betwixt
God and Men, who are the work of his hands; not his equals, but his subjects,
his servants, etc. and these of the lowest rank and degree, Heb. 2.6, 7, What
is man, that thou art mindful of him, or the Son of man, that thou visitest
him: Thou made him a little lower than the Angels. The Covenant of Redemption
is betwixt God and his Son in favor and friendship with him, who never
offended him, Mat. 3.17, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; but
the Covenant of Reconciliation is betwixt God and his enemies, sinners at
variance and enmity with God; and it is made with Christ, only as he took the
sinners place, Romans 5.8.10, But God commends his love toward us, in that
while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us; -- for when we were enemies, we
were reconciled to God.

4. The Covenant of Redemption, is an equal Covenant; but the Covenant of
Reconciliation is unequal: This difference is in the Nature of these Covenants.
I say, the Covenant of Redemption is an equal Covenant, being betwixt equal
parties, and upon equal terms and conditions (as I have already showed): But
the Covenant of Reconciliation made with sinners, is an unequal covenant, where
there is, 1. Infinite unequality betwixt the parties, betwixt Man and his
Maker; God who works, and who shall let it? Isa. 43.13. and man, who laid in
the balance, is altogether lighter then vanity, Psalm. 62.9. Betwixt God who
gives conditions to his creatures, but takes none from them; and man, who
gives no conditions to God, but is bound to accept what conditions he is
pleased to give. 2. There is a vast disproportion and unequality in the terms
and conditions of this Covenant, betwixt that which is promised upon God's
part, and that which is required upon man's part; betwixt the condition of the
Covenant of Reconciliation, and the promises and blessings thereof: O what vast
unequality and disproportion betwixt our little faith, and of low stature; and
the far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory that is promised to the
believer! 2 Cor. 4.18.

5. There was no Mediator in the Covenant of Redemption, neither was there need
of any; the parties covenanting being so near to one another, and in so good
terms, Prove. 8.30, Then was I by him, as one brought up with him, and I was
daily his delight, rejoicing always before him. Neither could there be any
Mediator in this Covenant; for who could interpose betwixt the Father and the
Son? Joh. 10.30, I, and my Father are one; and from whence should the Mediator
be taken when that eternal transaction was made when Christ was set up from
everlasting, before his works of old? Prove. 8.22, 23. But in the Covenant of
Reconciliation, there is a Mediator (the need whereof, we shall show in its
proper place); there is a days-man, a person who interposeth betwixt the
parties who are at variance, and travelleth in the peace, 1 Timothy 2.5, For there
is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus. Heb.
12.24, And to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant.

6. The Promises of these two Covenants are different: 1. There be many
promises in the Covenant of Reconciliation made to us, that cannot agree to
Christ, and whereof he was not capable; such as the promises of a new heart, of
cleansing from all filthiness and Idols; the promises of repentance, remission
of sins, and the like, Ezekiel. 36. 2. There were promises made to Christ in the
Covenant of Redemption, that were peculiar to himself, that were peculiar for
the preheminency of the Head and Captain of our Salvation, and whereof we are
not capable, such as a throne at the right hand of God, a name above every
name, Dominion from Sea to Sea, all power in Heaven and Earth, and the like,
Heb. 1.8, 13. Phil. 2.8, 9. Psalm. 89.22.25, 27. Isa. 53.10, 11. Mat. 28.18.

7. There be many threatenings annexed to the Covenant of Reconciliation:
Threatenings of Gospel-vengeance to the transgressors of the Covenant, Heb. 2.3,
How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation; which at first began to
be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him? 1 Cor.
16.22, If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema
Maranatha. But there are no threatenings in the Covenant of Suretiship, nothing
denounced against the man Christ if he should fail of his undertakings; for
there was no use nor place for threatenings in that Covenant, in regard the
undertaker was exempted from all possible failing in the performance, the man
Christ could not possibly sin, nor fall short of that Covenant, in regard of
the personal union.

8. The Commands and conditions of the Covenant of Redemption and the Covenant
of Reconciliation are different: For, 1. There are commands in the Covenant of
Redemption peculiar to Christ alone, and such as are not required of us, nor do
belong to us; such as the command of taking upon him our nature, and laying
down his life, and making his soul an offering for Sin, etc. Heb. 10.5, 7. Joh.
10.18. Isa. 53.10, 11. Again, there are commands and conditions required in the
Covenant of Reconciliation, which are peculiar to us alone; such as the
commands of believing in Christ, repenting and working out our Salvation with
fear and trembling, etc. Act. 16.31. and 3.19. Phil. 2.12. The former is
Christ's work, not ours; and these are conditions required of us, not of
Christ. 2. All the commands of the Covenant of Redemption are conditions:
whatsoever work is put upon Christ to do, is a condition of his Covenant with
Jehovah; but all the conditions of the Covenant of Reconciliation, are not
conditions of the righteousness and life therein promised; else Justification
should be of works, Romans 4.4, 5, Now to him that works is the reward not
reckoned of grace, but of debt: But to him that works not, but believes on
him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness. Phil.
3.7, But what things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ. 3. The
conditions of the Covenant of Redemption, are works, downright obedience,
doing and suffering, Joh. 17.4, I have glorified thee on the earth, I have
finished the work which thou gave me to do. But the condition of the Covenant
of Reconciliation, is grace, not works, Romans 4.16, Therefore it is of faith
that it might be by grace, to the end the promise might be sure to all the
seed; Not to that only which is of the law, but to that also which is of the
faith of Abraham, who is the father of us all. 4. The conditions of the
Covenant of Redemption, are antecedent meritorious conditions; for which the
reward and wages promised to Christ by that Covenant is given, Joh. 17.4, 5, I
have finished the work which thou gave me to do. And now, O father, glorify
thou me with thine own self. But the conditions of the Covenant of
Reconciliation are not antecedent conditions, such as are in civil contracts of
Justice, when one thing is given for another; but they are consequent
conditions, such as hold forth the connection and order of things: Conditions
which do not hold forth the cause for which God gives the things promised, but
the connection of things, the qualification of the subject, or the way and means
of conveyance, by and through which he gives the things promised, and without
which he will not give them, Romans 3.24, 25, Being justified freely by his
grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ: Whom God has sent forth
to be a propitiation, through faith in his blood.

9. The Covenant of Redemption tarried not for our consent, to make it an
actual Covenant; neither had any dependency upon man, or any act of his will;
but alone upon the free will and good pleasure of him who is Lord of our will,
and could give us away to Christ, without our knowledge and consent, when yet we
were not; because he has power over the clay, and can indeclinably bow the
wills of Men and Angels: therefore, I say, this Covenant tarried not for our
saying Amen to it; but was actually concluded and transacted with Christ, who
was set up from everlasting in Heaven as designed Mediator, before we were in a
capacity to know it, or to say yea, or no: being a deed that was from
everlasting, as we have often hinted from Prove. 8.22, to 31. But the Covenant
of Reconciliation made with us, (...) depends principally upon Christ's eternal
transactions with Jehovah, whereby we were virtually in Covenant with God,
through his undertaking for us, to procure our consent unto such conditions of
righteousness and life, as his Father had foreordained, Joh. 6.37, All that
the Father gives me, shall come to me; and him that comes to me, I will in no
wise cast out. So also it cannot be an actual formal Covenant with us, without
our own consent: before we are actually and formally in Covenant with God,
through Grace; and before we receive any actual benefit by a new Covenant
state; not the Spirit only must say come; but the Bride also, Rev. 22.17, 20,
And the Spirit and the Bride say, Come, -- Amen, even so.

3. But although these Covenants are on this wise to be differenced and
distinguished; yet they are not to be divided and separated: there is an
observable conjunction and connection betwixt the Covenant of Redemption made
with Christ, and the Covenant of Reconciliation and Grace made with us Sinners;
which does demonstrate the dependence of this latter upon the former, and that
the Covenant of Reconciliation has its rise and original from the Covenant of
Redemption made betwixt Jehovah and Christ.

These two Covenants are conjoined together by a five-fold connection.

1. By an inseparable connection: There is such a near and strict conjunction
betwixt these Covenants, that they cannot be separated; take away the Covenant
of Suretiship, and the Covenant of Grace falls to the ground; this can no more
stand without that, than a house without a foundation; take away the
foundation, and the whole building and superstructure falls. God has founded
the Covenant of Reconciliation made with us, upon the eternal compact of
Redemption which he made with Christ; his Covenant with Christ is the key and
cornerstone of the whole frame and building of his Covenant with us; yea, it
is the very pillars of the house that wisdom has built; of that Masterpiece
of work that is worthy the wisdom of him that framed it, and cannot be
separated from the Covenant made with us, Prove. 9.1, Wisdom has built her
house, she has hewn out her seven pillars: therefore the Lord gives the Name
to Christ, a precious cornerstone, a sure ^^^ndation, Isa. 28.16. Hence also
the whole building of Covenant-mercy and faithfulness with us, is joined with
God's Covenant with Christ, Psalm. 89.2, 3, For I have said, Mercy shall be
built up for ever, thy faithfulness shall thou establish in the very heavens: I
have made a Covenant with my chosen. Isa. 59.21, As for me, this is my Covenant
with them, says the Lord, My Spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I
have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth
of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says the Lord, from
henceforth and for ever.

2. By an infallible connection, whereby one thing does necessarily and
certainly follow upon another: for supposing that God has made a Covenant of
Redemption with Christ, and has from eternity given a people to him, to be
redeemed by him; it necessarily follows that this redeemed people shall come
under Covenant-dealings with Christ, by faith in him; for if that go before,
this must needs follow, Joh. 6.37, All that the Father gives me, shall come to
me: and him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. And 17.6, 8, I have
manifested thy name unto the men which thou gave me out of the world; thine
they were, and thou gave them me, and they have kept thy word. For I have
given unto them the words which thou gave me, and they have received them,
and have known surely that I came out from thee, and they have believed that
thou did send me: The reason is manifest; because as nothing is here
transacted in time, which was not from eternity concluded in the counsel of
God's Will; so nothing is there concluded, nothing agreed betwixt Jehovah and
Christ that can miss to take effect, Act. 15.18, Known unto him are all his
works, from the beginning of the world. And 4.27, 28, For of a truth, against
thy holy child Jesus, whom thou have anointed, both Herod and Pontius Pilate,
with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel were gathered together, for to do
whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined before to be done. And 13.48,
And as many as were ordained to life, believed. Isa. 53.10, And the pleasure of
the Lord shall prosper in his hand.

3. These two Covenants are conjoined by an Insuperable connection, such as the
strength of no opposition can overcome; for the Covenant of Suretiship made
with Christ, has such strong influence on the Covenant of Reconciliation made
with us, that it regards no opposition in the way of that work: but the
people who are given to Christ by that first Covenant to be redeemed by him, he
does redeem them out of all Nations by the mighty efficacious power and working
of his Spirit; he bows their wills indeclinably to believe; to hearken that
their souls may live, and to make with him an everlasting Covenant, Isa. 55.3.
Joh. 17.2, As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give
eternal life to as many as thou have given him; the force of this Covenant with
Jehovah draws so, that nothing can keep back the Sinner from coming, Song. 1.4,
Draw me, we will run after thee. Matthew. 16.18, Upon this rock I will build my
Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. Zech. 10.8, I will
hiss for them, and gather them; for I have redeemed them.

4. By a secret and hidden connection, which natural eyes and carnal minds
cannot see nor take up: This secret and mystery of the Covenant was long hid in
God's breast, even after it had a being betwixt him and Christ; yea, and how
great a secret was it in the world, even after it began to break forth first in
Paradise? Col. 1.26, Even the mystery which has been hid from ages, and from
generations; but now is made manifest to his Saints. Psalm. 25.14, The secret of
the Lord is with them that fear him, and he will show them his Covenant. It is
but one continued tract of Covenant-grace, one current of the water of life,
that run along like a river under ground, hidden in the secret counsel of God's
Will, and kept close betwixt God and Christ, and at length brake out above
ground in a Covenant of peace with believers, Heb. 6.17, 18, Wherein God
willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the immutability of
his counsel, confirmed it by an Oath: That by two immutable things, wherein it
was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong consolation, who have
fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us. Joh. 17.7, Now they
have known that all things whatsoever thou have given me, are of thee.

5. These Covenants are conjoined by a beautiful connection, which eminently
shines in the exact correspondency of the Covenant of Suretiship made with
Christ, and the Covenant of peace made with us; which being laid together, do
perfectly quadrate, and answer one another in all points. O what a deal of
beauty is to be seen in the connection of the Covenants of Redemption and
Reconciliation! In the former all things relating to the Redemption and
Salvation of Christ's elect seed, were plotted and contrived; in the latter,
the same things are executed: by that Covenant they were ordered, by this they
are acted. It is the same business in the hand of Christ, by the Covenant of
Reconciliation, which was long before in his heart, when he made a Covenant
with Jehovah: the same design of love acted him in both. Now Christ negotiates
the same business which was long before undertaken by his Suretiship, Joh.
17.6, 7, 8, I have manifested thy Name unto the men which thou gave me out of
the world: thine they were, and thou gave them me, and they have kept thy
word. Now they have known that all things whatsoever thou have given me, are of
thee. For I have given unto them the words which thou gave me, and they have
received them, and known surely that I came out from thee, and they have
believed that thou did send me. 2 Cor. 5.19, 21, God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them:
and has committed unto us the word of reconciliation. For he has made him to
be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God
in him. Zech. 9.11, As for thee also, by the blood of thy Covenant, I have sent
forth thy prisoners out of the pit wherein is no water.

In a word, there is such a connection between the Covenant of Redemption made
with Christ, and the Covenant of Reconciliation made with us, as is betwixt the
cause and the effect; God's Covenant with Christ is the cause; his Covenant
with us is the effect: for it has a proper efficiency in the producing of
this, such as is betwixt the root and the branch, the fountain and the streams;
the Covenant made with us, did spring out of that fountain, did grow out of
that root; for Covenant-grace is in God's dealings with us, as sap is in the
branch, and water in the cistern; but it is in his Covenant-dealings with
Christ, as sap is in the root, and water in the fountain. There is such a
connection betwixt these two Covenants, as betwixt decree and execution,
deliberation and action, promise and performance, suretiship and satisfaction,
bond and payment, etc. for the Covenant with Christ was in the decree of God;
with us, it is the execution of that eternal decree; there it was deliberated
and consulted, here it is acted; there the promises were made, the suretiship
acted, the bond given: but in God's Covenant-dealings with us, the promises
made betwixt God and Christ are performed, his act of suretiship satisfied, and
actual payment and satisfaction made of all obligements which he took on.

The connection of the Covenants of Redemption and Reconciliation may be
illustrated by a similitude or two. It is as if a deed of favor were drawn for
children and heirs not yet born, and the whole conveyance settled, how that deed
of favor shall redound unto the benefit of children not yet born, which in due
time by the wisdom of the contriver takes place and becomes actually profitable
to those for whom it was intended. The Covenant of Redemption is the wise
contrivance of this deed of favor to a seed given to Christ, but not yet
created; and the Covenant of Reconciliation is the conveyance by which the
favor intended for this elect people takes place.

Or, as if a Marriage were concluded by a wise father betwixt his only son, and
a person wholly under his power at his disposing; but now under-age, not
marriageable, nor capable to give consent to such a contract as were drawn up;
but the knowledge of this is kept up from the bride a great while, but at last
the bridegroom makes proposals according to his fathers concluded contract, and
gains the brides heart and consent to the intended match; this matter is all of
a piece, and every part of it connected with another; but the first part is the
work of the Covenant of Redemption betwixt Jehovah and Christ: And the latter
part is the work of the Covenant of Reconciliation betwixt God and Sinners.

Or as if a King upon paction with his Son should grant a fair Charter with
many privileges, to persons who yet know nothing of the King's favor, the
actual communication of these privileges being suspended till the King's Son
actually own these persons for his Subjects, and they actually own him for
their Lord. The Covenant made with Christ is the fair Charter: the Covenant
made with us is the mutual owning betwixt the King's Son, and the persons to
whom the favors and privileges of the great Charter of Redemption was
intended.

CHAP. VI. Of the Grounds of assurance and comfort, and supports of Faith,
resulting from the Covenant of Suretiship, unto all those who are in the
Covenant of Reconciliation and Grace.
I Shall shut up the Doctrine of the Covenant of Redemption and Suretiship,
with a collection of some grounds of comfort, and supports of Faith which arise
from it.

1. That the original and foundation of God's Covenant-dealings with us, is an
eternal compact betwixt Jehovah and Christ, and had not its beginning and rise
from our first thoughts of that business, when we begun to entertain the news
of a Savior, and of Redemption by him; it bred not in our breasts, but was
under deliberation betwixt God and Christ long before ever it entered into our
hearts; yea, it was there transacted, the heirs of Salvation were foreordained
unto their lot and inheritance with them who are sanctified, when the Captain
of Salvation was destinate unto this work, 2 These. 2.13, God has from the
beginning chosen you to salvation through sanctification of the spirit, and
belief of the truth. And it is only the manifestation of this to us, and our
consent to it that is of yesterday, and but lately transacted, Joh. 17.8, For I
have given unto them the words which thou gave me, and they have received
them, and have known surely that I came out from thee, and they have believed
that thou did send me. Heb. 6.17, 18, Wherein God, willing more abundantly to
show unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his will, comfirmed it by an
oath: That by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie,
we might have strong consolation, who have fled for refuge, to lay hold upon
the hope set before us. O how comfortable and strengthening is this to the weak
believer, that eternal Covenant-love, Covenant-dealings, and Covenant-relations
and engagements, begin at the head Christ, fall first upon him, and descend to
his redeemed seed, Ephesians. 1.3, 4, Blessed be the God and father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in
Christ; according as he has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the
world, etc.

2. That the same love of the Father and of Christ, which now has appeared and
broken forth, in drawing thee into this new Covenant-state, Jer. 31.3, The Lord
has appeared of old unto me, saying, I have loved thee with an everlasting
love, therefore with loving kindness have I drawn thee; has been in action for
thee and about thee in eternity, when thou wast not, Prove. 8.23, 31, I was set
up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was. -- Rejoicing in
the habitable part of his earth, and my delights were with the sons of men. How
should that support faith, and comfort and assure our hearts, that the love of
God and of Christ did provide a rich inheritance for us when we were not yet
created, and did provide a physician before we fell sick: who had a Redeemer in
readiness, before the fall of Man, which he foresaw: who provided a Surety
before he was needed, to be in readiness to strike hands for our Debt; that
Christ spoke kindly for us, when we were not present: that he took our case in
hand undesired: that he undertook for us when we had neither being, nor action,
nor vote, nor knowledge of his undertaking.

3. That our Redemption and Salvation has so very little of our will in it,
and so much of Gods Will, and that of Grace, so much of his gracious Will, or
of the good pleasure of his Will, Ephesians. 1.5. Being now by the Covenant of
Suretiship, the will of the Father and of Christ, without our knowledge or
consent, or any act of our will, Joh. 6.3, 9, And this is the fathers will that
has sent me, that of all which he has given me I should lose nothing, but
should raise it up at the last day. With 17.24, Father, I will that they also
whom thou have given me, be with me where I am. And there is now no more of our
will in all the business, but so much as is captivated, bowed and carried after
Gods will, Phil. 2.13, For it is God that works in you both to will and to do
of his good pleasure. Psalm. 110.3, Thy people shall be willing in the day of
thy power. And how sweet and comfortable is it, that Salvation is by the
Covenant of Suretiship, taken off the mutable will of man, the slippery yea and
nay of man's free will, and laid upon the immutability of his counsel, Heb.
6.17, and will, with whom there is no variableness! Romans 9.15, I will have
mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on whom I will have
compassion. Jam. 1.18, Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth.

4. That by the Covenant of Suretiship the fountain and wellspring of Life,
and Salvation, and of all the influences that must needs act us toward it, lay
out of our selves, and are placed in Christ, Psalm. 8.7, All my springs are in
thee. Col. 3.3, Your life is hid with Christ in God. The Wellhead of Life to
Adam was in himself; and that which was placed in himself went dry, he had no
other Fountain whence he had assurance to draw and fetch any more: but by
Christ's Suretiship, the spring of Life and Salvation to us is placed in him,
which makes it indefectible to us; and O how sweet is that to the believer,
that his Salvation is fountained in Christ! thus when his water fails within,
he needs do no more but turn the water cock of Faith that is in his own heart,
and take in fresh supplies from Jesus, the resurrection and the life, Joh.
11.25. Isa. 27.3, Lest any hurt it, I will keep it night and day: I will water
it every moment. Joh. 4.14, The water that I shall give him, shall be in him a
well of water springing up into everlasting life. Joh. 14.19, Because I live,
ye shall live also.

5. By the Covenant of Suretiship, our Rights and Charters, I mean the promises
not of Heaven and Salvation only, but of all our concernments, are in a surer
hand than our own, and under better keeping: for now by that Covenant they are
in Christ's keeping, to whom the promises are made, Gal. 3.16, Now to Abraham
and his seed were the promises made; he says not, and to seeds as of many, but
as of one, and to thy seed, which is Christ. He is the first heir of all
things, Heb. 1.2. to whom the first title and right to the promises, which are
our Charters, does belong: they were first his, before they were ours: yea, and
he was the first possessor too; upon Christ did all the acts of Gods
Covenant-love to us fall first, Act. 13.34, I give you the sure mercies of
David. Most of the promises were made formally to Christ, even those which
directly relate to our Calling, Justification, Salvation, Isa. 53.10, 11, And
the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. He shall see of the travel
of his soul, and shall be satisfied. By his knowledge shall my righteous servant
justify many, for he shall bear their iniquities. And these that were not made
formally to him, such as the promise of a new heart, a new spirit, remission of
sins; yet these were made to him eminenter, they were laid down in him, and
consigned in his hand: for Christ is not only the fountain and original cause
of all the promises, who merited by his Blood, Remission, Righteousness and
Life, which the Lord makes ours by free promise; but he is also the first
subject of the promises: Christ receives all the Covenant-promises which are
our Rights and Charters, and he keeps them, and manageth them for our use, as
may most tend to our good: Christ is made by his Suretiship, that excellent Ark
which keeps the tables of the Covenant, and the book of the Law and Covenant,
Deuteronomy. 31.26. 1 Kings 8.9, How sweet and satisfying is it, that our Rights of
Heaven is in such a Charter-chest, and in the hands of such a keeper, even
under Christ's custody, who shall give a good account to his Father of all that
is committed to him? Joh. 17.12, Those whom thou gave me I have kept, and
none of them is lost: and whose keeping is in high account with all those who
know him, 2 Timothy 1.12, For I know whom I have believed; and I am persuaded that
he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him against that day.

6. By the Covenant of Suretiship Christ and the believer are in a manner in
one Writ; for notwithstanding that there be differences between the Covenant
made with him, and that which is made with us, (as is before showed): yet it
may be said, that Christ and the believer are some way in one Writ.

1. Because these two Covenants are all of a piece; they are to be
distinguished, but not divided: it is the same design of Grace, the same
business of redeeming and saving lost Man, that is carried on in both.

2. Although Christ and the believer be not formally, and as parties, in this
Writ of Christ's Sureti-covenant to God; yet they are virtually, and as to their
interests and concernments. It is Christ's business and concernment, and the
believers too; even all his eternal concernments that are in that Covenant, and
ours, these meet together, and are transacted in one Writ: and thus even among
men, a person may be said to be in a Writ, where his concernments are handled.

3. Because of the contexture and interweaving, not only of Christ and the
believers interests, but also of their Names in the same Writ. For in the
Covenant where his Name is put alone as undertaker, and which is his single
bond, to wit, the Covenant of Suretiship; even there is the believers Name put,
as being the person for which he paid a price, and for whom he undertook, and
who were promised to him for a seed, as a satisfying-sight for the travel of
his Soul. And again, in the Writ given to us, we stand not alone in
Covenant-dealings with God; but in the same Writs of the promises made to the
believer, Christ's name stands as principal party Covenanting for us, and
receiving the promises, as is manifest from what is already said.

4. There is not only a contexture, but a commutation with Christ and the
believers Name in the Covenant-writs: for his Name is put in our Bond, for he
wrote himself the sinner (legally,) and in the sinners place under the Law
accursed: and our Name is put in the Writ of Justification given to him, and
the new Law of Faith writes the believer righteous and blessed, 2 Cor. 5.21,
For he has made him to be sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made
the righteousness of God in him. Gal. 3.13, 14, Christ has redeemed us from
the curse of the law, being made a curse for us: for it is written, Cursed is
every one that hangs on a tree. That the blessing of Abraham might come on
the Gentles through faith. Romans 3.22, Even the righteousness of God, which is
by faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all them that believe: for there is
no difference.

5. There is not only a commutation, but a community of Writs betwixt Christ
and the Believer: for one Writ and Promise-wreats, God, the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and the God and Father of the Believer: this
Covenant Relation to him and us, is by the great promises of the Covenant, Heb.
1.5, I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son. Psalm. 89.26, 29,
He shall cry unto me, Thou art my Father, my God, and the rock of my salvation.
-- His seed also will I make to endure for ever. One Writ makes Christ the
first Heir, and Son of the promise; and the Believer a younger Brother coming
in under Christ the first Heir, Psalm. 89.27, Also I will make him my
firstborn. Gal. 3.26, For ye are all the children of God, by faith in Christ
Jesus. Romans 8.17, And if children, then heirs, heirs of God, and joint-heirs
with Christ. One Writ and letter of acquittance discharges both Christ and the
Believer from the curse and condemnation of the Law, Romans 8.3, 4, God sending
his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin the
flesh. That the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not
after the flesh, but after the spirit. O how comfortable and strengthening is
this, that Christ and we are in one Writ, that our Covenant interests and
relations to God, and all his and our concernments are thus bound up in one
Writ! if his title to God, to Heaven, to promises, be good and valid, ours is
so too; if he acquit and defend his own Charters, he does the same for ours:
blessed are they who are united to him in this New Covenant Relation.

6. By the Covenant of Suretiship, Christ is constituted the grand Instrument
and Actor of all things that appertain to his peoples Redemption and Salvation,
and that not only of eternal Salvation and Redemption, which he alone brought
unto his people, Heb. 5.9, And being made perfect, he became the author of
eternal salvation unto all them that obey him. Heb. 9.15, And for this cause he
is the mediator of the new Testament, that by means of death, for the
redemption of the transgressions that were under the first testament, they who
are called, might receive the promise of eternal inheritance. Luke 1.68,
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his people:
And of such part of that Redemption as is wrought within time, Heb. 7.25,
Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by
him: But of whatsoever Salvation and other administrations are good for them in
this life: And therefore we find that Christ was the grand Instrument, and had
an active hand in the deliverance of his people from all afflictions and
oppressions in all ages, Isa. 63.5, 9, And I looked, and there was none to
help, and I wondered that there was none to uphold: therefore mine own arm
brought salvation unto me, and my fury it upheld me. -- In all their
afflictions he was afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved them; and in
his love and in his pity he redeemed them, and he bare them, and carried them
all the days of old. It was Christ the Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3.1, who
delivered Jacob from all evil, Genesis 48.16, It was he who brought the people out
of Egypt, and said to Moses, And now come, I mill send thee unto Egypt. He it
was who appeared unto Moses in the Bush, and made him a ruler and a deliverer,
Act. 7.32, 34, 35. It was he that brought the people out of Babylon, and built
the temple, Zech. 6.12, 13, Behold the man whose Name is the Branch, and he
shall grow up out of his place, and he shall build the temple of the Lord. Even
he shall build the temple of the Lord, and he shall bear the glory, etc. If the
temporal Salvation of the Church and people of God lay upon men, how cold a
comfort were that? Isa. 59.16, And he saw that there was no man, and wondered
that there was no intercessor. Psalm. 142.4, I looked on my right hand, and
beheld, and there was no man that would know me: refuge failed me, and there
was no man cared for my soul. And if the working of that part of our Salvation
which the Lord has made the Believers Duty, and has commanded him to do for
his own Soul, if that lay upon us alone, how heavy would it prove? Phil. 2.12,
Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling. But O how warm, how
comfortable is it, what a support to faith, that Christ is by his Suretiship
engaged to work all manner of Salvation for his people, and to become the grand
instrument, and chief actor thereof! Isa. 63.13, I that speak in righteousness,
mighty to save: I have trodden the wine press alone, and of the people there
was none with me. Phil. 2.13, For it is God that works in you both to will
and to do of his good pleasure. Heb. 12.2, Looking unto Jesus the author and
finisher of our faith.

8. By the Covenant of Suretiship, all the hard conditions lay upon Christ; all
that the Law requires of Man condition-ways: he was made under the law, Gal.
4.4, that we might not be under the law, but under grace, Romans 6.14. O how
sweet and comfortable is it to the poor weak Believer, who finds himself so
very insignificant a creature at all Covenant-conditions, to know that by
Christ's Suretiship, 1. He did take upon him all conditions which the law
requires of man, to abide in every thing that it requires: the Believer is yet
under the commands of the Law; but I say not under the conditions thereof: for
it is not to him a Covenant: Christ also did bear the curse of the Law, but
that which the Believer suffers even of the things that were sometimes written
in the book of the Law, are now written in the book of Covenant-mercies. 2.
Christ did take upon him all the conditions that are works, and nothing rests
to the believer condition-wise, but that which is grace, Romans 4.16, Therefore
it is of faith, that it might be by grace. Its true, the Believer yet works,
and is created unto good works, Phil. 2.10, But all working condition-ways, was
upon Christ by his Suretiship. 3. The principal and most significant condition
of Redemption, Salvation, and all Covenant-blessings and privileges promised
to us, is Christ's doing his part of the Covenant of Suretiship; his laying down
his life, this was not only a condition of the reward that was to be given to
Christ personal, but even of all the promises that were made to him, concerning
his redeemed seed, Isa. 53.10, 11, And the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper
in his hand. He shall see of the travel of his Soul, and shall be satisfied: by
his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many, for he shall bear their
iniquities. 4. By this Suretiship, beside all that he has fulfilled and done
in his own person, he is under a Covenant to work in his people what God
requires condition-ways of them, Joh. 6.37, All that the father gives me,
shall come to me; and him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. O how
comfortable is it, that Christ is under a Covenant to enjoy his Elect people,
not for any thing they can do for themselves, but for the work that he has
wrought, and the conditions that he has fulfilled in his own person, and is
obliged to fulfill and work in them. And indeed the promises are fulfilled to
us, not because we fulfill the condition, but for Christ, in whom they are made
to us, and who by his Suretiship did perform all conditions that the law does
require.

9. That in the Covenant of Suretiship the Believer is undertaken for by both
the parties: 1. Jehovah undertakes, forasmuch as he promises a redeemed seed to
Christ, and engages that he shall see them, Isa. 53.10, He shall see his seed.
Now he who undertakes for this, must needs undertake that they shall be born
again; so that the Lord is undertaker for our believing, Justification,
Perseverance, and Salvation: then Jehovah is engaged by Covenant with Christ to
make sure our believing and Salvation, as he will be true to his Son, to whom
he gave this promise, and to himself and his holy nature, for he cannot deny
himself. 2. Christ has undertaken for us also. He is made surety, Heb. 7.22.
He has given Bond for our believing, and Salvation; he has by an eternal act
of cautionry, acted himself for all them who shall believe on him, body for
body, life for life, soul for soul, that his life shall go for theirs, that his
soul shall be in their souls stead, Isa. 53.10, When thou shall make his soul
an offering for sin. And by the Mediatory office that he took upon him, he has
laid Bonds upon himself, and made a necessary duty of his office, to save his
people, to become a Captain of Salvation to them, to bring many sons to glory,
Heb. 2.10. And that he will be faithful in this office he has taken Bonds upon
him, that by virtue of his office, and place, he must do whatsoever is for his
peoples welfare: See Heb. 3.1, 2, Consider the Apostle and High Priest of our
profession, Christ Jesus, who was faithful to him that appointed him. Chap. 2.
v. 17, Wherefore in all thingsit behoved him to be made like unto his brethren,
that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest, in all things pertaining
to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. How comfortable is
this to the weak Believer? and how strengthening to Faith, to consider that
Jehovah gave Bond from eternity to Christ, and stands engaged to him, for the
bowing of our rebellious wills, and for such a frame of heart to us, as our
Redemption and Salvation necessarily requires! And that Christ stands engaged
to be to all his own a merciful and faithful High Priest! and that by the Bonds
he has laid upon himself, it behoved him to be so! Heb. 2.17. O consider! he
can no more be unconcerned with our concernments, he can no more be untouched
with, and want a feeling of our infirmities, than he can cease to be a merciful
and faithful High Priest; which qualifications he behoved to take upon him, by
taking on that office, Heb. 5.2, 3. Chap. 2. v. 17. Chap. 4. v. 15. Christ can
no more fail in any thing pertaining to our peace with God, and our Salvation,
than he can break his faith of Suretiship, and fail in Covenant-faithfulness,
and the Bonds that he has given to Jehovah.

10. By the Covenant of Suretiship passed betwixt Jehovah and Christ, the
believer is in a sure confirmed state; he is not in a tottering, slippery,
mutable condition, as were the Angels that fell, and like to Adams first
Covenant-state; but the believer is in a sure confirmed state, as sure as the
Elect Angels who never fell. 1. By the Covenant of Suretiship the believers
help is laid upon one that is mighty, Psalm. 89.19. A potent person is his
helper, for their Redeemer is strong, Deuteronomy. 33.27, The eternal God is thy
refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms. Isa. 40.28, 29, Have thou not
known, have thou not heard, that the everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of
the ends of the earth, faints not, neither is weary, there is no searching of
his understanding? He gives power to the faint: and to them that have no
might, he increases strength. 2. By this Covenant there is a great juncture of
undertakings for the believers standing, to wit, by both the parties of that
Covenant. 3. By this Covenant the believers standing and perseverance is taken
off the creatures mutable will, and is now upon the gracious immutable counsel
of Gods will, Heb. 6.17, Wherein God, willing more abundantly to show unto the
heirs of promise, the immutability of his counsel, etc. Luke 12.32, Fear not
little flock, for it is your fathers good pleasure to give you the kingdom. 4.
By this Covenant-salvation, the weight of Salvation is taken off the creatures
acting, and laid upon Christ's, Isa. 49.6, That thou may be my salvation unto
the end of the earth. Joh. 17.2, As thou have given him power over all flesh,
that he should give eternal life to as many as thou have given him. 5. The same
confirming-grace that is given to the Elect Angels, is by Christ's Covenant of
Suretiship ensured, yea, given in Christ to the believer, in whom ye are
complete, Col. 2.10. 2 Timothy 1.9, Who has saved us, and called us with an holy
calling, not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and
grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus, before the world began. 6. The
honor of Christ Mediator, by this Suretiship of his, lies at the stake for the
weak believers standing, Joh. 17.10, All mine are thine, and thine are mine. I
am glorified in them.

How should this comfort the believers heart, and support his says, that
though he be not yet without the reach of dangers, yet by Christ's Suretiship he
is in a confirmed state? that he can no more fall quite away from his state of
Grace and Faith, than Jehovah can break to Christ, or Christ break to his
Father, which is impossible? Psalm. 89.35, 36, Once have I sworn by my holiness,
that I will not lie unto David. His seed shall endure for ever. Rev. 1.5, And
from Jesus Christ who is the faithful witness. That the faith of the least of
them that believe on Christ, can no more fail, than Christ can want his reward,
which is impossible, Isa. 53.11, He shall see of the travel of his soul, and
shall be satisfied. Christ cannot be left unsatisfied, which he should be if
the says of any of his should fail, in regard of Christ's Suretiship; the weak
believers legs can no more fail, in regard of Christ's Suretiship, than his arms
can fail, Psalm. 40.11, He shall gather the lambs with his arms.

11. Whatsoever Christ acted by the Covenant of Suretiship, he did it for us,
and we did that in him. For, 1. Whatsoever he acted by virtue of the Covenant
of Suretiship, he acted as a Surety. Now a Surety is one that undertakes and
does for another, and whose deed by the allowance of the Law, stands for the
deed of that person for whom he was undertaker: a person who puts himself in
the stead of another; such a person was Judah for Benjamin, Genesis 43.9. Chap.
44.32. 2. Whatsoever he acted by virtue of this Covenant, he acted as a public
person, I do not say that in the transacting of the Covenant of Suretiship
Christ acted as a public person: for then fallen man should be an undertaker
to satisfy justice, and to pay a price of blood to God for his own sin,
because a person who represented him, did undertake this: but I say, after
Christ personally considered, had by the Covenant of Suretiship taken upon
him-this public capacity and place, whatsoever he acted by doing or suffering,
he acted still as a public person: Now a public person is one who personates,
represents and acts the part of another, so that what he does (as such) that
other person whom he represents, is reckoned by the Law to do: such public
persons were Adam and Christ; the first man and the second, the heads of two
families, who represented all that came of them, their seed and heirs, Romans
5.12, etc. 1 Cor. 15.21, 22. Consider, how comfortable this is to the believer,
and what support it affords to his faith; look over his state, his condition,
his actings, all that he was made, all that he did, all that was done to him;
he was made, and did, and suffered all that for the believer; and his Elect
people were made, and did, and suffered, and received all that in him: when he
died, God reckoned us dying then, and would have us reckon so also, Romans 6.10,
11, For in that he died, he died unto sin; but in that he lives, he lives
unto God. Likewise, reckon ye also your selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but
alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord. When he suffered and satisfied
the Law, God reckoned that we did so also, Gal. 3.13, Christ has redeemed us
from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us. When he was acquitted and
discharged of the Debt, when he rose again, and was released from the Prison
and Bonds of the Law, we did so also, Romans 4.25, Who was delivered for our
offenses, and was raised again for our justification. 1 Cor. 15.20, 21, But now
is Christ risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that slept.
For since by man came death; by man also came the resurrection of the dead.
When he entered into Heaven, and had reception, and a welcome of
Covenant-favour, there we did so also, and had the same welcome, Ephesians. 2.6, And
has raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in
Christ Jesus. For he acted all these things in our stead; and all these things
were done to him, as a person representing us.

12. By the Covenant of Suretiship, beside all other Attributes in God, Justice
it self, that is most terrible to the believer, and was sometimes a dreadful
Attribute, and speaking nothing less than Damnation to fallen man, is now
turned to be as much for the believers Salvation, as any other attribute in
God: and upon that account is, and may be comfortably looked upon, 1 John 1.9,
If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to
cleanse us from all unrighteousness. If you ask, How can that be, that Justice
should be for the forgiveness of our sins, if we do but confess them, though we
can make no satisfaction to justice for them? Christ by his Suretiship has
brought about the business, and handled the matter of Salvation so, that
Justice and Righteousness is as forward, as much engaged to save the believer,
as any other Attribute in God, 1 John 2.2, And he is the propitiation for our
sins: and not for our sins only, but also for the sins of the whole world. For,
1. Christ has satisfied Justice by a condign-price, the price of the blood of
a person who is God; he has paid the believers Debt to the least farthing. 2.
He pleads this satisfaction, and his own righteousness for the people whose
Debt he took upon him to pay; and thus he carried his matter by righteousness
and Justice. Now Justice, when it is satisfied and made for a person, is as
comfortable, as it is terrible when it is unsatisfied, and against a person. How
sweet and comfortable is this to the believer, that by the Suretiship of
Christ, not only favor and grace is for him, but Justice also? that satisfied
Justice is the sinful believers friend, stands on his side; and if God be
righteous and just, he will, he must, he cannot but forgive the
confessing-believer, and save him upon Christ's account, who suffered and
satisfied punitive Justice, and merited by a condign-price, holding proportion
with the thing which he bought, that communitative and remunerative-Justice
should give this reward for his work.

Learn hence, 1. From the Covenant of Suretiship, to frame an answer to all
temptations from our own frailty, mutability, inconstancy, mixture of unbelief
with faith, of corruption with grace, etc. and the like: the weak believer
thinks, Adam and the Angels fell, who had no sin in them, who had habitual
grace in perfection, and how can I stand The Covenant of Suretiship answers
these and the like assaults of the weak believers faith: 1. Thou stand by
faith, which excludes boasting: and if thou be not high minded, but fear, Romans
11.20, thou shall stand by faith: but they stood by the Law of works, which
does not exclude boasting, Romans 3.27. And therefore they feared not, but were
lifted up, and fell. 2. That same low despised thing, the little weak faith
that is in thee, as it is of another kind than any faith which was in them,
which was not faith in Christ Mediator, so it is given to thee for another end,
even that thou may by going out of thy self, stand by faith; and comes from
another spring, which makes it indefectible, Luke 22.32, But I prayed for thee
that thy faith fail not: this is his seed that remains in him that is born of
God, 1 John 3.9. 3. Although Adam and the Angels that fell, had habitual grace
in perfection, without mixture of corruption; yet they had no promise nor
assurance of the spirit and actual influences which the weakest believer has
settled upon him by promise, Ezekiel. 36.27, And I will put my spirit within you,
and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do
them. 4. Neither had these grace in the storehouse, Christ given to them;
though they had a fair stock, yet it was all in their own hand at adventure and
the well head and fountain of life to them was placed in themselves, or the
streams were cut off from the fountain; but to the weak believer, the fountain
of life and grace is placed in Christ, Ephesians. 2.10, For we are his workmanship,
created in Christ Jesus unto good works. Joh. 1.26, And of his fullness have all
we received, and grace for grace. 5. Nor was Christ an undertaker and Surety
for the Angels that fell, nor for Adam in his first Covenant state; he gave no
Bond, nor came under any act of Suretiship for their standing, Heb. 2.16, For
verily he took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of
Abraham. God never said to them as he does to the believer, Psalm. 89.19, I have
laid help upon one that is mighty.

2. Learn hence to admire and study these eternal depths of love and wisdom
that shine forth in Gods Covenant-transactions with Christ, Ephesians. 3.18, 19, That
you may be able to comprehend with all saints, what is the breadth, and length,
and depth, and height; and to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge.
This glorious mystery the Angels desire to search into, though not so much
concerned in it as we, and shall not believers much more study it? 1. The
wisdom and knowledge that found out this way, that was beyond the possible reach
of men and Angels; that lost man who was in as hopeless a condition as the
Apostate Angels, should be by a Surety, by such a Surety undertaken for, when
Angels were passed by, Heb. 2.16. 2. The everlasting outgoings of that same
eternal love, which came forth in Covenant-transactions betwixt the Father and
the Son, when these objects of his love and eternal delight were not yet
revealed, nor knew any thing of it, Prove. 8.23, to 31. What a wonder is this,
that the heart of God, the delights of God should be taken up about such
objects! 3. The Sovereign graciousness and free preventing-grace of this
Suretiship, that Christ became Surety and undertaker, and came to fulfill his
Suretiship, not sought for, not sent for, not so much as desired by us, to
undertake and act any thing for us, Isa. 65.1, I am sought of them that asked
not for me, I am found of them that sought me not. I said, Behold me, Behold
me, unto a nation that was not called by my Name. 4. The seasonableness of his
sending the notice of this unto us; the Lord provided a Physician before we
were sick, and sent him to us in due time, 1 Timothy 2.6. Gal. 4.4. When fallen
man was sick unto death, when Justice with a fiery sword kept him out from
happiness, when he was running away, and hiding himself at the voice of God
Genesis 3.10: When the cure was desperate, and the remedy impossible to our
knowledge, then came the news of a Surety to undertake for us in our low
condition. 5. The double tenure whereby the believer holds his pardon and life
through Christ's Suretishp, by free grace, and by Justice, Jam. 3.24, Being
justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ.
The Covenant of Redemption has provided both, that Free Grace should acquit
wretched sinners, and Justice also should discharge them for a full price laid
down: Christ has said to Jehovah by his Covenant of Suretiship, as Paul said
to Philemon concerning Onesimus, Philem. v. 18, 19, If he has wronged thee, or
owed thee ought, put that on mine account. I Paul have written it with my own
hand, I will repay it. And this answers all that Law and Justice, and the
accuser can say; and therefore the believer may well say with Paul, Romans 8.33,
34, Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that
justifies, who is he that condemns?

3. Learn how needful the knowledge and persuasion of Christ's Suretiship and
undertaking for us is. Nothing is more necessary than to believe this, 1. For
the right understanding of our Debt to him, who did so freely, being under no
necessity of nature, and not desired by us, undertake for us, and put his soul
in our souls stead: a worthy study indeed, and well becoming a believer to know
what we owe to Jesus the Surety of the Covenant, who spoke for us behind our
backs, when we were absent, and who laid down his Bond for ours, 1 Cor. 6.19,
20, Ye are not your own, for ye are bought with a price, therefore glorify God
in your body and in your spirit, which is Gods. 2. For the establishing our
hearts in the faith of our Salvation, and complete Redemption: is there any
thing can so establish the heart of a believer, as to know that Christ is an
undertaker for him? he that can believe that Christ became Surety for him, in
the eternal Counsel of God, cannot reasonably doubt, but he will fulfill all his
undertaking, and that he shall be saved by his Surety-actings, Romans 5.8, 9, 10,
But God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners,
Christ died for us. Much more then being now justified by his blood, we shall
be saved from wrath through him. For if when we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son: much more being reconciled, we shall
be saved by his life. 3. For silencing all the actings of unbelief in us, and
the perverse suspicious of our heart concerning Gods Covenant Good Will toward
us; all which do resolve upon some apprehensions of breach of the Covenant of
Suretiship betwixt Jehovah and Christ: for if that stand fast upon both sides,
what place is there for doubting and unbelief, 2 Timothy 2.13, If we believe not,
yet he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself. Romans 3.3, 4, For what if some
did not believe, shall their unbelief make the faith of God without effect? God
forbid.

4. Nothing more necessary for engaging our hearts in the study of faith and
holiness, and unto a walk becoming the redeemed of the Lord, than the faith of
Christ's Suretiship.

Three ways does this engage unto holiness and becoming walking.

1. Morally, and by way of excitement and motive: the faith of Christ's
Suretiship and undertaking for us, is both an inviting, and encouraging motive
to be holy, forasmuch as we are chosen in Christ to be holy, and given to him
to be made holy, Ephesians. 1.4, According as he has chosen us in him before the
foundation of the world, that we should be holy, etc. Joh. 17.17, Sanctify
them through thy truth, thy word is truth. Heb. 2.11, For both he that
sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are all one.

2. By way of obligement: Christ's Suretiship does oblige us, and lay on Bonds
and Obligations to this duty, that we should believe and be holy: and he who
has the faith of Christ's Suretiship cannot but judge so, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15, For
the love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one died for
all, then were all dead. And that he died for all, that they which live should
not henceforth live unto themselves, etc. 1 Cor. 6.20, For ye are bought with a
price, therefore glorify God in your body, and in your spirit, which are Gods.

3. By way of real influence: the faith of Christ's Suretiship has real
influence upon the believers heart, to make him study to walk like the redeemed
people; if the threatenings of the Law and Gospel have some influence upon the
spirit of man, to make him obey the Law or Gospel, it is without doubt they have
a moral influence; and when accompanied with the spirit, they have real
influence, Heb. 2.3, How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation?
Chap. 12. v. 25, See that ye refuse not him that speaks: for if they escaped
not who refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we
turn away from him that speaks from heaven. Sure the gracious Covenant of
Suretiship betwixt Jehovah and Christ, the undertakings of Christ, for the
believer must much more have influences upon the believers spirit, and really
put him to it, to walk like a ransomed soul, Gal. 2.20, I am crucified with
Christ; nevertheless, I live; yet not I, but Christ lives in me; and the life
which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved
me, and gave himself for me. 2 Cor. 7.1, Having therefore these promises,
dearly beloved, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and
spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord.

CHAP. VII. Of the Name Mediator, what it signifies, and how it agrees to
Christ.
THat there is a Mediator of the Covenant of Grace, and but one only, even the
Lord Jesus Christ, does clearly appear from Heb. 8.6. Chap. 9. v. 15. Chap. 12.
v. 22, 23, 24. 1 Timothy 2.5, For there is one God, and one Mediator between God
and man, the man Christ Jesus.

The first Covenant which was of works, had no Mediator: for then there was no
disagreement betwixt God and Man; but this Covenant under which we stand by
Grace, has a Mediator, and needs one, as I shall show by and by.

Concerning the Mediator of the new Covenant, we shall consider, 1. The Name,
what it signifies, and how it agrees to Christ. 2. The necessity of a
Mediator in the new Covenant. 3. The Person that is Mediator. 4. The Office of
Mediatorship, and these things that belong unto it. 5. The grounds of comfort,
and supports of faith arising to believers from Christ's Mediation.

1. The Name Mediator, (...), properly signifies a midler, whether he be such
in regard of his Person or Office, one betwixt two, Gal. 3.20, Now a mediator
is not a mediator of one, but God is one. And a Reconciler, as the Hebrew word
signifies, Job 9.33, Neither is there any days-man betwixt us, Grot. de satisf.
Christi, chap. 8.
that might lay his hand upon us both (...), Mochjach, a Triester; one who
interposeth for taking away differences betwixt disagreeing parties. It
signifies also one that declares things betwixt parties, internuntius
interpres, one that goes betwixt parties, and carries the mind of each to
other; in which sense Moses was a typical Mediator betwixt God and the Children
of Israel, who carried the will of God to them, and carried back their answer
to God, Gal. 3.19, 20, with Exodus 19.3. Chap. 20. v. 19. Deuteronomy. 5.5.

And although Socinus plead that the word Mediator, Socin. de servat. lib. 1.
cap. 2.
signifies nothing in Scripture but an Interpreter, the falsehood whereof does
evidently appear from, Heb. 9.15, And for this cause he is the mediator of the
new Testament, that by means of death, for the redemption of the transgressions
that were under the first testament, they which are called might receive the
promise of eternal inheritance, etc. 1 Timothy 2.5, 6, For there is one God, and
one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a
ransom for all, to be testified in due time. Also, he would have Christ to be
a Mediator, only in this last sense, that is, Gods Interpreter: yet all the
three significations of the word do agree to Christ; and he is called the
Mediator of the new Covenant, with respect to all the three. 1. He is one
betwixt two, that middle person, God and man equally distant from both, equally
drawing near to both parties, and so in a fit capacity to mediate and
interpose, Mat. 1.23, And they shall call his name Emanuel, which being
interpreted, is God with us. He is the days-man, the Reconciler, and triester
of the difference, who has interposed and actually composed the difference,
Ephesians. 2.14, 16, For he is our peace, who has made both one. -- And that he
might reconcile both unto God, in one body by the cross, having slain the
enmity thereby. 2 Cor. 5.19, God was in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them, and has committed unto us
the word of reconciliation. Col. 1.20, And having made peace by the blood of
his cross, to him to reconcile all things to himself. 3. He is the Mediator in
this sense also, and Interpreter, who published and declared the new Covenant,
and the peace, Ephesians. 2.17, And came and preached peace to you which were afar
off, and to them that were nigh. He went betwixt the parties, and carried the
offers of one, and the acceptance of the other. In which respect he is called
the Messenger or Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3.1. And so much for a taste of
the Name and signification of the word Mediator: of the thing we shall speak,
when we come to speak of the Mediators Person and Office.

More particularly; Why is Jesus called the Mediator of the new Covenant, Heb.
12.24? Or, in what respects does this Name agree to him? and what may it import?

I will not trouble the Reader with the enumeration of how often and ordinarily
he is sound in medio, in the middle; Gerard. loc. com. de person, etc. offic.
Christi loc. 4. c. 3.
he that pleases may read it elsewhere. But I think he is called the Mediator
of the new Covenant upon a foursold account. 1. In respect of his Person,
because he was a middle person, participating of both parties, (...), having
interest in both parties, God-man; Immanuel, God with us, or God us, Mat. 1.23.
2. In respect of his Office, not only a middle-person, but a middle officer,
designed for a middle-work, for dealing betwixt God and man in the great
transaction of Recconciliation, Col. 1.20. 2 Cor. 5.19. 3. In respect of his
fitness and qualifications to interpose betwixt God and man, (whereof more
afterward, at this time but a passing-word of it). He was the only fit person
to lay hands on both parties: In Heaven or Earth, there was not found a fit
person to mediate betwixt God and man until Heaven and Earth, God and man, be
joined in one person, to make a fit Mediator, a person equally distant from,
and equally near unto both parties. A person who is Gods fellow, Zech. 13.7,
Awake, O sword, against my shepherd, and against the man that is my fellow. And
who is our fellow, made himself our companion, and like unto his brethren, Heb.
2.14, 17. A person who is Gods Son, and our brother, Joh. 20.17, I ascend unto
my father, and your father; and to my God, and your God: our Goel, Job. 10.25,
For I know that my redeemer lives, and that he shall stand at the latter day
upon the earth. Our kinsman, who had the right of Redemption. 4. He is called
Mediator, the midling person, not only in regard of his fitness, but upon the
account of his actual interposing, and stepping in betwixt the disagreeing
parties; because he acted and executed the Mediators Office which he took upon
him, and for which he was fitted; he acted the day-mans part in the treaty of
peace: he, through whom the whole Covenant of peace from beginning to end was
transacted; who stood in every passage of it as a middle person, through whom
God dealt with us, and we with him.

1. Through him was the Covenant with us first motioned, and by him was the
motion and overture entertained on our behalf: there had never been a Covenant
betwixt God and fallen men, had not Christ stepped in to overture the
reconciliation of Justice and Mercy, Prove. 8.30, 31, Then I was by him, as one
brought up with him, and I was daily his delight, rejoicing always before him.
Rejoicing in the habitable part of his earth: and my delights were with the
sons of men. He is Mediator Propositionis, or rather proponendo, the person
through whom the first motion of it was made and entertained.

2. Through him was the business done, and ended in the Counsel of God: he
entertained the motion of a Covenant; and agented it till it was a closed
bargain, in an eternal plot betwixt his Father and himself, Psalm. 89.3, I have
made my Covenant with a chosen: I have sworn unto David my servant. Chap. 40.
v. 7, Then said I, Lo, I come. He is Mediator Impetrationis, who obtained and
procured, that the proposal of free Redemption should be a conncluded Agreement.

3. Through him were we represented in Christ's transaction with his Father: he
interposed and did the business by way of representation, as the Head of the
Church in the name, and on the behalf of many, Heb. 2.13, Behold I, and the
children which God has given me. 2 Timothy 1.9, Who has saved us, and called us
with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own
purpose and grace which was given us (...) Christ Jesus, before the world
began. He is Mediator representationis, the person that stood and represented
many: When God spoke with us in him, as the Angels did with Israel in Jacobs
loins, for there he spoke with us, Hos. 12.4.

4. Through him did God strike hands with us: the stipulation on our part was
made by him, whom God took as a responsal person, and in our room to bargain
with, Heb. 7.22, By so much was Jesus made a surety of a better Testament.
Psalm. 89.19, I have laid help upon one that is mighty. I have exalted one
chosen out of the people. He is Mediator, fidei-jussionis, the person who put
his name in our Bond, and stepped in as a Sponsor and Surety for the broken man.

5. Through him is the whole Covenant fulfilled, and every word of it has a
being, ex part dei he fulfilleth all that is promised on Gods part, 2 Cor.
1.20, For all the promises of God in him are yea, and in him are Amen: And ex
part hominis, he works in us, and for us, whatsoever is required of us,
Phil. 1.21, Being filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are by Jesus
Christ, unto the glory and praise of God. Heb. 12.2, Looking unto Jesus the
author and finisher of our faith. He is Mediator impletionis, the person in
whom the whole Covenant is fulfilled and accomplished.

6. Through him came the news of this second Covenant: he proclaimed and
published the glad tidings, Isa. 61.1, The spirit of the Lord is upon me,
because the Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek. Ephesians.
2.17, And came and preached peace to you which are afar off, and to them that
were nigh. Psalm. 40.9, I have preached righteousness in the great congregation.
He is Mediator promulgationis, the chief herald and messenger, the person by
whom, and by his appointed servants, the Covenant was and is preached.

7. Through him is the mystery made manifest in the hearts of his people: he
shines upon the mystery of the Covenant, and makes it to be understood; and
this second discovery of God in Christ, can never be revealed but by the
Mediator himself, Joh. 27.6. I have manifested thy name. 2 Cor. 4.6. For God
who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts, to
give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus
Christ. Joh. 1.18, No man has seen God at any time: the only begotten Son,
which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him. He is Mediator
illuminationis, or the very medium of this new-Light, the person by whom the
Covenant is revealed.

8. By him was a price told down to Justice on our behalf: he interposed to
satisfy Justice on the terms it stood upon, and entered his person in prison
for us, till he paid the Debt by the price of his blood, after which he was
set at liberty, Heb. 9.12, 15, But by his own blood he entered in once into the
holy place, having obtained redemption for us. -- And for this cause he is the
Mediator of the new Testament, that by means of death, etc. Romans 3.24, Being
justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ.
He is Mediator redemptionis seu satisfactionis, the person that made the
satisfaction, and paid the price to Justice to the full, by his obedience to
death.

9. Through him is the difference actually composed, and the peace made, the
disagreeing parties are brought together in him as a middle person, and fit
resting place, Ephesians. 2.13, 14, But now in Christ Jesus, ye who sometimes were
far off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ. For he is our peace, who has
made both one. Heb. 2.17, To make reconciliation for the sins of his people. He
is Mediator reconciliationis, the person that made the peace, and in whom the
difference is composed, 2 Cor. 5.19, God was in Christ reconciling the world to
himself.

10. Through him are all the blessings of the Covenant applied to us, and the
fruit of his purchase is drawn forth by his intercession as a Priest for ever,
which he does as a Mediator, Heb. 7.25, Wherefore he is able also to save them
to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them. He is Mediator applicationis seu intercessionis, the
person that still mediates and officiates before God on our behalf, for fresh
applications of all his purchase.

11. Through him we receive all the blessings of the Covenant: he receives them
for us, and Christ Mediator is constitute great Lord Dispensator and
Theasaurer, the head of the Church, who receives blessings for the whole body,
and every member thereof, 2 Timothy 1.9, According to his own purpose and grace
which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began. Ephesians. 1.3, Blessed be
the God and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all
spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ. Psalm. 68.18, Thou have
received gifts for men. He is Mediator receptionis, the person who receives
all the blessings of the Covenant at the first hand; who is the storehouse,
and fountain, the person on whom all the acts of Gods love are first put forth,
Joh. 1.14, 16, And the word was made flesh, and dwelt among us; and we beheld
his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and
truth. -- And of his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace.

12. Through him was the Covenant with us confirmed: he sealed the new
Testament with his own blood, and interposed by his death to make the Covenant
Gods irrevocable will of grace to usward, Gal. 3.15, 17, Though it be but a
man's covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no man disannulleth or adds thereunto.
And this I say, That the Covenant that was confirmed before of God in Christ,
the law which was four hundred and thirty years after cannot disannul, that it
should make the promises of none effect. Heb. 6.17, 18, Wherein God, willing
more abundantly to manifest unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his
counsel, confirmed it by an oath, that by two immutable things, wherein it was
impossible for God to lie, we might have strong consolation, who have fled for
refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us. He is Mediator confirmationis,
the person in whom, and by whom the Covenant was confirmed.

13. Through him is the Covenant a closed bargain, as to the addition of our
consent to it: through him are our hearts engaged to the bargain: he travelleth
with us to get our consent to it, 2 Cor. 5.19, God was in Christ reconciling
the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them; and has
committed unto us the word of reconciliation. Ezekiel. 20.37, And I will cause you
to pass under the rod, and I will bring you into the bond of the Covenant. Rev.
22.17, And the spirit and the bride say, Come. He is Mediator, adstipulationis
seu consensus nostri, the person who interposeth for the subjection of our
consent, and to get our heart to say Amen to the Covenant; and is therefore
called the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, or adstipulation, Heb.
3.1.

14. Through him is the Covenant held fast with all those who are once really
engaged in it, that it crumble not away as the first Covenant did, but may
stand firm and stable, Psalm. 89.34, 35, My Covenant will I not break, nor alter
the thing that is gone out of my lips. Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I
will not lie unto David. Joh. 17.12, Those that thou gave me I have kept, and
none of them is lost. He is Mediator conservationis, the person who conserveth
and keeps the peace betwixt the covenanted parties, and makes the Covenant
sure, 1 John 2.1, 2, And if any man sin, we have an advocate with the father,
Jesus Christ the righteous. And he is the propitiation for our sins.

From this, that Christ is Mediator of the new Covenant:

Use 1. This shows the misery of all those who are under the Covenant of
works, which is the state of all natural men. Christ is not Mediator of that
Covenant under which you stand; you must either do for your selves, or think of
changing your Covenant state; for Christ's mediation does not reach you, so as
you continuing in that condition can have any actual benefit by it, Joh. 17.9,
I pray for them, I pray not for the world, but for them that thou have given
me, for they are thine.

Use 2. This shows also the blessed state of believers who are in the
Covenant of grace: you are not come to the Mountain that can not be touched;
you may with boldness approach to God with your services; and for obtaining
blessings and directions from him; you have a Mediator to deal for you; if he
be angry at any time, you have one to put between you and his anger, to speak
for you when you dare not speak for your selves; to procure blessings for you
when you deserve none, 1 John 1.2, If any man sin, we have an advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. Ephesians. 2.18, For through him we both have an
access by one spirit unto the Father. Chap. 3. v. 12, In whom we have boldness
and access, with confidence by the faith of him.

Use 3. Since Jesus Christ is Mediator of the new Covenant, then he must be
employed, and acknowledged in all things pertaining to the Covenant, Heb. 2.17,
And in all things pertaining to God: for if it be a business betwixt God and a
man who is within this Covenant, that falls within his office, 1 Timothy 2.5, For
there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus.
In all things he must be employed as Mediator, and acknowledged and honored as
Mediator, Joh. 5.23, That all men should honor the Son, even as they honor
the Father.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Necessity of a Mediator; and Reasons why this Covenant is
established in the hands of a Mediator.
COncerning the necessity of a Mediator in the Covenant of Grace, it is to be
remembered, Aquin. sum. 1 part Q. 19. art. 3. Estius in sent. lib. 1. did. 33.
Sect. 7.
that we speak not of an absolute necessity of that which God could have done
by his absolute power: whether he could have restored man without a Mediator,
and have pardoned sin without a satisfaction: nor of a natural necessity: but
we speak of an hypothetical, respective necessity, upon connection of one thing
with another; In regard of the decree of God, who having purposed not to suffer
sin to pass utterly unrevenged, neither yet to destroy all mankind in the
punishing of sin, and satisfying of Justice; but to glorify himself in such
manifestation of his grace, as should have satisfaction to Justice carried
along with it: In this respect it was necessary that a Mediator should be found
who might do the work in this manner.

The Reasons showing the necessity of a Mediator, or Gods ends in establishing
the Covenant in the hand of a Mediator, are of three sorts, according to three
great ends which God has before him in the work of our Redemption; The glory
of God, the glory of Christ, and the good of his people.

1. Some Reasons there are which most directly respect God himself, and his
glory.

2. Others respect Christ and his honor, as Mediator in this employment.

The third sort respect the Creatures good and happiness.

And, 1. The Reasons of establishing this Covenant in the hands of a Mediator,
which respect God himself, and his glory, may be, 1. For the glory of his
Greatness and Majesty; it is his glory to be dealt with like himself,
throughout the whole business of our Salvation.

1. It was for his honor that he should carry like a Superior wronged: it
became the Majesty of the Lord to keep at a distance with sinners, and not to
be dealt with immediately by the parties who had done him the wrong; but by the
Mediation and Intercession of another great Person, Mal. 1.14, For I am a great
king, says the Lord. Heb. 7.25, Men must therefore come to God by him, by a
Mediator. 2. It became the Majesty and Honor of God to be dealt with only by
his own Son, he being the greatest Courtier in Heaven, and who knew most of his
fathers mind, Joh. 1.18, No man has seen God at any time: the only begotten
Son which is in the bosom of the father, he has declared him.

2. For the glory of his Wisdom: This was a plot becoming the wisdom of God,
and much for the honor of it, to find out this way of making up an union
betwixt God and man. Again, by bringing down God to man, and bringing up man to
God, and treisting both to meet in a Mediator: wonderful did the wisdom of God
appear in the Reconciling Justice and Mercy, and making them meet together in
this business; in punishing sin, and setting the sinner free; in making a
Covenant with us through a Mediator, when there could be none without a
Mediator, Ephesians. 3.10, 11, To the intent, that now unto the principalities and
powers in heavenly places, might be known by the Church the manifold wisdom of
God: according to the eternal purpose which he purposed in Christ Jesus our
Lord.

3. It was for the glory of Gods Goodness and Free Grace, that grace may be
acknowledged, and dealt with like Freegrace; therefore there must be a
Mediator, who throughout the accomplishment of our Salvation shall deal with
grace by way of entreaty, and requests; and shall obtain our Salvation as
freely by requests, as if there had been no purchase made of it through
satisfaction to Justice, Heb. 5.17, Who in the days of his flesh, when he had
offered up prayers and supplications, with strong crying and tears unto him
that was able to save him from death; and was heard in that he feared. Chap. 7.
v. 25, Seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them.

4. It was for the glory of his Justice, which must be dealt with in a way of
satisfaction: grace will be dealt with by requests, salva justitia, which must
be dealt with by a satisfaction; therefore the Covenant is established in the
hands of a Mediator, who may tell down a price to Justice, 1 Timothy 2.6, Who gave
himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time. These two the Apostle
joins, Romans 3.24, 25, 26, Being justified freely by his grace, through the
redemption that is in Jesus Christ: Whom God has set forth to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the
remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God. To declare, I
say, at this time his righteousness, that he might be just, and the justifier
of him which believes in Jesus. The highest Justice, and the freest grace, met
together in the Mediator, to save us by paying a price as fully as if there had
been no grace; and entreating of favor in the matter of our Salvation: and yet
as much entreaty and request is made to grace, as if Justice had received no
satisfaction.

Secondly, Other Reasons respect Christ: the Covenant is established in the
hands of a Mediator, for the glory of the Mediator in this employment, whose
honor and glory God had in his eyes, as well as his own, Joh. 5.23, That all
men should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father. And 16.14, He shall
glorify me, for he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you. Now the
constituting and appointing Christ Mediator of the new Covenant, is for his
honor, 1. In respect of the honorable offices which are laid upon him as
Mediator: for it is as Mediator that he is constituted a King, a Priest, and a
Prophet to his people, Heb. 1, and 7 Chap. throughout, which are honorable
offices, Heb. 5.4, And no man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is
called of God as was Aaron. Joh. 5.22, 23, But has committed all judgment to
the Son, that all men should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father. 2.
In respect of the exceeding great power which is put in his hand as Mediator:
no less than the administration of the whole affairs in Heaven and Earth, and
that every knee should bow to him, Phil. 2.10, And the government shall be upon
his shoulder, Isa. 9.6. Mat. 28.18, All power is given unto me in heaven, and
in earth. Rev. 3.7, He that has the key of David, he that opens, and no man
shuts: and shuts, and no man opens. 3. In respect of the great
dependence that shall be upon Christ Mediator, by many supplicants resorting to
him, and waiting on him, for the representing and offering of their requests.
Joh. 15.16, Whatsoever ye shall ask of the Father in my name, he shall give it
you. Zeph. 3.10, From beyond the rivers of Ethiopia, my supplicants, even the
daughter of my dispersed shall bring mine offering. 4. In respect of his sole
and absolute working of the whole business of our Salvation from beginning to
end, every part of it being immediately from him as the Fountain and
storehouse, and Great Lord Treasurer of all the blessings of the Covenant,
Heb. 12.2, Looking unto Jesus the author and finisher of our faith. Ephesians. 1.3,
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us
with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ. Act. 2.33, Therefore
being by the right hand of God exalted, and having received of the Father the
promise of the holy Ghost, he has shed forth this which ye now see and hear.

The third sort of Reasons respecting the creatures good and happiness, may be
holden forth, 1. Negatively. 2. Affirmatively.

1. Without Christ the Mediator, we should have had no knowledge of God which is
saving: for since the fall, God deals not with man immediately: nor can man
see him, or hear him speak without a Mediator. This was typified, Exodus 20.19,
And they said unto Moses, Speak thou with us, and we will hear: but let not God
speak with us, lest we die. But in the Mediator we see Gods face, and know him
savingly, Joh. 17.3, And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the
only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. 2 Cor. 4.6, To give the
light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ.

2. Without Christ the Mediator, there could be no union betwixt God and man:
the distance was so great, that the parties could not come near to one another,
Ephesians. 2.13, But now in Chrisi Jesus, ye who sometimes were far off, are made
nigh by the blood of Christ.

3. Without the Mediator there could not have been any communion with God:
union is the foundation of communion: without Christ the Creature should
everlastingly have lost the fruition of God. Without Christ, and without God,
go together, Ephesians. 2.12.

4. Without the Mediator we could never had any conformity with God; we lost
the Image of God, but could never have regained it: but in Christ it is
restored more excellently, 2 Cor. 3.18, But we all with open face beholding as
in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to
glory, even as by the spirit of the Lord. In a word: without a Mediator, no
part of man's spiritual or everlasting good should have been brought to pass;
forasmuch as all the good which God had from eternity decreed to do to man, was
decreed to come to him in and through a Mediator: hence we are said to be
chosen and ordained unto adoption, holiness, obedience, perseverance, etc. in
and through him, Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5, Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiriritual blessings in heavenly
places in Christ. According as he has chosen us in him, before the foundation
of the world, that we should be holy, and without blame before him in love.
Having predestined us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to
himself, according to the good pleasure of his will. 1 Pet. 1.2, Through
sanctification of the spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of
Christ.

But by establishing the Covenant in the hands of a Mediator, man's good is
advanced. For, 1. There is a foundation laid of a higher happiness to be
recovered in Christ, than was lost in Adam: for there is much more of God
manifested and revealed in Jesus Christ, than was in the creation: for now we
may behold his face as in a glass, 2 Cor. 3.18, throughout. Christ, who is the
brightness of his Fathers glory, Heb. 1.3. Therefore this is a better Covenant,
which has better promises in it, laid to our hand in a Mediator, Heb. 8.6. 2.
Not only a higher happiness, and a better Covenant in that respect, but also
through the Mediator there is a foundation laid of a better security for that
happiness; a surer Covenant, and standing in it, than was before: a Covenant
that cannot be disannulled, as was the first; this being established, and
ordained in the hands of a Mediator, Gal. 3.15, 17, 19. Jer. 31.33, But this
shall be the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those
days, says the Lord, I will put my laws in their inward parts, and write it in
their hearts: and will be their God, and they shall be my people, Chap. 33. v.
20, 21. A happiness that cannot be forefaulted, Psalm. 89.33, 34, 35. 3. Through
the establishing of this Covenant in the hands of a Mediator, there is strength
and height of confidence and consolation, answerable to the security granted,
and the solid grounds of confidence and comfort that are laid in this Covenant;
the sum whereof is, That all shall go well, notwithstanding all things in us
that speak the contrary, because there is a Mediator in this Covenant, 1 John
2.1, 2, And if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the righteous; and he is the propitiation for our sins: and not for ours only,
but also for the sins of the whole world. Heb. 7.25, Wherefore he is able also
to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives
to make intercession for them. Chap. 2. v. 17, That he might be a merciful and
faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for
the sins of the people. And truly if there had not been a Mediator in the
Covenant of grace, in whose hand it was ordained, through whom it is
established with us; it had been as weak, ineffectual, and unprofitable to give
righteousness and life, as the first Covenant proved.

Use 1. The necessity of a Mediator in this Covenant, clears one of the main
differences betwixt the Covenant of Grace and the first Covenant which was of
Works, wherein there was no Mediator, nor need of a Mediator, the parties being
friends, and in fitness to deal immediately.

Use 2. From the necessity of a Mediator in this Covenant, be convinced of your
need of a Mediator. 1. Let natural men be convinced of this; you have none to
deal for you, you must stand or fall by your own righteousness without any
mending of it; you must do for your selves, or be undone; for there is no
Mediator of that Covenant under which you stand: you must do so, or of
necessity come to Christ the Mediator, that you may partake in a better
Covenant. 2. Let believers be convinced of this, It is not natural men only
that need a Mediator to make their peace, and to change their Covenant-state,
but you also need a Mediator: 1. At all times before, and after justification,
Romans 5.6, 10, For when we were yet without strength, in due time Christ died
for the ungodly. -- For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by
the death of his Son, much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his
life. In making your peace, and maintaining it: before, and in, and after your
conversion, you will need a Mediator, till you be in over the threshold of
glory; till you have put off the body of sin, Joh. 6.44, No man can come to me
except the father which sent me, draw him. Song. 1.4, Draw me, we will run
after thee. Luke 22.32, But I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not. 2.
To all intents and purposes, as well relating to your Covenant-state, as to
your duties; not only for your persons, to make your peace; but also for your
performances, to procure their acceptance, Romans 3.24, Being justified freely by
his grace through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ, Rev. 8.3, And another
Angel came and stood at the altar, having a golden censor, and there was given
unto him much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all Saints
upon the golden altar which was before the throne. 3. In all things pertaining
to God, whatsoever you have to do, if it be a thing that relates to God, Heb.
2.17, That he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest in things pertaining
to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. If you have any
direction to receive from God, if you have any blessing to receive, you need a
Mediator to procure it to you, and to receive it for you: If you have any
service to offer to God, any duty to perform, you need a Mediator both to
afford you strength to perform it, and to offer it to God for you: if you have
any evil to deprecate, you need a Mediator to avert it, whether it be for sins
before, or after conversion. 1. In all cases, not only in thy deadness, and
indispositions for duties, but when thy heart is in best frame, thy tenderness
and good frame cannot mediate for thee, Dan. 9.3, 17, And I set my face unto
the Lord God to seek by prayers and supplications, with fasting, and
sackcloth, and ashes. -- Now therefore, O our God, hear the prayer of thy
servant, and his supplications, and cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary
that is desolate, for the Lords sake. Isa. 38.3, 14, And Hezekiah wept sore. --
Like a Crane or a Swallow so did I chatter, I did mourn as a Dove: mine eyes
fail with looking upward: O Lord, I am oppressed, undertake for me. Not only
when thou art at distance with God, and can not find access, but when thou
art nearest to him, and admitted to his presence, to speak before his throne,
then thou need a Mediator; not only for establishing thee in that good
condition, but for covering the evil of thy best condition, Isa. 64.6, But we
are all as an unclean thing, and our righteousnesses are as filthy rags. Chap.
6. v. 5, Then said I, Woe is me, for I am undone, because I am a man of unclean
lips; and I dwell in the midst of a people of unclean lips; for mine eyes have
seen the king, the Lord of Hosts.

Use 3. Study to carry as becomes those who need a Mediator: and for this end
take these directions: 1. Take care to beat down self-confidence, and self
adoration, even of every thing in you that is not Christ, his gifts, and
graces, and assistances not excepted; put not a created grace in Christ's room;
be not lifted up with these, nor led away from the Mediator by them, Phil. 3.^,
4, For we are the circumcision which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in
Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh: Though I might also have
confidence in the flesh: if any other man thinks that he has whereof he
might trust in the flesh, I more. 2. When duties go well, and a good frame of
spirit is enjoyed, watch that your hearts lay not the weight of your
acceptance upon these things, but that you keep them especially within sight
of Christ's Mediation, as the ground of your confidence, Phil. 3.7, But what
things were gain to me, those I counted loss for Christ. 3. Let your employing
of him be as large as the extent of his mediation reaches to, and that is to
all things pertaining to God, Heb. 2.17. Shut him not out of his office in any
thing that is a matter betwixt God and you: think not to put him to drudg at
your burdens, and to slight him in other things: he will not be so dealt with.
4. Let us beware of tempting Christ, of grieving the Mediator: if you carry
about with you the fresh conviction of your need of him, you will be very
tender and wary of tempting him, and sinning against him, 1 Cor. 10.9, Neither
let us tempt Christ as some of them also tempted, and were destroyed of
Serpents.

CHAP. IX. Of the Person who is Mediator, and of the great discoveries of God
which are made to us in and through Christ.
IN the next place I shall speak something of the Mediators Person, or of the
Person who is Mediator, and his fitness and qualification for this work. When
the person is known, his fitness for the Mediatorship will appear: for it is
namely in order to that end that we speak here of the Person who is Mediator,
that his complete qualifications for that Office, and the discoveries which are
made of God to us through him, may be known.

And, 1. Before we speak of the Mediators Office, let us consider the Person
who is Mediator of the new Covenant, Jesus Christ, Heb. 12.24. Chap. 8.6. 1 Timothy 2.5. Chap. 3.17. Jesus Christ Mediator carries three Names, which relate
to three great discoveries and manifestations of God that are made to us in
him. 1. As he manifests the will of God, he is called the word of God, Rev.
19.13. 2. As he manifests the nature and essence of God, he is called the
brightness of his glory, Heb. 1.3. 3. As he manifests the persons of the
Godhead, he is called the express Image of his Person. I do not say these names
relate only to these discoveries; but mainly,

1. The Person who is Mediator of the Covenant of grace, is he whose name is
called the word of God, Rev. 19.13. and that both in relation to Creation and
Redemption. 1. He is the word by whom all things were made, Ephesians. 3.9, Who has
creatred all things by Jesus Christ. Heb. 1.2, By whom also he made the worlds.
Psalm. 33.6, By the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and all the host of
them by the breath of his mouth. 2. He is the word in relation to the revealing
all the will of God; he is medium revelationis, as well as reconciliationis.
There is a new discovery of God after the f^ll; its a discovery of him in
Christ: and this is a mystery which the Angels dive into, with stupendous
endeavors, 1 Pet. 1.12, Which things the angels desire to look into. Christ is
the word of God that reveals this mystery, Mal. 11.27, Neither knows any man
the Father save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. Joh.
1.18, No man has seen God at any time: the only begotten Son which is in the
bosom of the Father; he has declared him. 3. He is the word of God in
relation to the fulfilling all the word of God, and accomplishing his will,
especially that which relates to himself: this Name is given him in the time
of the seventh Trumpet, Rev. 11.15, with 19.13; When all the promises and
threatenings are to be fulfilled, then he shall be acknowledged to be the word
of God. The ordering of all things according to the word of God, and the
accomplishment of all his will since the fall, is committed to the
administration of Christ Mediator, Joh. 5.22, 23, For the father judges no
man, but has committed all judgment to the Son, that all men should honor the
Son, even as they honor the Father. It was Christ that brought the flood upon
the world: it was he that went down to Sodom, and destroyed it, 2 Pet. 2.5, 6,
Jehovah did it, Genesis 7. and 21. The same name is given to Christ. It was Christ
the Angel of the Covenant that appeared in the Bush, and delivered his people
out of Egypt, Exodus 3.2, And the angel of the Lord appeared unto him in a flame
of fire out of the midst of a bush: and he looked, and behold, the bush burned
with fire, and the bush was not consumed: Act. 7.30. An Angel of the Lord in a
flame of fine in a bush. It was he that brought all these Judgments on them in
the Wilderness, 1 Cor. 10.9, Neither let us tempt Christ as some of them also
tempted, and were destroyed of Serpents. It was he that brought them to Canaan,
and out of Babylon, and built the Temple, and filled it after their return,
Isa. 63.9, By the angel of his presence he saved them. Zech. 6.12, Behold the
man whose name is the Branch, and he shall grow up out of his place, and he
shall build the temple of the Lord. Chap. 9. v. 11, As for thee also, by the
blood of thy Covenant, I have sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit wherein
is no water. Hag. 2.7, And I will shake all nations, and the desire of all
nations shall come, and I will fill this house with glory, says the Lord of
hosts. And this contributes to make Christ a fit Mediator, and to support the
faith of Gods people, that the making of all things, the revealing of the will
of God, and the fulfilling of it, even the whole government is upon his
shoulders: which may assure our hearts that the work which he undertaketh shall
be accomplished.

2. This is he who is called the brightness of his Fathers glory, Heb. 1.3. As
Christ is (...), so he manifests Gods will: here he is (...), so he manifests
the nature of God.

And here let us, 1. See what the glory is: I take it to be meant, not of the
essential glory which he had with the Father from all Eternity; but of the
manifestative Glory and Majesty of the Lord which shined forth in Christ: for
it is of Christ Mediator that the Apostle is here speaking; it is the
excellencies of God as they shine forth in the Mediator, which otherwise had
been invisible, and could not have been seen, discovered, nor looked upon, 2
Cor. 3.18, But we all with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the
Lord. Therefore the end of Christ's being constitute Mediator, is for this
manifestative glory whereof we read, Joh. 11.4, When Jesus heard (...), he
said, This sickness is hot unto death, ^^ut for the glory of God, that the Son
of God might be glorified thereby. Chap. 5. v. 22, 23, For the Father judges
no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son: That all men should honor
the Son, even as they honor the Father.

2. The brightness, or sent-forth Light here spoken of, is a similitude taken
from the Sun; wherein there is the body of the Sun, there is the light of the
Sun, and the shining splendour or beams of the Sun: Interpreters think this to
be an expression of the eternal generation of the Son, proceeding from the
Father, as light from the Sun. I take it rather to be the manifestation of the
Father in Christ the Mediator, who is otherwise invisible: as the Sun is
manifested by its own light, so that if you would light all the Torches in the
world, you cannot see the Sun by the light of these, without its own light: No
more can you see God but in Christ Jesus; who is the brightness of his Glory,
the light whereby his excellencies are manifested, Joh. 1.9, That was the true
light which-lighteth every man that comes into the world. Mat. 11.27, Neither
knows any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will
reveal him.

3. This is he who is called the express Image of his Fathers Person, Heb. 1.3.
(...), the imprinted form, this similitude relates to the persons of the
Godhead, as the former did to the Divine Essence and Nature. It is borrowed
from the signets impression, which represents all the lineaments of the Seal,
the Character is the perfect expressed Image. Mark, Christ is called the Image
of Gods Person, not of his Essence; for he is the same Essence, not the same
Person. There is in the Godhead essentia and subsistentia; the Essence is but
one, but the Subsistences or Persons are different, as is expressed in
Scripture, 1 John 5.7, For there are three that bear record in heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: I take not this to be meant of Christ, as
God principally: for so he is the same in Nature, Names and Atrributes; rather
than the Image of God: but I understand it of Christ as Mediator, in whom there
is a full and perfect resemblance of the Fathers Attributes and Excellencies.

And here for our knowledge of the person who is Mediator, I lay down two
conclusions from that comprehensive description of him: 1. That Jesus Christ
has in him a glorious resemblance, and a perfect Character of all the glorious
Excellencies and Attributes of the Father, Col. 2.9, For in him dwells all
the fullness of the Godhead bodily. 2 Cor. 3.18, But we all with open face
beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord. 2. That it is by Christ
Mediator, that all the glorious excellencies of God are revealed unto us, 2
Cor. 4.6, For God who commanded light to shine out of darkness, has shined in
our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face
of Jesus Christ.

Consider, 1. That Gods great end in all his goings forth toward the Creature,
in Predestination, Creation, Providence, etc. is his own glory, and the
manifestation of his excellency, Prove. 16.4, The Lord has made all things for
himself, yea, even the wicked for the day of evil. Romans 11.36, For of him, and
through him, and to him are all things, to whom be glory for evor. Rev. 4.
last, Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor, and power, for
thou have created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created.
But more especially this is his end in Redemption, Ephesians. 1.6, To the praise of
the glory of his grace, wherein he has made us accepted in the beloved. Joh.
17.4, I have glorified thee on the earth, I have finished the work which thou
gave me to do. 2. That which is Gods end, is our happiness; even to have God
manifested to us, to see him, and to have discoveries made to us of his
excellencies, Joh. 17.3, And this is life eternal, that they might know thee
the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. Mat. 5.8, Blessed are
the pure in heart, for they shall see God. 1 John 3.2, But we know when he
shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. To see him,
and be transformed by that sight, 2 Cor. 3.18, But we all with open face
beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image,
from glory to glory, even as by the spirit of the Lord. 3. The way of Gods
attaining his end, and our attaining our happiness (which are both one), the
way (I say) is also one: it is in Christ the Mediator that God is manifested,
and in him do we see God; the knowledge of his glory and our happiness are both
in the face of Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. All the excellencies of God are manifested
in Christ, he reveals the mysteries, 1. Of his will as he is the Word. 2. Of
his nature as he is the brightness of his Glory. 3. Of the subsistences and
distinction of the Persons, as he is the Image of his Person; he only knows the
Father, and he only can reveal the Father, Joh. 1.18. Col. 1.15, He is the
image of the invisible God, i.e. The excellencies of God (otherwise invisible)
are revealed by him, and to be seen in him.

These three things of God are discovered in Jesus Christ. 1. The Attributes of
God. 2. The distinct subsistences of the persons of the Godhead. 3. The
distinct offices of the three Persons.

1. There is a full manifestation of the Attributes of God in Jesus Christ the
Mediator of the new Covenant; these Attributes that were never manifested
before, Mercy and Long-suffering, are revealed in him; and these that were
manifested before, shine mort brightly through Christ. 1. The Wisdom of God:
there was great and infinite wisdom showed in creating the world, and ruling it
by his w^^^ providence; but what is that to the wisdom that is showed in
Christ? the wisdom that reconciled Justice and Mercy, the wisdom that punished
sin, and pardoned the sinner? how wonderful and unsearchable is that Wisdom,
that by the fall of man, raised him to a greater height of happiness than ever
he had before? Romans 11.33, 34, O the depth of the riches, both of the wisdom
and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past
finding out! For who has (...) the mind of the Lord? or who heth been his
c^u^se^^^r (...) Ephesians. 3.10, To the intent, that now unto the prinly, (...) in
heavenly places, might be made known (...), the manifold wisdom of God: this
is, (...), the manifold wisdom of God, which yet does not fully express the
Greek word, which signifies the manifold and various wisdom, or the wisdom of
God that is full of admirable varieties: so Beza, Erasmus, Zanchius, Stephanus.

2. The Goodness of God is manifested in Jesus Christ; his goodness and love to
man appeared much at first in making him of the rank of the highest creatures
on earth, and putting all the rest of the Creatures under his feet, Psalm. 8.5,
6, For thus has^ made him a little four than the Angels, and have crowned him
with glory and honor. Thou made him to have dominion over the works of thy
hands: thou have put all things under his feet. This was penned to magnitie the
nature of man: but in Christ our nature is more magnified, as we shall show by
and by, Heb. 1.6, And again, when he brings in the first begotten into the
world, he says, And let all the Angels of God worship him. This is a higher
pitch of the love of God, this is the goodness of God more manifested than ever
before, to give his Son Christ for man, and his Son to become sin, and a curse
for man, Joh. 3.16, For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but haeve everlasting
life. 2 Cor. 5. last, For he has made him to be sin for us that knew no sin,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Gal. 3.13, Christ has
redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us.

3. The Mercy of God is eminently manifested in Jesus Christ: man is made to
rise by his fall: Mercy never saw the light before; it was never revealed but
in Jesus Christ: for it respects the creature in its misery, Luke 1.72, 78, To
perform the mercy promised to our fathers, and to remember his holy Covenant.
-- Through the tender mercy of our God, whereby the dayspring from on high
has visited us. When all the posterity of Adam were as fuel for the fire,
mercy rescues and reserves some to be sons and heirs, Romans 9.23, And that he
might make known the riches of his glory on the vessels of mercy, which he had
before prepared unto glory.

4. The Power of God is manifested in Christ: God showed his power in the
Creation, as we read, Isa. 40.12, Who has measured the waters in the hollow of
his hand, and meted out heaven with the span, and comprehended the dust of the
earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains in scales, and the hills in a
balance, etc. Job 38, etc. But what is this to the taking of our nature, and
uniting it in a personal union with the Son of God? that God should become man;
the Ancient of Days become a Child: the Incomprehensible to become
comprehensible! Col. 2.9, For in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead
bodily. The invisible God to become visible, and to dwell here as in a
tabernacle with men, Joh. 1.14, And the word was made flesh, and dwelt among
us, and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father,
full of grace and truth.

5. The Sovereignty of God is manifested in and through Christ; great was the
Sovereignty of God that was exercised in predestination, in making of vessels
of honor or dishonor, according to the pleasure of his will, Romans 9.21, 22,
23, Has not the potter power over the clay of the same lump, to make one
vessel unto honor, and another unto dishonor? What if God, willing to show
his wrath, and to make his power known, endured with much long-suffering the
vessels of wrath fitted to destruction: And that he might make known the riches
of his glory on the vessels of mercy which he had before prepared unto glory?
But all this was Sovereignty over the creature: but that Jesus Christ the Son
of God should be appointed a Mediator of the new Covenant, made a Servant,
commanded to lay down his life, this is greater Sovereignty, Joh. 6.38, For I
came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent
me. Chap. 10. v. 18, This commandment have I received of my Father.

6. The Justice of God is manifested in Christ: Justice was seen in casting off
the Angels that fell without hope: and in executing the sentence and curse of
the first Covenant upon Adam, for his transgression thereof: but the world
never heard of such manifestation of Justice as appears in the satisfaction of
Christ to Justice; That Christ the Son of God is made sin for us, and being
made so in obedience to his Fathers command, Justice spares him not, but he
must be smitten to death, that satisfaction may be made for sin in our nature,
Romans 8.32, He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all.
Isa. 53.8, For the transgressions of my people was he stricken.

7. The Holiness of God is manifested in Christ: his Holiness did appear in
that holy Image which he put in Adam, and the holy Law which he gave to him
under a penalty: but this holiness of the Image of God stamped on the creature,
was possible to be lost, for both men and Angels were capable of sin, and did
fall: but herein is a greater manifestation of Gods holiness, that a Creature,
Christ-man, Christ Mediator, is made the Fountain of all Holiness, Holiness
cannot be lost in him; yea, it is derived from him, Joh. 1.14, 16, Full of
grace and truth, and of his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace.
Chap. 3. v. 34, For God gives not the spirit by measure unto him. This is
spoken of Christ man, of Christ Mediator; for one of the persons of the Godhead
cannot receive another. O what an impression of Holiness is this! what a
communication and manifestation of the Holiness of God! The fullness of the
Godhead dwells bodily in the man Christ, Col. 2.9. Where there is the highest
union, there is the greatest communion; there was never such another union as
that personal union, and therefore there could never be such a communication of
God.

8. The All Sufficiency of God appears more in Christ than ever before: the
declarative glory thereof shines in the restoring of lost man: for whosoever
can restore lost man, can raise him to a higher happiness than he fell from; he
is All-sufficient, and Almighty, and is thereby declared to be so, this did God
in Christ the Mediator: this is a declaration of Gods All Sufficiency, and of
Christ's, Genesis 17.1, I am God almighty. 2 Cor. 8.9, For ye know the grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor,
that ye through his poverty might be made rich. Chap. 12.9, And he said unto
me, My grace is sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect in
weakness: most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the
power of Christ may rest upon me.

9. The Patience and Long suffering of God was never heard of before, until it
was manifested in Christ. God executed his Justice against the fallen Angels,
without exercising any Patience and Long-suffering toward them, 2 Pet. 2.4,
For if God spared not the Angels which fell, but cast them down to hell. But in
Jesus Christ there is a discovery of the Patience of God, and his bearing with
sinners, Isa. 49.8, There is a Covenant to establish the earth, that Justice do
not ruin it. Jesus Christ obtained pardon and reprival for some sinners, that
they should be spared, Exodus 34.6, And the Lord passed by before him, and
proclaimed, The Lord, the Lord God, merciful, and gracious, long-suffering, and
abundant in goodness and truth. In him the Lord proclaims himself merciful, and
gracious, long-suffering, etc. 1 Timothy 1.16, Howbeit, for this cause I obtained
mercy, that in me first Jesus Christ might show forth all long-suffering, for a
pattern to them which should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting. Yea,
and by way of concomitancy, and for the Elects sake, reprobates reap some
benefit by the Patience of God thus manifested. He suffers the creatures to
mock him, and say, Where is the promise of his coming? 2 Pet. 3.4. Romans 9.22,
Endured with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction.

10. The Faithfulness of God is manifested in Christ: he was known to be true
and faithful, in fulfilling the threatening and certification of the
transgression of the first Covenant, Genesis 2.17, In the day thou eatest thereof,
thou shall surely die. And in keeping the Covenant with all the creatures, Genesis
8.22, While the earth remains, seed-time, and harvest-time, and cold, and
heat, and summer, and winter, and day and night shall not cease, Jer. 33.20,
Thus says the Lord, If ye can break my Covenant of the day, and my Covenant of
the night, and that there should not be day and night in their season, etc. But
this was but a small declaration of his faithfulness, being compared with the
manifestation of his Faithfulness in Christ, which shines so brightly in
keeping Covenant and Promises with him, and with his people upon his account,
notwithstanding all your unfaithfulness to him: hereby he is proclaimed to be
the Lord, abundant in truth. Exodus 34.6. 2 Cor. 1.20, For all the promises of
God in him are yea, and in him are Amen. Psalm. 89.34, 35, My Covenant will I
not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. Once have I sworn
by my holiness, that I will not lie unto David, Mic. 7.18, 20, Who is a God
like unto thee, that pardons iniquity. -- Thou will perform the truth to
Jacob, and the mercy to Abraham, which thou have sworn unto our fathers from
the days of old.

11. The Majesty of the Lord, something whereof is manifested in the Creation,
Psalm. 19.1, The heavens declare the glory of the Lord, and the firmament
shows forth his handiwork. But much more in restoring man; if there be a
Majesty in Angels, Heb. 1.7, And of his Angels he says, who makes his Angels
spirits, and his ministers a flame of fire. And in godly men, which is but a
little discovered here, etc. shall be more fully afterward, 2 Thessalonians. 1.10, When
he shall come to be glorified in his saints. O what excellent Majesty must
there be in Jesus Christ? Heb. 1.13, But to which of the Angels said he at any
time sit on my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool. And what
shall be revealed in him, when he shall come in glory? 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, When the
Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven, with his mighty angels. Col. 3.4,
When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in
glory. You see then all the Attributes of God are made more bright, and get a
new luster in Jesus Christ the Mediator: he is the brightness of his Fathers
glory, and the express Image of his Person.

2. The distinct Subsistences of the Persons of the Godhead and blessed
Trinity, are more brightly discovered in Jesus Christ, than ever before: God
was but darkly seen before in the distinct Subsistences of the persons of the
Trinity; but in the Gospel, through Jesus Christ, there is a glorious
manifestation thereof, 2 Cor. 4.6, For God, who commanded the light to shine
out of darkness, has shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge
of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.

1. The Eternal Son of God, the second Person, his taking on our nature, does
clearly show that there are distinct Subsistences or Persons in the Godhead:
There are two natures in one Subsistence or Person, which illustrates the three
Subsistencies in one nature, or three Persons in the Godhead.

2. By Jesus Christ, from his own mouth, and in his carrying as Mediator, there
were many bright discoveries of this great mystery, as we may read, Mat. 3.16,
17, And Jesus, when he was baptized, went up straightway out of the waters:
and lo, the heavens were opened unto him, and he saw the spirit of God
descending like'd dove, and lighting upon him, And lo, a voice from heaven,
saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Chap. 28. v. 28, Go
ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Joh. 14.16, 26, And I will pray the
Father, and he shall give you another comforter, that he may abide with you for
ever. -- But the comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send
in my Name, etc. And many like testimonies were from him, manifesting this
glorious mystery.

3. The distinct Offices of the three Persons, or their ordered administration
and working, and the various and distinct acts of the Trinity, in the work of
redemption, are brightly discovered in and by Jesus Christ the Mediator, 2 Timothy
1.9, 10, Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according
to our works, but according to his own purpose and grace which was given us in
Christ Jesus, before the world began; but is now made manifest by the appearing
of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has abolished death, and has brought life
and immortality to light through the Gospel. But because these may be gathered
from what has been spoken of the Covenant of Suretiship or Redemption, I shall
only touch upon them in this place. And, 1. The Acts of the Father plotting and
making the Covenant with Christ Mediator. 1. He had a purpose to raise man
through a Mediator, Ephesians. 1.5, Having predestined us unto the adoption of
children, by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his
will. 2. He chose the Son for the doing this work, and us in him, Ephesians. 1.4,
According as he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world. Psalm.
89.19, I have laid help upon one that is mighty. 3. He makes a Covenant with
the Son, Psalm. 89.3, I have made a Covenant with my chosen: and promises were
given to Christ; and grace given to us in him, before the world began, Tit.
1.2. 2 Timothy 19. 4. God the Father appoints who shall be saved, and gives them
to the Son, that all that were written in Gods book may also be written in the
lambs book of life, Joh. 17.9. Them that thou have given me, for they are
thine, Rev. 20.12, 15. Chap. 21. v. 27. 5. He appoints what measure of grace
and glory every one of them shall have, Ephesians. 4.7, But unto every one of us is
given grace, according to the measure of the gift of Christ. Mat. 20.23, But to
fit on my right hand and on my left, is not mine to give, but it shall be given
to them for whom it is prepared of my Father. 6. He commits all Government to
the Son for the Elects sake, that he may do according to this appointment, Isa.
9.6, And the government shall be upon his shoulder. Joh. 5.22, For the Father
judges no man, but has committed all Judgment to the Son.

2. The Acts of Jesus Christ undertaking: 1. He consents to the Covenant, Psalm.
40.7, Then said I, Lo, I come, in the volume of the book it is written of me.
2. He engages himself to take the Creature into union with his Person, Heb.
10.5, Wherefore when he comes into the world, he says, Sacrifice and offering
thou would not, but a body have thou prepared me. And to lay down his life
according to his Fathers command, Joh. 10.18, This commandment have I received
of my Father. 3. He undertakes to receive, and keep, and raise up at the last
day, all those given him by the Father, Joh. 6.37, All that the Father gives
me, shall come to me; and him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out.
Chap. 17. throughout. 4. He undertakes the Government of the world, and to Judge
it at the last day, Psalm. 2.8, Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for
thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.
Mat. 11.27, All things are delivered unto me of my Father. Joh. 3.35, The
Father loves the Son, and has given all things into his hand.

3. The Acts of the Spirit: 1. He undertakes to unite the humane nature to
Christ, by a miraculous conception, Luke 1.35, The holy Ghost shall come upon
thee, and the power of the highest shall overshadow thee, 2. To join us with
God in one spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17, But he that is joined to the Lord, is one
spirit. 3. To be a Spirit of Unction, first to Christ, and then to us through
him, Joh. 3, 34, For God gives not the spirit by measure unto him. Isa. 61.1,
The spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach good
tidings unto the meek. 4. To act all our graces, to blow upon them, and to help
our infirmities, Song. 4. last, Awake, O north wind, and come thou south, blow
upon my garden, that the spices thereof may flow out. Romans 8.26, Likewise the
spirit also helps our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as
we ought, but the spirit it self makes intercession for us, with groanings
that cannot be uttered. 5. To shed abroad the love of God in our hearts, Romans
5.5, Because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost
which is given unto us. 6. To set a Seal upon our hearts, and to bear witness
of all the work of God in us, Ephesians. 1.13, In whom also after that ye believed,
ye were sealed with that holy spirit of promise. Romans 8.16, The spirit it self
bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God.

Now all these things are discovered, and manifested to us in Jesus Christ the
Mediator of the new Covenant.

CHAP. X. Of Christ's Calling to the Office of Mediatorship.
THis being the Person who is Mediator of the new Covenant: We come in the next
place to speak of the Office. And, 1. Of Christ's Calling to it. 2. Of his
qualification for it. 3. Of his carriage in it. And first we shall enquire
after Christ's Calling to the office of Mediatorship, which we shall shortly
dispatch by answering of these three Questions.

Q. 1. How came Christ to undertake this work? A. He was called to it: he did
not intrude himself in the Mediators Office, but was sent and employed in the
work: these things clear his calling to the work. 1. Several of his Names
import it, Mal. 3.1, He is called the Angel or Messenger of the Covenant.
Because of his mission, and Gods sending of him to do this work, etc. Isa.
42.1. My servant, and mine elect. Because of his being called, and employed by
his Father: he was called a Servant or chosen Officer, formed for a special
employment, Isa. 49.5, Thus says the Lord that formed me from the womb to be
his servant, to bring Jacob again to him. Phil. 2.7, And took upon him the form
of a servant. 2. He is about the work of Mediation by Office, and not by
meddling without his station; which also shows his calling to the Work,
inasmuch as he was about it by Office, as his duty, in his Calling, Heb. 3.1,
Consider the Apostle and High Priest of our profession Christ Jesus. Chap.
5.10, Called of God an High Priest, after the order of Melchisidec. And this is
pointed at by all these Scriptures which make mention of the things that Christ
did as Mediator; he did them ex officio, by virtue of some tie and obligation
to do them, as duties of his Office: hence we find the Holy Ghost using the
words, must, necessity, became him, behoved, etc. Heb. 2.10, 17, For it became
him, for whom are all things. Wherefore in all all things it behoved him to be
made like unto his brethren. Chap. 8. v. 3, Wherefore it is of necessity that
this man have somewhat also to offer. Joh. 4.4, And he must needs go through
Samaria. 3. He is in Office not by intrusion, but by anointing, which imports
lawful calling and mission, Psalm. 2.2, The Lord and his anointed. Joh. 1.41,
We have found the Messiah, which is, being interpreted, the Christ. So the
Apostle to the Hebrews shows of all his three Offices. 4. The Scriptures
plainly holds it forth, and the more strongly, that it is held forth both
Negatively and Affirmatively, denying any intrusion on Christ's part, and
affirming a calling from God to him, Heb. 5.4, 5, And no man takes this honor
unto himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron. So also Christ
glorified not himself, to be made an High Priest: but he that said to him, Thou
art my Son, to day have I begotten thee. Gal. 4.4, But when the fullness of the
time was come, God sent forth his Son, etc. Joh. 6.38, 39, 40, 44, Christ does
frequently make mention of the will of him that sent him.

Q. 2. By whom was Christ called unto the Office of Mediatorship? A. By God his
Father, not excluding the other two persons of the Trinity, though for orders
sake it be attributed to the Father, the fountain of divine operations, Col.
1.19, For it pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell. Joh.
6.27, For him has God the Father sealed, i.e. set apart, designed, and fitted
for this Office: that he was called unto this Office by God, the Scripture
speaks plainly, Psalm. 89.19, I have laid help upon one that is mighty, I have
exalted one chosen o^^ of the people. Heb. 5.5, 6, 10, So also Christ glorified
not himself to be made an High Priest, but he that said unto him, Thou art my
Son, to day have I begotten thee. As he says also in another place, Thou art a
Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedec -- called of God an High priest
after the order of Melchisedec. And 3.2, Who was faithful to him that appointed
him. And that he could be called by no other, may appear, 1. From the Antiquity
of his calling to this Office, which was before all created beings, Prove. 8.23,
I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was. He
was elected to this in order, before we were elected to salvation, Psalm. 89.3,
I have made a covenant with my chosen. Ephesians. 1.4, According as he has chosen us
in him, before the foundation of the world. 2. From the end of the Office of a
Mediator, which was Reconciliation: now who could find out a fit person, and
call him to undertake this work, but he that had found out the way and means of
Reconciliation; which was God only, for man did neither seek nor plot a peace
with God, Col. 1.20, It pleased the Father by him to reconcile all things to
himself. Psalm. 89.19, I have laid help upon one that is mighty. 3. From the
nature of the Office of Mediatorship, which is an Office of Inferiority, a
service, Mat. 20.28, Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but
to minister, and to give his life a ransom for many, Isa. 42.2. Chap. 53. v.
11. Now who could design Christ, call or ordain, and command him unto an Office
of Inferiority, (although by voluntary dispensation), but God only? Joh. 10.18,
For this commandment have I received of my Father. 4. From the Impossibility
under which the creature stood to find any days-man, except God had found one,
and called him to it; amongst all the Creatures there was none that durst
undertake this cause, or could design another to undertake it, viz. To
interpose betwixt the Creator and the Creature, Job 9.33, Neither is there any
days-man betwixt us, that might lay his hand upon us. 1 Samuel 2.25, If one man
sin against another, the judge shall judge him: but if a man sin against the
Lord, who shall entreat for him?

Q. 3. When was Christ called to be Mediator of the new Covenant? A. For the
clearing of this: Consider, that Christ's calling to the Office of Mediatorship
may import three things, his Designation, his Furniture, his Investiture in the
Office; Now according as the question relates to these parts of his Calling,
so it requires different Answers.

1. Christ's Calling, or Designation to the Office of Mediator of the Covenant,
is eternal; he was chosen and destinated hereunto before-time, even from all
eternity, Prove. 8.23, Wisdom was set up by the Father from everlasting,
designed and appointed unto this high and honorable Office and employment, to
be Mediator of the new Covenant; yea, it must be so, 1. Since Gods Covenant
with Christ is eternal, and his choosing and designation of Christ to be
Mediator, is in order of nature, before his Covenant with Christ: for it
presupposes him to be Mediator, Psalm. 89.3, I have made a Covenant with my
chosen. 2. Because our election presupposes Christ first chosen before us as
the head of the Elect, Ephesians. 1.4. Therefore we are said to be chosen in Christ,
i. e. as members of the head, or through him as Mediator, although Christ be
not the cause of Election, or of Gods Love.

2. Christ's calling to be Mediator, in respect of his Furniture for executing
that Office whereunto he was designed before time; and in respect of his being
invested in the Office, it is in time, to wit, when he was anointed, which was
at two times especially:

1. When he took our nature upon him.

2. When he was to appear in the public execution of his Offices; whereof more
particularly when I come to speak of his Unction.

Use. If Christ be called unto this Office of Mediatorship by God his Father
from all eternity; Then 1. wonder at the eternal love of God, and let your
hearts be raised up to adore the unsearchable riches of grace and wisdom
manifested in Gods early calling Christ to an Office and Service for our sake,
and Christ's voluntary submission to it. He knew well enough it would be too
late to wait for our call: He knew that we might dye in our sin, before we sent
for the Physician: he did well foresee our slowness and backwardness to give
him employment for making our peace; and therefore he prevented us, John 8.27.
Heb. 10.9.

2. This may establish our hearts in the faith of the weight and prevalency of
Christ's Mediation; he being no Usurper, but a called chosen person, set in
lawful Authority, all whose travels receive weight from his Place and Calling:
for because he was sent, and had a commandment to travel in the work of his
peoples Redemption, therefore the work that was set him to do, must prosper,
and his travels with both the parties must prevail, Joh. 10.36, Say ye of him
whom the Father has sanctified and sent unto the world, Thou blasphemest,
because I said I am the Son of God? Isa. 53.10, 11, By his knowledge shall my
righteous Servant justify many, for he shall bear their iniquities. He shall
see of the travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied.

3. This should bear upon us a necessity of receiving the Mediator in his
travels about Reconciliation. He is in his Office, and called to travel with
you about this work; take heed how you entertain and answer his propositions of
peace, now he is making proposals of peace to you by virtue of this Office
which he bears; 2 Cor. 6.2, Behold, now is the accepted time: behold, now is
the day of salvation. Chapter 5. v. 20, Now then we are ambassadors for Christ, as
though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled
to God. Heb. 2.1, 3, Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the
things that we have heard, lest at any time we should let them slip -- How
shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation? Your slighting of the Gospel,
beside the neglect of so great salvation brought to you in the offer, has also
in it great slighting of a chosen Officer, and of a Person called and put in
high authority by God, to travel with you in the business of your peace, Heb.
12.25, See that ye refuse not him that speaks; for if they escaped not who
refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away
from him that speaks from heaven.

4. This speaks comfort to believers, Christ is Mediator betwixt God and you,
by an eternal call from God his Father; he needs not much entreaty to be about
the Office whereunto he is called of God (although it be no less your duty to
entreat his favor as the Disciples did, than if he had no other calling to it,
but your invitation), Luke 24.29, But they constrained him, saying, Abide with
us, for it is toward evening, and the day is far spent: and he went in to
tarry with them. If you should at any time apprehend that he would refuse your
entreaties (which you have no ground to think), yet he will not, he cannot
shake off his Father's calling to mediate for you; he deals betwixt God and
you by virtue of an Office, which having taken upon him by voluntary
submission, the duties of that Office lie upon him through a blessed necessity,
as is written of the High Priest who was a type of him, That by reason hereof,
to wit, of his Office, he ought to offer for sins, Heb. 5.3. And 8.3, For every
High Priest is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices: wherefore it is of
necessity that this man have somewhat also to offer. Comfort your selves,
believers in Christ, that besides all the supports of your faith, which you may
have from his union of nature with you, and his unction; from his propriety in
you, and consanguinity with you; from his gracious qualifications for that
work; you have this moreover, That he is your Mediator by Calling, by Office,
and can no more decline any thing that may be for your good, than he can be
unanswerable to his Fathers Calling, or unfaithful in his Office, and in the
performing the duties thereof, which is impossible.

CHAP. XI. Of Christ's taking onr nature upon him, which is his grand
qualification for the Office of Mediatorship.
Christ's qualification and fitness for this Office of Mediatorship, may be
considered, 1. In his taking our nature upon him, wherein consists the grand
qualification, and fundamental fitness of Christ for being Mediator of the New
Covenant. And 2. In other qualifications which result from the union of the two
natures in him. Or we may consider Christ's qualifications for this Office in
the union of these two natures in him. 2. In his unction.

And 1. of Christ's coming in the flesh, and taking our nature upon him, which I
call the chief and grand qualification of him for Mediatorship. This is a
fundamental truth, and yet a great mystery. We think we know this so well, that
it is below us to study it, to preach it, and to hear of it; but you are not at
the bottom of your unbelief and ignorance, if you know not that this mystery is
little known and believed, God manifested in the flesh, seen of Angels, with
study and delight, 1 Timothy 1.16, with 1 Pet. 1.10, 11, 12. We shall consider, 1.
The reality of his human nature, and the assuming of it. 2. The transcendent
love and condescension showed by the Son of God in the taking our nature upon
him. 3. The honor and exaltation of our nature; yea, and of us, by Jesus
Christ his taking it into a personal union with the Divine nature. 4. How or in
what respects the taking of our nature upon him did qualify him to be Mediator
of the New Covenant. 5. Something for the clearing of some questions relating
to this Mystery.

And 1. He took our nature really upon him: Jesus Christ became truly man, as
kindly a man as ever lived, verus sed non merus homo, true man, but not mere
man. That word Romans 8.3, similitude of flesh, is put for sameness, as Augustine
observes, Non quia caro non erat caro, sed quia peccati caro non erat. Christ's
manhood was a true nature, yet no sinful nature, but had only the similitude or
likeness of sinful flesh, because he bare all our infirmities in which we lay
through sin: And it may appear thus: 1. Jesus Christ has taken man's nature
upon him, Heb. 2.16, For verily he took not on him the nature of angels, but he
took upon him the seed of Abraham: (...), he catched at it, took hold of it; it
properly signifies to catch one who is running away, or falling in a pit; to
fetch back or recover again: the same word that is used of Christ's catching
hold of Peter when he was like to sink, Mat. 14.31, it is answerable to the
word used Genesis 19.16, of the Angels laying hold on Lot's hand. So did Christ in
taking our nature upon him. 2. He took all the parts of a man, body and soul,
Mat. 26.38, Then says he unto them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful unto death.
Heb. 10.5, A body have thou prepared me. Luke 24.39, Behold my hands and my
feet (that it is I my self); handle me and see; for a spirit has not flesh and
bones as ye see me have. 3. He has all the names of a man, Adam, Enosh, Ish,
Geber, whereof see Zech. 6.12, and 13.7. Dan. 7.13. 4. He took upon him all the
affections of a man, fear, and sorrow, and love, and anger, etc. Mat. 26.38, My
soul is exceeding sorrowful unto death. Heb. 5.7, And was heard in that he
feared. Joh. 11.33, 35, 36, He groaned in the spirit and was troubled. -- Jesus
wept. Then said the Jews, Behold, how he loved him. Mat. 10.14, And when Jesus
saw it, he was much displeased, Mat. 21.12. 5. He took upon him all the sinless
infirmities of a man, to hunger, thirst, be weary, ^afflicted, tempted, die,
etc. Heb. 2.18, For in that he himself has suffered, being tempted. Chap. 4.
v. 15, For we have not an High Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling
of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without
sin. Chap. 5. v. 2, For that he himself also is compassed with infirmity. Mat.
8.17, Himself took our iniquities, and bare our sicknesses. Chap. 4. v. 2, And
when he had fasted forty days, and forty nights, he was afterward an hungered.

2. Consider, in Christ's taking our nature upon him, his condescending love:
union betwixt God and man was the great design intended through the Mediator;
this is brought about by his condescension, and our exaltation: where love is,
it will stoop, and the greater condescension, the greater love.

These things hold forth infinite condescending in Christ's taking our nature
upon him. 1. Consider who condescends thus: The higher that the person be who
condescends, the more love is in his condescension: if it be a great
condescending for God to look down upon things here below, Psalm. 113.46, The
Lord is high above all nations, and his glory above the heavens; who humbles
himself to behold the things in the heaven, and in the earth: What then must it
be for the Son of God to take upon him the form of a Creature! Phil. 2.6, 7,
Who being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God. But
made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was
made in the likeness of man. That he that made the world should be made of a
woman! That the immortal God should become mortal flesh! it were a great
condescension, that the soul of a man should enter into a worm, or that all the
Angels should become worms; yet that were nothing to Christ's stooping to take
our nature upon him. 2. Consider what he took upon him, not our person, but our
nature, Heb. 2.15, 16, The seed of Abraham, our flesh and blood, that is our
nature: many can be content to take upon them the persons of men, to represent
them, who yet would not be willing to take their nature; but Christ took our
nature. 3. The end wherefore he took our nature upon him, shows yet more of
his condescending. 1. It was that he might suffer, and that he might die for us
in that nature, Phil. 2.8, And being found in fashion as a man, he humbled
himself, and became obedient unto the death, even the death of the cross. Non
ad gloriam sed ad ignominiam, to be abased in our nature. 2. It was for our
good, not for any thing that it could profit him, Gal. 4.5. To redeem them that
were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons. 4. He took our
nature upon him, not for a day, or a short time, but to continue so: It may be
a Prince at a Masque for a little time might be moved to take the form of a
servant upon him; but to continue so, he would not be moved: but here is
infinite condescension, Christ takes our nature upon him, and keeps it still,
he will come again in our nature to judge the world, Act. 1.11, This same Jesus
which is taken up from you into heaven, shall come in like manner as ye have
seen him go into heaven. Chap. 17. v. 31, Because he has appointed a day in
the which he will judge the world in righteousness, by that man whom he has
ordained. Though he does nothing now in Heaven, but acts of Majesty, being a
Priest set upon the right hand of the throne of Majesty, Heb. 8.1. Yet he will
do those acts in our nature; yea, when he shall deliver up the kingdom, See
Chap. 6. the Kingdom which he has received as Mediator, he will not lay down
our nature, 1 Cor. 15.24. 5. Consider the time when he took our nature upon
him; not when our nature was a virgin, but when it was defiled; not man's nature
in innocence, but in his sinful, corrupted, condemned, accursed estate, Romans
8.3, In the likeness of sinful flesh. Chap. 5. v. 10, When we were enemies, and
when all the Creatures did hate us; when we were not worth the following, then
he did thus condescend to love us, and follow us. 6. Consider the manner of his
taking our nature upon him. 1. He does not personate our nature, but is made
flesh, Joh. 1.14. 2. He does it voluntarily and cheerfully, and with earnest
desire, when we were not following him, but fleeing away from him, he himself
rose out of his place and followed after us, and caught our nature, as the
words signifies, Heb. 2.7, And took upon him the form of a servant. Psalm. 40.7,
Then said he, Lo, I come. 3. He takes our nature upon him, with all the
infirmities of it, Heb. 2.17, Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made
like unto his brethren. Chap. 4. v. 15, For we have not an High Priest which
cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points
tempted, like as we are, yet without sin. He would condescend so far, that in
all things he would be like us (sin only excepted); and even in that, though he
took not the corruption of sin, yet he took upon him the guilt of our sin, (2
Cor. 5. last, For he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin. He was
legally the sinner, though not intrinsecally), and the punishment thereof, Gal.
3.13, Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law being made a curse for
us. He was content to be numbered with the transgressors, Isa. 53.12. He was
content to be punished for our sins, even by God his Father. And, which is yet
wonderful, that he might come as near to us as possible, he was content to
condescend to be tempted to the thing wherewith it was impossible that he could
be tainted, Mat. 4.2. To be tempted of the Devil to sin, and yet the Prince of
the world had naught in him, Joh. 14.20. 7. Consider the comparison instituted
by the Holy Ghost, which does yet further and more significantly express this
condescending-love, Heb. 2.16. It was a favor which he denied to the Angels,
(...) not at all, or not in any wise; he neither looked after nor sent, nor
went after the Angels; he neither followed them nor took hold of their nature,
nor suffered them to take hold of him; though these glorious spirits were
incomparably far above us, that Christ would manifest himself, not in the most
glorious Creatures, but in our flesh, was strange condescension!

3. In Christ's taking our nature, we are to consider the honor and exaltation
of our nature, and of us in that union. And, 1. That it may appear what honor
is conferred upon our nature by Christ assuming it into the personal union with
the Godhead,

Consider, 1. The nearer that any Creature is to God, the greater honor is put
upon it. It is the honor of people that are under ordinances, that they have
God near to them, Deuteronomy. 4.7, For what nation is there so great, who has God so
nigh unto them, as the Lord our God is in all things, that we call upon him
for? It is a more especial honor of those that have offices in the house of
God, Heb. 5.4, And no man takes this honor unto himself. Now there is a
threefold union; 1. Moral, so were men and Angels united before the fall. 2.
Mystical, so are Believers united amongst themselves, and with Christ. 3.
Hypostatical, so is our nature united with the divine nature in the Person of
Christ; there is a personal union of our nature with God; this is the nearest
union, and therefore the highest honor and exaltation, Heb. 1.4, Being made so
much better than the Angels, as he has by inheritance obtained a more
excellent name then they.

2. Consider the Sonship that Christ has as Mediator, whereby our nature is
also highly exalted; the Son of God and our nature have but one Sonship; for
siliatio est personae, Heb. 1.5, For unto which of the Angels, said he at any
time, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. And again, I will be to
him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son.

3. Consider the glorious communion that our nature has by this union with the
Son of God, it is a high and great communion, that Angels and the spirits of
just men are made perfect, have with God; but the communion that our nature
has with Christ, is far higher, Joh. 3.13, And no man has ascended up to
heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the Son of man which is in
heaven. Even the man Christ is Gods fellow, Zech. 13.7, This is high communion
indeed, whereby all the will of God is known to him, and so to our nature, Col.
1.19, For it pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell.

4. What honor is it, that our nature should be the Treasury and Storehouse
of all the good which God intends to dispense to men and Angels? Col. 2.9, For
in him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. Divines call the humane
nature Canalis gratiae, Ephesians. 1.22, And has put all things under his feet, and
gave him to be the head over all things to the Church.

5. What honor is it that all the Creatures should worship God in our nature?
Heb. 1.6, And again, when he brings in the first begotten into the world, he
says, And let all the Angels of God worship him. Phil. 2.9, 10, 11, Wherefore
God also has highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every
name; that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and
things in earth, and things under the earth. And that every tongue should
confess that Jesus Christ is Lord. Willingly or unwillingly, by consent or by
constraint, all shall bow to the Lord Mediator, to God in our nature, even to
the Son of man.

6. What honor is it to our nature, that God in the humane nature should
dispose of the eternal estates of men and Angels? for God shall even judge the
world by the man Christ, Act. 17.31. Joh. 5.27, And has given him authority to
execute judgment also, because he is the Son of man.

Yea, by Christ's taking our nature upon him, not only our nature, but we our
selves are honored. 1. We have a nearer union with Christ than man in his
innocence had with God; a nearer union than the Angels have; for believers make
up one body with Christ: he is the head, and they are the members, Col. 1.18,
And he is the head of the body the Church. Ephesians. 1.22, 23, And gave him to be
the head over all things to the Church, which is his body. Heb. 2.11, For both
he that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are all one, for which cause
he is not ashamed to call them brethren. 2. We are not beholden to one of
another nature, not to the Angels, nor any other Creature; you are independent
of them all; you have Salvation by one of your own nature, Heb. 2.16, 17, For
verily he took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of
Abraham. Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his
brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest in things
pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people.

4. Let us consider how Christ's taking our nature upon him, or taking it into
the union of his Person, is the great qualification of him for the Office of
Mediatorship. Our Mediator behoved to be God manifested in the flesh: to make
way for clearing this, I shall premise, 1. That the Angels Covenant (if any
Covenant was made with the Angels, as some think) it was not made with the
whole Angelical nature, it was personal, some of them fell, and some of them
stood, and all fell not in them that fell. Man's first Covenant was with his
Nature, and in Adam all fell. 2. When Man and Angels fell, God intended to
raise the one, and not to raise, but to destroy the other. 3. God will not
restore man without a fit satisfaction to his Justice. 4. There is an eternal
impotency in man to give to God a fitting satisfaction; the command of the Law
man cannot obey; the curse of the Law he cannot bear to his own advantage, so
as to make way thereby to his own restitution. Here is obedience required that
cannot be performed by man; and a guiltiness contracted that cannot be taken
away by man: Therefore a Mediator must be had, and he must be God and man in
one person.

1. He must be God: for man could not make satisfaction to God for sin: It was
the union of the Divine nature with the human, that made all Christ's sufferings
meritorious, that made his shoulder fit for the burden and weight of the work
of satisfying Divine Justice, Psalm. 89 19, I have laid help upon one that is
mighty. I say therefore, that it was absolutely necessary our Mediator must be
God, 1. Because these evils which he was to expiate, could never be taken away
by any person that was not God; sin done against an Infinite Majesty, must have
an equal satisfaction. 2. Because the things with which he was to wrestle, and
the Enemies which he was to subdue, could not be wrestled with, nor subdued by
any person who was not God. Could a mere man wrestle with the infinite wrath of
God? subdue Satan and Death? No, the only human nature of Christ, which in it
self is finite and mortal, could not bear up with that, except the person had
been God. 3. Because the good things which he was to purchase, could never have
been purchased by any person who was not God, a happiness far above Adam's,
eternal righteousness, the image of God, and communion with him in glory: only
the infinite worth of Christ the Son of God, could compass that.

2. He must not be God only: for a Mediator is not a Mediator of one, but he
must be God manifested in the flesh. He must be man, 1. Because his name is to
be put in our Bond: he is to stand in our stead, and to put his Soul in our
souls room; therefore he must be something else than God: for God will have
satisfaction to Justice, of man; the soul that sins shall die. 2. Our
Mediator must be a Mediator of satisfaction: A Mediator of intercession may
exalt grace and mercy by entreaties, but cannot satisfy Justice: this will not
do the turn; the Debt must be paid, the principal Debt; to obey the command,
he must be subject to the Law, and the forfeiture must be satisfied, he must
bear the curse and die; for without blood there is no remission: he must then
be a man, and must have a body and soul: the nature of Angels will not suffice,
Heb. 10.5, 9, A body have thou prepared me. Then said he, Lo, I come to do thy
will, O God. 3. He must be one with us; else what he does cannot be imputed to
us; as there must be an imputation of our sin to him, so of his righteousness
to us: now imputation imports an union; for union is the ground of imputation;
and it must be an union in nature and Covenant; the Angels sin was not imputed
to man, but Adams was, with whom we were one in nature and Covenant. 4. Our
Mediator must receive the Spirit, without which we cannot be sanctified, Joh.
17.19, And for their sakes I sanctify my self, that they also might be
sanctified through the truth. Chap. 3. v. 35, The Father loves the Son, and
has given all things into his hand. Now the Father cannot receive the graces
of the Spirit, neither the Son as God: for unto that which is infinite, nothing
can be added; therefore our Mediator must have man's nature, which is capable of
receiving that which our Mediator must have. 5. Our Mediator must convey to us
the Adoption of sons, and therefore must receive it himself, and so become a
man, that he may receive it, Gal. 4.4, 5, 6, But when the fullness of the time
was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under the Law, to redeem
them that were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons. And
because ye are sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his Son into your
hearts, crying, Abba Father. Christ is the natural Son of God, Luke 1.35, That
holy thing which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God. He is
also as man, a Son, as is evident from the original Greek, where the article is
not prefixed, (...), Mat. 4.3, And when the tempter came to him, he said, If
thou be the Son of God ( Gr. if thou be a Son of God). Because Christ owns us
as brethren, therefore God is not ashamed to own us as Sons, Heb. 2.11, For
both he that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are all of one, for
which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren. He must be of our kindred;
for if Christ had not been our born brother, we could not have been Gods
Children. 6. Our Mediator must be such a Person from whom we may receive the
inheritance; he must therefore be man; for it is from Christ-man, as he is an
heir appointed, Heb. 1.2, that we receive the inheritance; for the natural
inheritance of Christ cannot be communicated, Gal. 4.5, 7, To redeem them that
were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of Sons. Wherefore thou
art no more a servant, but a son; and if a son, then an heir of God through
Christ. Romans 8.17, And if children, then heirs: heirs of God, and joint-heirs
with Christ. Heb. 9.15, And for this cause he is the Mediator of the new
Testament, that by means of death, for the redemption of the transgressions
that were under the first Covenant, they which are called might receive the
promise of eternal inheritance.

3. Our Mediator must be God and man in one Person, Immanuel, Isa. 7.14. (...),
both God and man, (sometimes denominated from one nature, sometimes from
another). 1. That the great design and end of the Mediators Office, might first
be accomplished and made manifest in the Mediators own person: union betwixt
God and man, was the design of a Mediator, and this was done, 1. In Christ's
Person: for in him the houses of Heaven and Earth are allied. 2. That he might
be a person duly qualified for his Office; he must be a Person equally distant
from, and equally drawing near unto both the parties; this could not be a
Person who was either God alone, or man alone, but God-man is a Person at some
distance, and in some nearness with both the parties, having interest in both,
and participating of the natures of both: he is a fit days-man to lay his hands
on both, Job 9.33. 3. That he might have access to both parts of his work as
Mediator: he had two great transactions to go about, 1. He was to deal with God
for man. 2. He was to deal for God with man: unto these he could not have
access without partaking of both the natures. 1. That he may deal effectually
with God for man, he must be God: for who can have access to deal with God, but
a Person who is God, to deal with an angry God? 1 Samuel 1.25. 2. That he may
deal with man from God, and for God, he must be man; for man cannot endure the
voice and presence of God immediately; man unreconciled, man without a Mediator
cannot speak with God, Exodus 20.19, And they said unto Moses, Speak thou with
us, and we will hear: but let not God speak with us, lest we die. Heb. 12.20,
21, For they could not endure that which was commanded. And so terrible was the
sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear and quake. But of this more, when I
shall come to speak of the Requisites of a Mediator.

CHAP. XII. Several Questions resolved, concerning Christ's taking our nature
upon him.
WE come to clear some doubts and Questions about this mystery of Christ's
taking our nature upon him.

Quest. 1. (If we may soberly make it a Question without curiosity, See Rog.
pract. catech. p. 2. p. 26. Bal. treatise of the Covenant, page 266.
and enquire a little after so much of the Reasons of it, as God has been
pleased to reveal). Why did not God the Father, or the Holy Ghost, take on man's
nature to be our Mediator, but the Son, The second Person?

Answ. It might suffice for an answer, That so it pleased God in the deep and
unsearchable counsel of the Will of all the three Persons, to order it, Psalm.
80.19, 20, Then thou spakest in vision to thy holy One, and said, I have laid
help upon one that is mighty. I have exalted one chosen out of the people. I
have found David my servant, with my holy oil I have anointed him. And although
I know not another satisfying-reason that can be given, or that should be
curiously enquired after: yet I shall soberly propose a few considerations,
which may help us to adore the unsearchable depth of the counsel of Gods Will,
in this part of the mystery of Christ.

1. Consider, That the world was made by the word Christ, Heb. 1.2. Joh. 1.3,
All things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made that was
not made. And who was so fit to restore all things, and to amend the world; to
create the new World, as he that created all things? he by whom the world was
made, Act. 3.21? The Redemption that came by Christ, and is to be perfected at
the day of his coming again, is called by the Apostle the restitution of all
things. 2. Jesus Christ the Son of God, the second Person of the Trinity, is
appointed Mediator, and takes our nature upon him, that the order of the three
persons of the Godhead, and their working, might in this be manifested unto us:
The Father is the first Person and Fountain of divine operation, he works by
the Son, and the Father and the Son work by the Holy Ghost. Our Mediator must
be a person who must give satisfaction to the Father for us, and who must be
able to send the Spirit for our sanctification, and therefore must be the Son
and second Person. 3. Consider the things which we lost in Adam: we lost the
Image of God, our Sonship and Inheritance: and who so fit to restore the Image
of God, as he who is the Image of the invisible God, the express image of his
person? Col. 1.15. Heb. 1.3. Who so fit to restore us to a Sonship, as the only
begotten Son? Joh. 1.18. Mat. 3. last. Who so fit to restore man to the
inheritance, as the heir of all things, and firstborn of every creature? Heb.
1.2. Col. 1.15. 4. Consider the Offices which our Mediator behoved to carry: he
must be a King, a Priest, and a Prophet; and who so fit to be our King, as the
Power and Wisdom of God? 1 Cor. 1.24, 30, Christ the power of God, and the
wisdom of God. -- Who of God is made unto us wisdom. Col. 2.3, In whom are hid
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Who so fit to be our Priest, as he
who lies in the bosom of the Father? who can have such access to treat for us
with God, and such favor with him, as he that lies in the center and seat of
love, the beloved that lies in the Fathers bosom? Mat. 3.^^, This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, Joh. 1.18. Who so fit to be a Prophet
to us, as he who is the word of God, who only knows and reveals all his
Will? Rev. 19.13. Joh. 1.8. Mat. 11.27. 5. Consider that reason given by B.
Andrews: Because Adams sin was most directly against the second Person, Genesis
3.^5, 22. Man will be as God, and have the knowledge and wisdom of God, which is
Christ's prerogative, Col. 2.3. And who so fit to pack up that injury, as the
second Person? flesh would have been as the Word, and the Wisdom and Word of
God becomes flesh, to raise up ruined man in a quite contrary way to his own
sinful design: a marvelous, humble condescension, to expiate so proud a plot!

Quest. 2. Why must the Son of God be not only a man, but the Son of man, of
the seed of the woman, of the same lump with us? Might not the taking of a
created nature have fitted him to be our Mediator? Gal. 4.4. He might have been
man, and yet had a body framed for him in heaven, and not made of a woman?

Ans. He must be of the same lump with us, 1. The more to set forth his
condescension, and our exaltation: in this his condescension was greater, in
taking a nature of the same lump with us, than if he had taken our nature
created, as Adams was; and the exaltation of our nature was the greater, that
Christ's flesh was not only of the same kind, but of the same lump with ours. 2.
That we might have the more comfort in his satisfaction: for if he had taken a
created nature, that could have reached to a personal satisfaction only; but he
takes our nature, and the flesh of our nature, that he might satisfy for the
sin of our nature, and make a public satisfaction for the sins of many. The
Covenant with Adam being with his nature, not personal; and his sin also being
of the same kind, the satisfaction must be in the same nature, and by one of
the same lump, and not with a person having that kind of nature, but not the
same nature, Heb. 2.14, 9, Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of
flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same, that through
^eath he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is the devil --
that he by the grace of God should taste death for every man. 3. That he might
be a fit Mediator, one between two, he behoved to ^raw as near to us in respect
of his human nature, as to God in respect of the Divine nature: he must be a
man, and a man of the same lump that his brethren are of; a Priest ordained for
men, and taken from among men, Heb. 5.1. 4. That the alliance with us might be
the straiter, and his right of Redemption the stronger: for our Mediator
behoved not only to be a Redeemer, but a Goel, one to whom belonged the right
of Redemption. Now this could not be, except he were our own kinsman, our
brother of the same lump and stock, Deuteronomy. 25.5, 6, etc. Christ came to raise up
seed to his dead kinsman, old Adam, who dyed without issue of grace (for ought
that his seed had from him) therefore he behoved to be our brother and kinsman;
and by this means Christ (1.) as the kinsman, not only may do it, but he takes
it on him as his duty, v. 7, to perform the duty of a husbands brother: if the
kinsman had refused, he is put to open shame, by taking off his shoe; which
Christ will not let be done to him. 2. By this means the Inheritance (even the
better Inheritance than that of Adams) is settled upon our Family, Jer. 32.8,
For the right of Inheritance is thine, and the Redemption is thine. 5. That he
might sanctify our nature in the root, and repair it in the very foundation
where Adam defiled it, when he and we have it of the same lump: Now you know it
is the first fruits that sanctifies the lump, Romans 11.16: for except he had
been the first fruits of the same lump that we are of, the lump could not have
been sanctified by him, Heb. 2.11, For both he that sanctifies, and they who
are sanctified, are all of one. Col. 1.15, The firstborn of every creature.
But in as much as he is the first fruits of the same lump with us, he
sanctifies our nature in the root, our conception, birth, nursing, education,
life, etc.

Quest. 3. Why did not the Son of God take upon him Adam's nature in Innocence,
when it was a virgin; but he took our nature upon him when it was at the worst,
when it was corrupted and accursed?

Ans. 1. It was not Adam's nature in innocence that needed a Mediator, but
sinful nature; therefore he will take upon him that nature that needed help,
and will sanctify it by his taking of it upon him, Romans 8.3, God sending his
own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh.

2. He did this to magnify his love (as I have before showed); there was the
more wonderful love in it. There was, 1. Distinguishing love in it, that put
difference betwixt us and the Angels, Heb. 2.16, For verily he took not on him
the nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham. 2. There was
condescending love in it, that loved us at our worst, Romans 5.8, But God
commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners Christ died
for us. Ezekiel. 16.8, Now when I passed by thee, and looked upon thee, behold,
thy time was the time of love, and I spread my skirt over thee, and covered thy
nakedness; yea, I swear unto thee, and entered into a Covenant with thee, says
the Lord God, and thou becamest mine.

3. He did this, that he might be glorified in the greater destruction and
confusion of man's enemy, the Devil.

Consider, 1. The weaker that the enemy be, the greater is the confusion of
them that fall by him: how great is Satan's confusion, that by his power is able
to destroy a world of men in a night, if he were permitted, when the man Christ
in our nature, and having taken our nature upon him at the worst, is the
destruction of the Devil for ever? Heb. 2.14, Forasmuch then as the children
are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the
same, that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that
is the Devil. When by a babe and suckling the enemy and avenger is stilled,
Psalm. 8.2.

2. For one to perish in his own plot, is a great confusion: when the Devil
fell from Heaven, and could not reach Angels to tempt them, he becomes man's
enemy, and Christ destroys him in man's nature, in the similitude of sinful
flesh: he is twice defeated in his own plot, in our nature, 1. The Devil tempts
man to sin, and this proves his greatest confusion, for out of man's fall came
the bruising of his head: and it is observable, that in Satan's sentence is put
the first promise of Christ to man, Genesis 3.15, And I will put enmity between
thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy
head, and thou shall bruise his heel, Romans 8.3. 2. When Christ is manifested in
the flesh, the Devil tempts men to kill him, and in this plot he is defeated
again, Heb. 2.14, That he might destroy him that had the power of death, that
is the Devil. When he has made innocent man become sinful flesh, he is
destroyed in the similitude of sinful flesh by the man Christ, who took our
nature upon him when it was at the worst.

3. It is a great confusion for one to have his enemy to become his Judge, and
to pronounce the sentence against him, as his Judge: and hereby is Christ yet
more glorified in the destruction of man's enemy, the Devil; that the man Christ
Jesus in the similitude of our flesh, which he took upon him when it was at the
worst, has judged the Devil, and shall judge men and Angels, Joh. 16.11, Of
judgment, because the prince of this world is judged. Act. 17.31, Because he
has appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in righteousness by
that man whom he has ordained, whereof he has given assurance unto all men,
in that he has raised him from the dead.

4. Our Mediator behoved to partake of all our infirmities, Isa. 53.3, A man of
sorrows: who is to leave us an example of sufferings, and therefore behoved to
take our nature upon him when it was at the worst, Heb. 12.2, He endured the
cross, despising the shame. 1 Pet. 2.20, 21, But if when ye do well, and suffer
for it, ye take it patiently, this is acceptable before God. For even hereunto
were ye called, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example,
that we should follow his steps. He is a Mediator that is to be made perfect
through sufferings, Heb. 5.8, 9. Chap. 2. v. 10. Which agrees not with man's
nature in innocence.

Quest. 4. Why must our Mediator be born of the seed of Abraham, and when? was
there any matter what prerogatives he had? might he not have been of any other
stock, since he is to be the redeemer of man, both Jews and Gentiles, Heb. 2.16?

Answ. That he might be known to be the promised Messiah, of whom all the
Prophets had spoken, all which agree that he should be a Jew by Nation, of
Abraham's seed, and David's son, Deuteronomy 18.15, The Lord thy God will raise up unto
thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy brethren, like unto me, unto him
ye shall hearken. Genesis 22.18, And in thy seed shall all the nations of the
earth be blessed. Psalm. 132.11, The Lord has sworn in truth unto David, he
will not turn from it, Of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throne. 2.
Because God had then no other people in the world at that time, but Abraham's
feed; and he would honor his own people, by taking his hum^ne nature of their
family. 3. Christ was to be subject to the Law, even the ceremonial Law, which
was among the Jews only; and here for explicating this Branch of the Answer
more fully, we shall take it in a distinct Question.

Quest. 5. Why must our Mediator be made under the law? Gal. 4.4. Or subject to
the Law both Moral and Ceremonial?

Answ. That the Law might reach him as the sinner legally, as one that was made
sin for us: for if he had not been made under the Law, he had been without the
compass of it, it could not have reached him, nor taken hold of him, as one who
took our Law-place upon him, and so we should not have been the better of him;
the taking on of our nature, could not have profited us, except he had also
taken on our condition, as we were sinful men, liable to the sentence of the
Law, for the transgression thereof, which is expressed Gal. 4.5, by our being
under the Law, that was our condition; and that he might take it on him, he is
made under the Law.

More particularly, 1. He was made under the Moral Law, under the whole Law. 1.
Under the Directive part of it, which he fulfilled and established; he
satisfied that part of the Law, without breaking so much as one jot or tittle
of it; and established it to be a rule to all his, that by the obedience
thereof they should testify their love to him, 2. Cor. 5.14, 15, For the love
of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then
were all dead: and that he died for all, that they which live, should not
henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose
again. 2. He was made under the Forfeiture and penalty of the Law; which he
fulfilled and abolished; to wit, the Forfeiture which we had incurred, and by
Forfeiture had brought our selves under the penalty of death therein contained,
Col. 2.14, Blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us,
which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his cross.
And this he satisfied by his obedience, even to the suffering of death nostra
vice, in our stead or room; and so he satisfied the Law fully, and cancelled
the sentence thereof.

2. He was made under the Ceremonial Law, Luke 2.21, 22, 23, 24, And when eight
days were accomplished, for the purification of the child, his name was called
Jesus, etc. Ceremonies fall under a threefold consideration: 1. As they are
Ordinances, and so he was made under them to sanctify them; for Christ needed
not circumcision nor baptism, but by him they are sanctified. 2. As they are
types, and so the whole Ceremonial Law was fulfilled in Christ, Col. 2.17,
Which are a shadow of things to come, but the body is Christ. 3. As they are
burdens, and so they are removed by Christ, Act. 15.10, Now therefore, why
tempt ye God to put a yoke upon the neck of the disciples which neither our
fathers nor we were able to bear.

He was then made under the Ceremonial Law, to fulfill and abolish it: for if
Christ had not come and been under it, we had still remained under the burden
of it: but by his being a Jew, made under the Law, we enjoy these privileges
of freedom from that yoke which believers enjoy under the new Testament.

Quest. 6. Why was the Son of God born of a Virgin, and not of a married woman?

Answ. That he might answer the type given of him by the Holy Ghost, in
Melchisedecs Priesthood, Heb. 7.3, 15, Without father, without mother, without
descent, having neither beginning of days, nor end of life, but made like unto
the Son of God, abides a Priest continually. -- And it is yet far more
evident, for that after the similitude of Melchisedec, there arises another
Priest. 2. To answer the predictions of his miraculous conception: Christ's
being manifested in the flesh was miraculous, and foretold to be so; and that
it might be the better known to be so, God will have his Son come into the
world in a miraculous manner, Dan. 2.45, Forasmuch as thou saw that the
stone was cut out of the mountain without hands, etc. As also he went out of
the world in like manner, Act. 1.11, This same Jesus which is taken up from you
into heaven, shall come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven.
Therefore also the Angels came down at his birth, to waken up men unto the
observation of that miracle, Luke 2.13, 14, And suddenly there was with the
Angels a multitude of the heavenly host praising God, and saying, Glory to God
in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men. It is a sign above
nature, Isa. 7.14, Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign, Behold, A
virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and shall call his name Immanuel. A
matter that reason comprehends not; faith only deals in it. 3. Because
Original sin (at least the stain and filth thereof) comes to us by
propagation; therefore he must not come into the world in the ordinary way,
being that he must be separated from sinners, and be that holy thing upon which
the corruption of our nature cannot fall, Heb. 7.26. Luke 1.35. Being also
conceived of the Holy Ghost, to sanctify the seed of the woman, Luke 1.35, And
the Angel answered, and said unto her, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and
the power of the highest shall over-shadow thee, therefore also that Holy thing
which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God.

Quest. 7. Why is Christ made man in the fullness of time, and not sooner nor
later?

Answ. It may satisfy and content us, that it is written, Gal. 4.2, that was
the time appointed of the Father. It liked him to appoint that time; yet for
further satisfaction (if further be necessary or attainable),

Consider, 1. God will have the world to know their own condition, to try their
own wisdom, and he will give them time to do so, if the world can do any thing
for themselves to deliver the creature from vanity and bondage, unto which it
was made subject by reason of corruption; and when the world in so long time
might see that they could do nothing for their own happiness and Redemption,
then God will send his Son, and let out his wisdom in Christ, that had been hid
from the world ever since the fall, when the Law of God written in man's heart
was corrupted, and all things out of order; so that by the light of nature, and
rules of virtue, no man could find out the way to happiness, nor discover any
thing of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.20, 21, Where is the wise? where is the scribe? where
is the disputer of this world? has not God made foolish the wisdom of this
world? For after that in the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God;
it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe.

2. God will have his people to wait long, and to be much exercised, before he
let out great mercies, and fulfill great promises to them. And so it is in this:
If in the fulfilling of the promise of bringing Abraham's seed to Canaan, he
would be so long waited on: If in the destruction of Antichrist he will be so
many years waited on, before he fulfill his promise; What wonder that he will be
waited on for the promise of Christ longer, even till the fullness of time, this
being the greatest promise that ever he made to his people? He will have the
consolation of Israel waited for, and redemption in Jerusalem looked for, Luke
2.25, 38.

Before we proceed to speak of Christ's unction, and his qualifications for his
Mediatorship refulting thence; let us first make some use of this union of the
two natures in Christ, this great fundamental qualification of him for the
Office of our Mediator, that he is God and Man; that for his due qualification
he has taken our flesh into his person, therein to subsist.

In the union of the two natures in the Person of our Mediator, 1. As it holds
forth his condescending, who stooped to be made manifest in the flesh, 1. Let
us admire and wonder at his love: It was love that made him condescend; it has
been and will be the admiration of Angels, Luke 2.13, 14, And suddenly there
was with the Angel a multitude of the heavenly host, praising God, and saying,
Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men. 1 Pet.
1.12, Which things the Angels desire to look into. And how is it that we want
affections and admirations? Beside what I have before said, these things
wonderfully set out Christ's love, 1. That he would not entrust our Redemption
to Angels, but he would come himself, and work it, Heb. 1.5, For unto which of
the angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee?
2. That for the payment of our debt, and in order to his being in a capacity to
do so, he would be in the same condition of clay with us, a worm and not a man,
Psalm. 22.6. 3. That he would not buy us at a base ransom, but at a great price,
he would breathe out his life for us, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19, Forasmuch as ye know
that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, but with the precious blood
of Christ. 4. That he would condescend thus singularly to love man, to love him
so, as that he loved not any other creature that sinned against him. Heb. 2.16,
For verily he took not on him the nature of angels, but he took on him the seed
of Abraham.

2. Let this raise up our hearts to thankfulness, when we think of Christ's
Incarnation, 1. This is the greatest demonstration of his readiness to save
sinners: the principal errand Christ had unto the world, and in taking our
nature, was to save sinners, Mat. 9.13, I am not come to call the righteous,
but sinn^rs to repentance. You may therefore be assured of his readiness to
receive such when they come unto him. 2. This is the Fountain of all the
promises of the Covenant of Grace: the three greatest promises in all the
Covenant flow from Christ's Incarnation. I will be your God: I will give you my
Son: and, I will give you my Spirit. All these, and all the rest too, flow from
this Fountain; for neither the Father, the Son, nor the Spirit are given to us,
but through a Mediator, and through his assuming of our nature, Ephesians. 1.3,
Blessed be the God and Father of our Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all
spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ.

2. As the union of the two natures in our Mediator, holds out the exaltation
of our nature; Hence, 1. Let us wonder what is man thus to be exalted: the
eighth Psalm is written for this end; that we may wonder at man's exaltation,
not in Creation only, but in Redemption, as Verse. 2, shows, which is applied to
Christ, Mat. 21.16, Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings, thou have
perfected praise: how should this provoke to admiration, that in our nature the
fullness of the Godhead should dwell bodily, Col. 2.9, 2. Let us take Christ's
coming in the flesh, and the exalting of our nature, by the personal union with
the Godhead, for a pledge of the fulfilling of all other promises, and granting
all other mercies and salvation to us; the root and body of the promises is
come, the branches will follow also, 2 Cor. 1.20, For all the promises of God,
in him are yea, and in him are Amen. Romans 8.32, He that spared not his own Son,
but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us
all things? This pledge was used by Isaiah, as a confirmation from God, and a
ground of assurance for delivering the Church from Ashur, Isa. 7.11, 14, Ask
thee a sign of the Lord thy God, ask it either in the depth, or in the height
above. -- Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign, Behold, A virgin
shall conceive. and bare a Son, and shall call his name Immanuel. And shall we
distrust him for granting any other petition, or deliverance, who has granted
the main one? 3. Let us take boldness to come to God through Christ's flesh: the
great Courtier in Heaven is of our kindred; take courage, and improve the
favor and friendship that our brother has in Heaven, Heb. 10.19, 20, 21, 22,
Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of
Jesus, by a new and living way which he has consecrated for us, through the
vail, that is to say, his flesh. And having an High Priest over the house of
God, let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith.

3. As the union of the two natures in our Mediator holds out his due
qualification and fitness for his office: 1. Behold in him a general fitness to
receive each Person, whose nature he bears. I say, a fitness to receive them,
even all sorts of persons without exception; there is none who needs him and
comes to him, needs to distrust him, Heb. 7.25, Wherefore he is able also to
save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to
make intercession for them. 2. Let this encourage such as are afraid to draw
near to God for union and reconciliation with him, because of their
estrangement from him, through loss of his Image: Lo, he is willing to unite
himself to thee, and has given assurance of it in his Son, by virtue of his
union with our nature, Romans 8.3. 3. When we find difficulty to draw near to
God, or languishing in the life of our faith toward God: Let us draw near to
God, the flesh of our our Mediator, for influences, and searn to come to God
through the vail of his flesh, Heb. 10.20. Jesus Christ is not strange, he is
near to us, and his graces cannot be far off, Romans 10.6, 8, Say not in thine
heart, Who shall ascend into heaven? The word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth,
and in thy heart, that is the word of faith which we preach. But it is with
many, and even with the most part, as with the ten Tribes, who pleaded kindred
and blood to David, yet there were but two tribes that clave to him; and being
nearer in kindred, would not be beaten from him, 1 Kings 12.16, 17. Some
talk-lustily, and bear themselves boldly upon Christ in words; others are near
of kin to him, and will not be beaten from him.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Mediators Unction, as it relates to the separating of him
for his Offices.
THE second part of Christ's qualification for the Office of Mediatorship, is
his Unction; this was consequent unto his personal union; so that as we called
the union of the two natures in Christ Person, the principal and chief
qualification of him for this Office; so we are to look upon his Unction, as
carrying in it diverse qualifications which result from the former.

The Unction of Christ comprehends two things; 1. The separating of him unto
these excellent Offices of being Prophet, Priest, and King of his Church. 2.
The endowing him with the Spirit above measure, with gifts and graces of the
Spirit, and assistances meet to enable him for the Work.

The first Part of Christ's Unction, is that whereby he is anointed to these
Offices: Christ Mediator is anointed to be Prophet, Priest, and King of his
Church. Concerning which we shall speak: 1. Of the anointing. 2. Of the
Offices. And first by this Unction, as it relates to his Offices (for of his
Unction, as it comprehends his Furniture, we are not now speaking, but shall in
the next place), we may understand according to the various use of anointing
among men: and the Scripture purport of the Word. 1. His Designation for these
Offices in the Counsel of God, Isa. 42.1, Behold, my servant whom I uphold,
mine elect in whom my soul delights. So the word is used, 1 Samuel 16.13, of
David's first Designation to succed in the Kingdom to Saul, long before he came
to the Government. 2. The declaration of his being designed unto these Offices,
Psalm. 2.7, I will declare the decree, the Lord has said unto me, Thou art my
Son, this day have I begotten thee. So anointing is taken in the case of Gods
declaring Jehu successor in the Kingdom, 1 Kings 19.16, with 2 Kings 9.1. 3.
The separating of him, or setting him apart for these Offices, Psalm. 89.20, I
have found David my servant, with my holy oil have I anointed him. So the word
is used, 1 Chronicles. 29.22. 1 Samuel 15.17, with Psalm. 105.15. 4. The public solemn
investing him in these Offices, with power and authority to exercise them, Act.
10.38, How God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with power,
who went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the Devil,
for God was with him. Luke 1.32, And the Lord God shall give unto him the
throne of his father David. And its from his anointing that Christ has his
name, Joh. 1.41, We have found the Messiah, which is, being interpreted, the
Christ, Luke 9.20. The Christ of God.

2. Concerning these three Offices of Christ, we shall briefly touch upon, 1.
The necessity of them in our Mediators Person. 2. The nature and use of them.
3. The harmony and consent of these Offices in Christ's person, and in his
execution of them.

And, 1. The necessity of these Offices in our Mediator, appears, 1. From the
evils under which we were lying; man being under, 1. Ignorance of God. 2.
Alienation from God, Ephesians. 4.18, Having the understanding darkened, being
alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in them, because
of the blindness of their hearts. 3. Impotency to come unto him, Joh. 6.44, No
man can come to me, except the Father which sent me, draw him. Necessary it was
that our Mediator be a person that carries Offices, which may reach these
evils. His prophecy and teaching meets with our ignorance of God, for he is a
teacher come from God, Joh. 3.7. A Prophet by whom all his people are taught of
God, Jer. 31.33. Isa. 54.13. His Priesthood and Sacrifice meets with our
alienation and estrangement from God, for thereby the distance is removed, and
a friendship bound up with God, Ephesians. 2.13, 14, 18, But now in Christ Jesus, ye
who sometimes were far off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ. For he is our
peace, who has made both one. For through him we both have an access by one
spirit unto the Father. And his Kingdom meets with our impotency; for thereby
we are mightily wrought upon and determined, so as our impotency proves no
overpowering let in the way of his grace, Jer. 31.33, But this shall be the
Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days, says the
Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts,
and I will be their God, and they shall be my people.

2. It appears from the work which he came to do, which required this
conjunction of Offices in his Person: 1. He came to reveal a new way of
happiness, and therefore behoved to be a Prophet, Act. 7.37, A prophet shall
the Lord your God raise up unto you, of your brethren, like unto me, him shall
you hear. Heb. 2.3, How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation, which
at the first began to be spoken by the Lord? 2. He came to purchase and acquire
this new blessedness, and therefore behoved to be a Priest, to offer Sacrifice
for it, Heb. 9.15, And for this cause he is the Mediator of the new Testament,
that by means of death, for the redemption of the transgressions of the first
Testament, they which are called might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance. 3. He came to make application of his purchase, and therefore
behoved also to be a King, Heb. 5.9, And being made perfect, he became the
author of eternal salvation unt^ all them that they him.

2. The nature and use of these three Offices in our Mediator, we find in some
measure let out in the promises of the Covenant, at least a chief and material
hint at something of all the three, Jer. 31.33, 34, with Heb. 8. and 10. 1.
Christ Mediator as a Prophet, travelleth in begetting a right understanding
betwixt the two parties that are at variance, betwixt God and man; and to this
effect, being intimately acquainted with all his Fathers secrets, 1. He
publishes and declares all the mind of God to his people, especially in
revealing the gracious purpose of God concerning the way and means of
reconciliation, Mat. 11.27, Neither knows any man the Father save the Son,
and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. Ephesians. 2.17, And came and preached
peace to you which were afar off, and to them that were nigh. 2. He works the
effectual knowledge of God, and of his will, in his peoples heart, See 2 Cor.
4.6, For God who caused the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our
hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ. Luke 1.77, 79, To give knowledge of Salvation unto his people, by
the remission of their sins. -- To give light to them that sit in darkness, and
in the shadow of death, to guide our feet in the way of peace. 3. He removes
the mistakes and prejudices whereby the alienation betwixt God and man is
hightned and continued; and this by imparting the true mind of the parties to
each other, Ephesians. 4.21, If so be that ye have heard him, and have been taught by
him, as the truth is in Jesus. This is the nature and use of his prophetical
Office, which he executes by his word and spirit, causing light first to
appear, and then to shine into the hearts of his people.

The end of this Office, and his exercising it after this manner, is to promote
his great design of reconciliation, which is the end of his Mediation; and this
he does, by declaring the mind of the parties to each other, removing mistakes,
which increase alienation; begetting a good understanding, and thereby working
a compliance betwixt the parties: and in respect of this Office mainly he is
called a Prophet, Deuteronomy. 18.15. Acts 3.22: and by way of eminency, the Prophet,
and that Prophet, Joh. 6.14, and 7.40: and the Angel or Messenger of the
Covenant, who published and revealed it, Mal. 3.1: and the Word, John 1.14.
Rev. 19.3, who reveals the will of God, whereof I have already spoken; and a
Witness, or teacher and testifier of the will of God, Isa. 55.4. Rev. 3.14: and
the Apostle of our profession, Heb. 3.1: and the Wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.24.
Col. 2.3.

2. Christ Mediator in his Priesthood travelleth, 1. About Satisfaction. 2.
Intercession. Isa. 53.12, Because he has poured out his soul unto death, and
he was numbered with the transgressors, and he bare the sin of many, and made
intercession for the transgressor: And about both these in order to
Reconciliation, which is the great business belonging to the Mediators Office.

1. I say, the nature and use of that Office relates to satisfaction for sin,
because by virtue of that Office principally he performs the great work of
satisfaction for our sins, by offering up himself a sacrifice to death, after
he had given perfect obedience to the Law, Heb. 9.26, But now once in the end
of the world has he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself. And
this he did as our Surety, he stood in the Elects room, and Justice did strike
him in their stead, Isa. 53.5, He was oppressed, etc. or rather, according to
the original, he was exacted, and answered; that is, God the Father required
satisfaction for our sins, and his Son (as our Surety) answered for us.

2. Unto this Office belongs his Intercession, which is performed in the
virtue of the satisfaction given by him to Divine Justice, and the Sacrifice
once offered up by him, Isa. 53.12, He poured out his soul unto death -- and
made intercession for the transgressors. Heb. 9.24, For Christ is not entered
into the holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the true; but
into heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us. And this
according to the two parts of the Highpriests Office, which were, 1. The
offering of sacrifice. 2. The presenting of it in the Holy of Holies with
prayer and intercession, See Good^. Christ set forth, p. 12^, 123. Rog. Cat. p.
2. p. 39. Gomar ad Heb. c. 3.
that God would accept it for the sins of the people, see Levit. 16. The
excellency of this Priesthood of our Mediator, was typified by Aarons
Priesthood in these two parts of it; and more eminently and excellently in
Melchisedecks Priesthood, which showed also the continuance of Christ's
Priesthood for ever, and the excellency of it above Aarons, Psalm. 110. Heb. 5,
and 7 chap.

Concerning the nature and parts of this Office, we shall only observe these
three things; 1. That Christ Mediator did and does both the parts of this
Office on earth, and in Heaven, but with this difference, 1. On earth he
eminently sacrificed and offered up himself, Heb. 9.14, How much more shall the
blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to
God, purge your conscience from dead works to serve the living God. Yet he
interceded also, Heb. 5.7, Who in the days of his flesh, when he had offered up
prayers and suppl cations with strong crying and tears unto him that was able
to save him from death, and was heard in that he seared. 2. In Heaven he
eminently intercedes, Heb. 7 25, Seeing he ever lives to make intercession for
them. Chap. 9.24, But into Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God
for us: but he offers up himself also, by presenting the sacrifice, and
offering of himself, which was once made, Heb. 12.24, We are come, says the
Apostle, to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, and to the blood of
sprinkling, that speaks better things than that of Abel. 2. That all Christ's
satisfaction and Priesthood would be ineffectual for our good, if he did not
continue in the exercise of it by his intercession in Heaven, whereby he
becomes the applying cause of salvation to us, Heb. 5.10, 11, Called of God an
High Priest after the order of Melchisedec; of whom we have many things to say,
and hard to be uttered, seeing ye are dull of hearing. Romans 5.10, For if when
we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more
being reconciled we shall be saved by his life. 3. That the design carried on
by this Office is the same as in the former, to wit, Reconciliation, which is
promoted through this Office, 1. By his giving satisfaction to Justice. 2. By
his application of that satisfaction, and making Atonement for the sins of his
people.

The nature and use of Christ's Kingdom, I lay down in these Assertions: 1. That
it is Dispensatory; Christ Mediator is a King appointed, a Viceroy and
Deputy Governor in subordination to his Father. Psalm. 2.6. Yet have I set my
King upon my holy hill of Zion. John 5.23, That all men should honor the son
even as they honor the father; he that honors not the son; honors not
the father that sent him: a Kingdom which is to be rendered up again to him who
gave it to him, 1 Cor. 15.24, Then comes the end, when he shall have delivered
up the kingdom to God even the father, when he shall have put down all rule and
all authority and power. His Kingdom as Mediator, is not regnum natural, which
he has as God co-essential with his Father; but regnum oeconomicum, which he
has by donation and unction from his Father. 2. That it is very large, yea
universal; for it is all power in heaven and earth, Matthew. 28.18: and it
reaches to the upholding all things by the word of his power, Heb. 1.3. It is
over all the creatures, Ephesians. 1.22, And has put all things under his feet, and
gave him to be the head over all things to the Church. Over all Mankind, Dan.
7.14, And there was given him dominion and glory, and a kingdom, that all
people, nations and languages should serve him. Rev. 17.14, He is lord of
lords, and king of kings. Over the Reprobate as well as the Elect, Psalm 110.1,
The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine
enemies thy footstool. Over all ages and generations of men: Dan. 7.14, his
dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away; and his kingdom
that which shall not be destroyed. Although it be more special, and he be a
King more peculiarly to the Church and the elect World, Psalm 2.6, 8, 9, Yet
have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion, -- Ask of me, and I will give
thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth
for thy possession: thou shall break them with a rod of iron, thou shall dash
them in pieces like a potters vessel. And that both outwardly, by appointing
them Laws, Ordinances and Officers, Psalm 9.6, 7, For unto us a child is born,
unto us a son is given, and the government shall be upon his shoulder: and his
name shall be called Wonderful Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting
Father, the Prince of peace; of the increase of his government and peace there
shall be no end; upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom to order it,
and to establish it with justice and with judgment from henceforth and for
ever. And inwardly by ruling in their hearts. Luke 17.21, Neither shall they
say, lo here, or lo there: (...) behold, the kingdom of God is within you.
Ezekiel. 36.27, And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes, and ye stall keep my judgments and do them. Jer. 31.33, But this
shall be the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those
days, says the Lord, I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in
their bearts. And his Kingdom is over other creatures, but for the cause and
behoof of the Elect, Ephesians. 1, 22, And gave him to be the head over all things to
the Church. 3. It is Spiritual, over the souls and consciences of men, to awe
and overruled the hearts of men, to captivate their affections, Romans 14.17, For
the kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and peace, and joy
in the Holy Ghost. Joh. 18.36, Jesus answered and said, My kingdom is not of
this world. Chap. 6.15, When Jesus therefore perceived that they would come and
take him by force to make him a King, he departed again into a mountain himself
alone. To break in pieces his enemies with an iron Rod, to rule and slay them
with the words of his mouth, Psalm 110.2, Rule thou in the midst of thine
enemies. Isa. 11.4, But with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove
with equity for the meek of the earth; and he shall smite the earth with the
rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked. 4.
It is everlasting, Dan. 2.44, And in the days of these kings shall the God of
heaven set up a kingdom which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall
not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these
kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever. Chap. 7.14, His dominion is an
everlasting dominion which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which
shall not be destroyed. Heb. 1.8, But unto the Son he says, Thy throne, O God,
is for ever and ever: and although it be said, 1 Cor. 15.24, he shall give the
kingdom to his Father, yet his Kingdom shall not then cease: for I take that to
be in regard of the manner of administration of it by Ordinances, Officers,
etc. for then all his Saints shall be perfected, and all his enemies subdued,
whereof something has been already spoken. 5. In the kingdom of Christ
Mediator, he does all things with authority and power, and yet it is wholly
ruled by his Word and Spirit. He does all things in his Kingdom, not by outward
secular force, but by his influences upon the spirits of men, and determining
them in a secret way, whether providentially, or by saving and sanctifying
influences. Zech. 4.6, Not by might, nor by power, but by my spirit, says the
Lord of Hosts. Psalm 110.1, 2, The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right
hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool. The Lord shall send the rod of
thy strength out of Zion: rule thou in the midst of thine enemies. 2 Thessalonians.
2.8, And then shall that wicked be revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with
the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming.
6. The great work of his Kingly Power is to employ it for saving of his people,
and subduing his and their enemies, to bring to pass his purpose of the one and
the other, either without or against all-contradiction, Psalm 110 throughout,
Psalm 2 throughout. Phil. 2.9, 10, Wherefore God also has highly exalted him,
and given him a name which is above every name, that at the name of Jesus every
knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the
earth. 7. The great and special end of Christ's Kingly Office, is to make his
other Offices effectual for the saving of his Elect, to support his Priesthood
and Prophecy, and to give vigor and efficacy to them: for except Christ had
been a Prince that had power over his friends and foes, his other Offices could
never have been made effectual to the Elect, nor he a Captain of Salvation to
them, Heb. 2.10. Therefore also he is set forth as a Priest upon a Throne, who
carries all things as a King with power, Heb. 1.3, When he had by himself
purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high. It is his
Kingdom which effects that Reconciliation which is the end of a Mediator, that
which his Prophecy teaches, and his Priesthood and Sacrifice has purchased;
he sits as a King, and conveys the power of it into the soul. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5,
For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, to the
pulling down of strong holds, and casting down imaginations, and every high
thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and bringing into
captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ.

3. The Harmony and Consent of these three Offices in our Mediator, and how
they do concur for the end of his Mediatorship, to wit, the triesting of the
difference betwixt God and man, by making a reconciliation, and binding up
friendship by a new Covenant. Here observe the sweet concurrence of the three
Offices in the Mediator Christ. 1. All these Offices level at one end, to wit,
Reconciliation and Salvation, which is the great business wherefore a Mediator
was appointed, 2 Cor. 5.19, God was in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself: but with this difference, his Prophecy teaches the way of
Reconciliation, Acts 3.22, Him shall ye hear in all things whatsoever he shall
say unto you. His Priesthood opened the way, and purchased the peace, Heb.
9.14, 15, How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal
Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from dead
works to serve the living God. And for this cause he is the Mediator of the new
Testament, that by means of death for the redemption of the Transgressors that
were under the first Testament, they which are called might receive the promise
of eternal inheritance. His Kingdom does effect and do the business, John
12.32, And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me. Col.
1.20, 21, And having made peace through the blood of his cross, by him to
reconcile all things to himself, I say, whether they be things in earth, or
things in heaven. And you that were sometimes alienated, and enemies in your
mind by wicked works, yet now has he reconciled. But yet we must not conceive
the actings of these Offices in Christ separately, nor appropriate to any of
them solely the effecting Reconciliation or Salvation: but understand it by way
of eminency, and so of the following particulars. 2. These three Offices in our
Mediator, concur to do the same work, but in diverse ways, that our
Reconciliation and Salvation might be the more complete and sure: he would have
us saved, Heb. 7.25, to the utmost; (...), Camer. in Myr. F. Goodwin. Christ
set forth. Corn. Schrevel. Lexic.
or, as the word is rendered by some, over and above all manner of ways; for the
word as some observe, signifies, Omni modum persecutionem, omnem adeptus finem,
and absolute perfection in all manner of ways whereunto these three Offices in
our Mediator concur. 1. Christ as Priest through his death reconcileth us to
God, and saves us (as captives are redeemed) by Ransom and Price. Heb. 10.12,
But this man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins, for ever sat down on
the right hand of God. Col. 1.1, 20, And having made peace through the blood of
his cross, by him to reconcile all things to himself. Romans 5.10, For if when we
were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, etc. 2. Christ
as King, by his Resurrection and Ascension effectuates our Salvation by power
and conquest, Heb. 2.14, That through death he might destroy him that had the
power of death, that is the Devil. Ephesians. 4.8, Wherefore he says when he
ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. 3.
Christ as Prophet effectuates our reconciliation with God, and Salvation, by
our own consent: informing our judgments, begetting a good understanding
betwixt God and us; removing mistakes, and making us willing to be reconciled
unto him, and saved by him, Psalm. 110.2, 3, The Lord shall send the rod of thy
strength out of Zion, -- Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power:
in the beauties of holiness, from the womb of the morning, thou have the dew of
thy youth. This he effects by Treaty, till he has concluded favor and
friendship betwixt the parties by voluntary consent in a Covenant, Rev. 22.17,
And the Spirit, and the Bride say, Come.

3. These Offices in our Mediator sweetly concur together to meet with three
great Evils in our natural condition (which are comprehensive of all our
misery), and to deal in taking them away: 1. Christ as a Prophet deals with
our Ignorance of God, and blindness: and removes that, by applying himself to
us in the exercise of that teaching-Office, Ephesians. 4.18, 21, Having the
understanding darkened: being alienated from the life of God through the
ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart -- If so be
that ye have heard him, and been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus. 2.
Christ as Priest, with his Atonement and Satisfaction, deals with our
alienation and estrangement from God, and our enmity against him, which is the
fruit of our Ignorance of him; and by making a satisfaction to of fended
Justice, he takes away the enmity. Ephesians. 4.18, Being alienated from the life of
God through the ignorance that is in them. See Romans 5.10, When we were enemies,
we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son. Col. 1.21, And you that were
sometimes alienated, and enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now has he
reconciled. 3. Christ as a King deals with our Impotency and Rebellion, which
is the third great evil in our unnatural condition, which he sweetly subdueth
by the power and dominion of his grace, Psalm 45.5, Thine arrows are sharp in
the heart of the kings enemies, whereby the people fall under thee. Rev. 6.2,
And he went forth conquering and to conquer. Or the harmony of these Offices
may be conceived thus:

1. That Christ as a Prophet deals eminently with the understandings of men,
to persuade and convince them by his teaching, 2 Cor. 4.4, 6, In whom the god
of this world has blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light
of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine in them
-- for God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in
our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face
of Jesus Christ.

2. Christ as a Priest, as a merciful, loving, condescending man, who has laid
down his life for us, uses entreaties, and deals with the affections mainly,
when the judgment is informed by his prophecy and teaching, 2 Cor. 5.20, Now
then we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we
pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled to God.

3. Christ as King deals with the wills of men, the proudest and highest
enemy that Christ has in our nature, which he subdues and overpowers by
determinating grace, Psalm. 110.3, Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy
power.

4. These three Offices in our Mediator, do most pleasantly conspire in aiding
and supporting one another, that each Office may be vigorous and effectual for
the end of his Mediation. And here consider, 1. How the prophecy of Christ is
aiding to his Priesthood and Kingdom: 1. By teaching what the Priesthood and
Kingdom of Christ are, and the way how reconciliation and peace is to be made:
His prophecy teaches those mysteries of the Kingdom, and our salvation, which
otherways we could not know, Joh. 1.18, No man has seen God at any time: the
only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him.
It shows, 1. Where a Sacrifice is to be had, and a power to make out our
peace, which upon the matter is the Priesthood and Kingdom of Christ, Acts
5.31, Him has God exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior,
to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. 1 John 2.27, And ye need
not that any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches you of all
things, and is truth, and is no lie. 2. How to apply Christ's Priesthood at
first for justification, and how to apply it daily and continually for repeated
pardon and forgiveness, and how to improve it as our daily sacrifice, 1 John
1.9, If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. And 2.1, 2. My little children,
these things write I unto you, that ye sin not: and if any man sin, we have an
Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, etc. 3. How to live by
faith, to depend upon Christ, and to be guided continually by him, as the ruler
of his people, Heb. 10.38, Now the just shall live by faith. Psalm. 73.24, Thou
shall guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory. 2. By
removing mistakes and prejudices, which are so rooted in our hearts, that there
can be no agreement till these prejudices be taken off, and a good
understanding be gotten betwixt the parties: Thus Christ played the Prophet to
the woman of Samaria, by instructing her, till he had removed her mistakes and
prejudices, and informed her judgment right, and then he had access to deal
further with her, Joh. 4.3, By convincing of the need of his Priesthood and
Sacrifice, and of his Kingdom; he does teach his people as a Prophet, till they
know they need a Sacrifice, and till he show them where it is; and till they
know they need a King and the arm of Omnipotency, for effecting a change of the
Covenant-state, John 16.8, And when he is come, he will reprove the world of
sin, of righteousness, and of judgment. Job 33.23, If there be a messenger with
him, an interpreter, one among a thousand, to show unto man his uprightness.

Consider, 2. How the Priesthood of Christ concurreth with his Prophecy and
Kingdom, and is aiding to them: 1. His Priesthood is aiding to his Prophecy,
1. By making God accessible through the new and living way of Reconciliation,
taught by his Prophecy; God having now accepted a sacrifice: and we having a
Priest, by whom we may come to him, Heb. 10.19, 20, Having therefore brethren,
boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, by a new and living
way which he has consecrated for us through the vail, that is to say, the
flesh: and an Advocate and Intercessor to pray for us, 1 John 2.1, 2, We have
an Advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the righteous; and he is the
propitiation for our sins. 2. By making that great Prophet more affable and
condescending to us, by how much he is come near to us in our nature; and has
taken his Sacrifice from among his brethren; I mean, his flesh and body, Heb.
2.17, Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren.
Chap. 5.1, For every High Priest taken from among men, is ordained for men in
things pertaining to God, that they may offer both gifts and sacrifices for
sins. Chap. 10. v. 5, Whererefore when he comes into the world, he says,
sacrifice and offering thou would not, but a body have thou prepared me. 2.
His Priesthood is aiding to his Kingdom, and that in both the parts of it: 1.
In his sacrifice and satisfaction, he has doubled his right and title to his
people, and works their salvation by price; which as a King he does by power
and conquest, Heb. 9.15, And for this cause he is the Mediator of the new
Testament, that by means of death for the redemption of the transgressions that
were under the first Testament, they which are called might receive the promise
of eternal inheritance. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19, Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not
redeemed with corruptible things, -- but with the precious blood of Christ. 2.
In his Intercession, he carries the same business of our Salvation by favor
and entreaty, which he has also carried by Command as a King, Heb. 7.25,
Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by
him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. With 1.3, When he had
by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the majesty on high.
John 17.24, Father, I will that they also whom thou have given me, be with me
where I am.

3. Consider how his Kingdom does support his Priesthood and Prophecy, and
give vigor and efficacy to them both.

And 1. His Kingdom does assist his Prophecy, 1. By sustaining and keeping up
the means of Salvation and Teaching, by his Gospel and Ordinances, against all
the enemies that have risen up and bestirred themselves against the same ever
since the beginning of the world: Thus he keeps these pillars of his Throne
from ruin. Psalm 110.2, 5, The Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of
Zion: rule thou in the midst of thine enemies. The Lord at thy right hand shall
strike through kings in the day of his wrath. 2. By making his Gospel and
Ordinances have their full effectualness in the hearts of his people, to
convince and convert them, and to pierce and condemn those that despise them,
John 9.39, And Jesus said, For Judgment I am come into this world, that they
which see not, might see; a and that they which see, might be made blind. Isa.
55.11, So shall my word be that goes forth out of my mouth, it shall not
return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that which I please: and it shall
prosper in the thing whereto I sent it.

2. His Kingdom does assist his Priesthood: 1. By giving efficacy to his
satisfaction, to reconcile the persons of the Elect to God, and to obtain
forgiveness of their sins: for it is his Kingdom that does convey the power of
his Priesthood into the soul. 2. By giving Efficacy unto his Intercession, for
keeping all those that are given to him by his Father, continually in a state
of grace and favor, John 17.11, 24, Those that thou gave me I have kept, and
none of them is lost but the son of perdition -- Father, I will that they also
whom thou have given me, be with me where I am. 3. By making his Death and
Resurrection effectual to subdue our lusts, and to set up his Kingdom within
us. Ephesians. 1.19, 20, And what is the exceeding greatness of his power to usward
who believe, according to the working of his mighty power, which he wrought in
Christ when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in
the heavenly places. Romans 6.4, 5, Therefore we are buried with him by baptism
into death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the
father, even so we also should walk in newness of life. For if we have been
planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness
of his resurrection.

Use 1. Of Christ's Unction unto these Offices: How excellent and eminent a
person must our Mediator he, in whom these three Offices concur, which take in
all things that pertain to instruction and wisdom, to favor and entreaty, to
power and acting? who is anointed unto all the high Offices over the house of
God, Heb. 10.21, unto which great persons have at any time been anointed. The
excellency of all high Offices treist in his Person, so that as the Apostle
says often, such a High Priest; we may say, such a Mediator, by way of
Excellency, Psalm 89.19, 20, I have exalted one chosen out of the people, I
have found David my servant, with my holy oil have I anointed him. Isa. 22.22,
-- And the key of the house of David will I lay upon his shoulder: so he shall
open, and none shall shut: and he shall shut, and none shall open.

2. How well has God provided for his people in Christ the Mediator? 1. There
must be a wonderful fullness of Satisfaction which proceeds from a person thus
anointed. 2. An admirable weight in the intercession of a Person carrying such
high Offices. 3. He has treasured up all his Churches happiness in Christ,
that he should be to them whatsoever they need: and that he should carry all
Offices whereof they can have use. Col. 1.19, For it pleased the Father that in
him should all fullness dwell. 4. From the wellspring of his Unction, he has
made another Unction to flow to us, for calling us to high and honorable
things, and furnishing us for them; Rev. 1.6. And has made us Kings and
Priests unto God, and his Father. 1 John 2.27, But the anointing which you have
received of him, abides in you: and ye need not that any man teach you, but as
the same anointing teaches you of all things, and is truth, and is no lie: and
even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him 1 Pet. 2.9, For ye are a
chosen generation, a royal Priesthood, a holy Nation, a peculiar people, that
ye should show forth the praises of him who has called you out of darkness
unto his mavelous light.

3. Let us make use of Christ Mediator in all his Offices, and acknowledge him
in them all, and take notice of the concurrence of these for effecting our
happiness. And for this effect, 1. Let us study to be acquainted with our need
of Christ in all his Offices: Some men know not their need of a Priest, but
very few know their need of a Teacher: they think they are very knowing, while
they are blind; but far fewer know their need of a King; they think they can
rule themselves. Romans 7.9, For I was alive without the law once: but when the
commandment came, sin revived, and I died. And yet our need of all these is
such, that we could not have been completely saved, if any of these Offices had
been wanting in our Mediator: we stand in need of a Prophet, a Priest, and a
King.

2. Study to know, and be convinced, that there is in us a natural enmity
against all these Offices of Christ the Mediator: 1. Enmity against him as a
Prophet, against his Teaching and his Truth; disliking his truths which cross
our lusts, John 6.60, Many therefore of his Disciples when they had heard this,
said, This is an hard saying, who can bear it? Quenching and resisting the
voice and teaching of his Spirit. Isa. 63.10, But they rebelled and vexed his
holy Spirit. 2. Enmity against him as a Priest, by undervaluing his Person,
Suffering, Satisfaction, Righteousness, Merits, Romans 10.3, For they being
ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about to establish their own
righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God. 3.
Enmity against him as a King; against his spiritual Worship, Commands, Wages: a
principle which controuls them, and rebels against him, Romans 7.23, But I see
another law in my members warring against the law of my mind, bringing me into
captivity to the law of sin, which is in my members.

3. We must take with our need of Christ in these his Offices, and lay down our
enmity against them; that is, in the knowledge that we need not only a Priest,
but a Prophet, and a King; we must break off our rebellions against these his
Offices, and lay down the weapons whereby we have opposed them, which are
mainly self-conceit, and knowledge, or Science, fasly so called, opposing him as
a Prophet, 1 Cor. 8.2, And if any man think that he knows any thing, he
knows nothing yet as he ought to know: and self-will, opposing his Kingdom,
refusing to admit of his Laws within us, Luke 19.14, We will not have this man
to rule over us: and self-worth, or righteousness, opposing his Priesthood, by
setting up something in the place of it, Romans 10.3, For they being ignorant of
Gods righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, etc.

4. Let us by all means take heed that the grace of God tendered to us through a
Mediator in all these Offices, be not in vain, through our not seeking to it,
and laying hold on it, Heb. 4.1, 2, Let us therefore fear, lest a promise being
left us of entering into his Rest, any of you should seem to come short of it.
For unto us was the Gospel preached, as well as unto them: but the word
preached did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in them that heard it.
A Court of Justice is a public Sanctuary; but it actually relieveth none but
those that seek unto it, Heb. 6.18, We might have a strong consolation who have
sled for refuge, to lay hold on the hope set before us. It is in vain as to our
profit, that Christ carries these Offices, if we do not make application to
him for his Teaching, his Sacrifice, and his Government, Gal. 2.21, Do not
frustrate the grace of God: for if righteousness come by the Law, then Christ
is dead in vain. 2 Cor. 6.1, 9, We beseech you also, that ye receive not the
grace of God in vain.

5. Let us have our hearts jointly and equally satisfied to receive him in all
his Offices, and not to divide his complete Unction, Isa. 55.4, Behold, I have
given him for a witness to the people, a leader and commander to the people.
Acts 5.31, Him has God exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince and a
Savior, to give repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. Jer. 31.33, 34,
But this shall be the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after
those days, says the Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write
it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people. And
they shall teach no more every man his neighbor, saying, Know the Lord: for
all shall know me from the least of them unto the greatest of them, says the
Lord; for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more.
1 Cor. 1.30, But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us
wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification and redemption. There be who
divide his Offices, who would be saved by his Priesthood, but will neither be
taught by his Prophecy, nor ruled by his Kingdom. 2. Others, who would be both
saved and taught, but not commanded by him. Again, There be who would divide
the things belonging to his Offices: As 1. who would submit to his teaching by
outward Ordinances, but will not submit themselves to the inward teaching of
his Spirit. 2. Who will be content to take his satisfaction, and merit of his
death, but think they need not his intercession. 3. Who would take the
protection of his Kingdom, but will not have the Laws and Government thereof.
4. Who would be made happy by his means, but will not be made holy.

6. Let us labor to seek within us the experiment of the virtue of each of his
Offices, and of the several parts thereof, and things pertaining to the same.

And 1. of his Prophecy; and that not only of his doing the part of a Prophet,
in showing to us things more pleasant, but things more bitter also, even our
sin, and his reproofs, Joh. 16.8, And when he is come, he will reprove the
world of sin, and of righteousness, and of judgment. Psalm. 50.21, But I will
reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes.

2. Let us study to experience the power and efficacy of his Priesthood in both
parts thereof, of his Satisfaction, and of his Intercession; of the death and
life of our Priest, and that to all the intents of these parts of that Office,
for Reconciliation, for access to God, for bringing you in favor, for keeping
you in favor, for perseverance, for righteousness, for holiness, and for
salvation, Romans 5.9, 10, Much more then being now justified by his blood, we
shall be saved from wrath through him. For if when we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son: much more being reconciled, we shall
be saved by his life. Heb. 4.14, Seeing then that we have a great High Priest
that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our
profession. And 10.22, Let us draw near, in the full assurance of faith, having
our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure
water. 1 Cor. 1.30, But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto
us wisdom, and righteousness, sanctification, and redemption. Acts 5.31, Him
has God exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, for to give
repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins. Heb. 9.15, And for this cause he
is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by means of death for the redemption
of the transgressions that were under the first Testament, they which are
called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance.

3. Let it he our endeavor also to feel within us the virtue of his Kingdom,
by taking on his yoke, submitting to his commands, Mat. 11.29, Take my yoke
upon you. Admitting him as a King upon a throne, to rule within us, Luke 17.21,
Behold the kingdom of God is within you. Yielding him service, Psalm. 2.11, 12,
Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the son lest he be
angry. Subduing your lusts, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5, For the weapons of our warfare are
not carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds:
casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against
the knowledge of God; and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience
of Christ. Committing your selves to his protection, and making it your refuge,
2 Timothy 1.12, For I know whom I have believed; and I am persuaded, that he is
able to keep that which I have committed unto him against that day.

Use 5. Try your improving of Christ's Offices, and whether he carries them in
vain as to your reaping profit by them. 1. In general: 1. By your delight in
the wise conjunction of them, insomuch that if it were at your disposing, ye
could not be content that any of them were wanting in him. 2. By your
unsatisfiedness with your selves until you have had some good, and found some
effect of each of them upon you.

2. More particularly, 1. If you have been under the efficacy of Christ's
Prophecy, no outward teaching will satisfy you, till you feel the power of
his Spirit teaching you inwardly. 2. If you have been under the efficacy of his
Priesthood, no sacrifice, nor service, nor prayers of your own will be rested
on, but his Sacrifice and Intercession only. 3. If you have felt the efficacy
of his Kingdom, no externals of a well-ordered and ruled walk, will content
you, without his Kingdom within you.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Mediator's Unction as it relates to the endowing of him
with all requisite Qualifications for that Work.
THE Second Part of Christ's Unction (which is also consequent to his personal
union) is the furnishing and fitting of him with special Requisites and
Furniture for the work of Mediation; and particularly, he is anointed with
requisite qualifications for the discharge of these three high Offices unto
which he was designed, to be a King, a Priest, and a Prophet to his Church: And
this also is comprehended in the Anointing from which our Mediator has his
name, Messiah, or Christ, Joh. 1.41. Luke 9.20.

Of this part of his Unction we shall speak, 1. More generally, laying open
what it is, and the comprehensive phrases of Scripture which speak of it. 2.
More particularly, pointing at the special graces which were required, and were
found eminently in our Mediator.

And 1. of his Unction in general, whereby the Godhead made the Manhead full of
himself, and of all the communicable graces and gifts of the Spirit, to fit him
for the work of a Mediator.

The Scripture-phrases concerning this unction, or fitness and furniture of
Christ for his Mediatorship, are exceeding large and comprehensive, Psalm. 45.2,
7, Thou art fairer than the children of men: grace is poured into thy lips --
thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. There
his unction with the Holy Ghost, and graces of the Spirit, compared to oil
(which in regard of its nature refreshes and makes fit for use; and in regard
of its use, was employed for figuring and signifying men's fitness for the
calling), is extolled comparatively, comparing it with the unction of
believers; a large effusion of the Spirit was upon him after an extraordinary
measure and manner, John 3.34, For God gives not the spirit by measure unto
him: how then? without measure: i.e. most abundantly: the like phrase see Ezra
7.22, And salt, without prescribing how much. Christ did receive the gifts of
the Spirit in such abundant measure, that he might have an overflowing measure
in him, that should run over, and fill all his members, Joh. 1.14, 16, full of
grace and truth. And of his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace.
1 John 2.27, But the anointing that ye have received of him, abides in you:
and ye need not that any man teach you, etc. Ephesians. 4.7, But unto every one of us
is given grace, according to the measure of the gift of Christ. And 1.23, The
fullness of him that fills all in all. Acts 10.38, He is said to be anointed
with the holy Ghost and with power, having both (...) and (...), given to him,
both might and authority, Mat. 28.18, All power is given unto me in heaven and
in earth. Joh. 17.2, As thou have given him power over all flesh. 1 Cor. 1.24,
Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God. And Col. 1.19, It pleased the
Father that in him should all fullness dwell: that is, admirable perfection of
Grace; he has all worth in his person, nothing is wanting in him that may
complete his peoples happiness: some short view of the Graces wherewith he was
filled, we have Isa. 11.2, 3, 4, 5, And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon
him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and might,
the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord: And shall make him of
quick understanding in the fear of the Lord: and he shall not judge after the
sight of his eyes, neither shall reprove after the hearing of his ears: But
with righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek
of the earth: and he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth; and with
the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked. And righteousness shall be the
girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins. Romans 15.12, And
again Esaias says, There shall be a root of Jesse; and he that shall rise to
reign over the Gentiles, in him shall the Gentiles trust. And Col. 2.3, All the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge; not absolutely taken for infinite knowledge,
as the words relate to the human nature of Christ; but relatively, for a
mavelous height of perfection of these things, such as was requisite for his
Mediatorship in order to our salvation. Again, Col. 2.9, it is said of him, The
fullness of the Godhead dwells in him bodily, i. e. personally, by the union of
the divine nature with the human, in the unity of his person, the perfect Deity
of the Son, with all his Attributes (and not only in regard of particular gifts
and graces, as he dwells in the Prophets and Saints), but as the soul
dwells in the body, personally, or substantially, in opposition to the
shadows of the Old Testament.

But mainly, by the anointing of Christ with the Holy Ghost, we understand two
things, which we find joined with the Spirit promised to him: 1. All the Gifts
and Graces of the Spirit in copious and abundant measure, and according to the
highest pitch and degree that the human nature of Christ was capable to
receive; and so the Spirit put upon him, is joined with the variety and
eminency of excel-cellent gifts, Isa. 11.2, etc. 2. The unutterable assistance
and presence of the Spirit, bearing his Human nature up in all that he was to
do as Mediator, that he should not serve on his own charges: See Isa. 42.1, 2,
Behold my servant whom I have chosen: mine elect, in whom my soul delights. I
have put my spirit upon him: he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles: He
shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street, etc.
Psalm. 89.21, With whom my hand shall be established: mine arm also shall
strengthen him. And both these the holy Human nature of Christ needed, for
these reasons: 1. For the things which he was to suffer: If Christ had nothing
to do but active obedience, the spirit of Adam, or confirmed Angels, might have
done his turn: but he had another work to do (which would have crushed those
excellent creatures) to satisfy justice, and lie under the infinite wrath of
God, and therefore needed more than they received, Heb. 9.14, He is said to
have offered up himself, by the power of the eternal spirit, which I take to
signify, not only the Godhead which gave value to his suffering, but the
assistance of the Holy Ghost, whereby he was marvellously helped (I mean his
humane nature) to go through those sufferings. 2. Because his anointing was
intended to run over to his people, and the off-fallings of it was designed to
fill them; therefore it behoved to be without measure; such a measure as cannot
be comprehended by any other creature, Joh. 1.16, Of his fullness do we receive.
Psalm. 133.2, It is like the precious ointment upon the head, that ran down upon
the beard, even Aarons beard, that went down to the skirts of his garments.
Psalm. 68.18, Thou have ascended on high, thou have led captivity captive, thou
have received gifts for men; yea, for the rebellious also, that the Lord might
dwell among them: with Ephesians. 4.8, He led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto
men. Joh. 5.26, For as the Father has life in himself, so has he given to the
Son to have life in himself. 3. Because God has so contrived the business of
Grace, that no created thing can act without the spirit: not Adam, not the
Angels, not the holy humane nature of Christ; that all creatures might be known
to have no self-sufficiency, but to be very depending things upon God, and upon
grace, the assisting-grace of his Spirit, that framed them, and gave them
being, Mat. 3.15, And Jesus answering, said unto him, Suffer it to be so now,
for thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness. Romans 11.36, For of him,
and through him, and to him are all things, to whom be glory for ever.

For a further clearing of this part of Christ's Unction, I lay down these four
Positions:

1. Concerning the Nature thereof, that it was the same with the Unction of
believers; it was not one spirit which Christ received, and another which
believers receive: grace in him, and in them, differ not in kind, but in
degrees: See Joh. 1.14, 16, And the word was made flesh, and dwelt among us,
and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full
of grace and truth. And of his fullness have all we received, and grace for
grace. Psalm. 45.7, Thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above
thy fellows. Gal. 4.6, And because ye are sons, God has sent forth the spirit
of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba Father. Romans 8.9, 11, But ye are not
in the flesh, but in the spirit, if so be that the spirit of God dwell in you.
Now if any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his. -- But if the
spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised
up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies, by his spirit
that dwells in you. For, Consider the Unction of the humane Nature of Christ,
1. It was Created-grace wherewith he was anointed: it was grace given upon the
one part, and received upon the other: it was grace-poured out and infused in
the same manner as believers receive grace, Psalm. 68.18, Thou have received
gifts for men; yea, for the rebellious also, that the Lord might dwell among
them. Psalm. 45.2, 7, Grace is poured into thy lips, therefore has God blessed
thee for ever. Thou love righteousness, and hate wickedness, therefore God,
thy God, has anointed thee with oil of gladness above thy fellows. 2. It was
grace, which being finite, did receive increase, Luke 2.40, 52, And the child
grew, and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom, and the grace of God was
upon him. And Jesus increased in wisdom and stature, and in favor with God and
man; as all his members do, Ephesians. 4.13, Till all we come in the unity of the
faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. 3. It must needs be of the
same kind, seeing our grace and Unction is part of his fullness, Joh. 1.16, And
of his fullness have all we received and grace for grace. 1 John 2.20, 27, But
ye have an unction from the holy one. -- But the anointing which you have
received of him, abides in you. Yet so, as Christ is not degraded from his
Sovereignty by his partners exaltation, Col. 1.18, And he is the head of the
body, the Church; who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead, that in
all things he might have the pre-eminence.

2. Concerning the measure of Christ's Unction: although his Unction differ not
in kind from the Unction of believers; yet the measure of it so far exceeds our
measure, that in respect thereof it is without measure, and yet the humane
Nature of Christ had not infinite grace; for thereof it was not capable: it is
as the Ocean compared with the drop of a Bucket; the spirit and grace was in
him as water in the Fountain; in us, as water in the Cistern; communication in
regard of Christ, is full and immediate; grace is in him as the money in the
treasure, which is disbursed to us according to our need; grace is in him as
life and sense is eminently in the heart and head, which is diffused into his
members, Joh. 5.26, For as the Father has life in himself, so has he given to
the Son to have life in himself. Chap. 6. v. 57, As the living Father has sent
me, and I live by the Father: so he that eats me, even he shall live by me.
Psalm. 45.2, 7, Thou art fairer than the children of men, grace is poured into
thy lips. -- God, thy God, has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above
thy fellows. Col. 1.18, And he is the head of the body, the Church, who is the
beginning, the firstborn from the dead, that in all things he might have the
pre-eminence.

3. Concerning the time of Christ's Unction: whether he received the spirit
without measure, in that copious abundant effusion, from the womb, and first
moment of his conception: We say he was anointed even from the first union of
his two Natures in his person; the Godhead did sanctify the huname Nature, and
make it holy, undefiled; and infused all graces, as appears from Luke 1.35,
Therefore also that holy thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called the
Son of God. Heb. 7.26, For such an High Priest became us, who is holy,
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heaven.
And from the glorious effects thereof, which did early appear in him, Luke
2.42, to 49. Yet so, as he did more fully receive the anointing, and the spirit
without measure, when he was to appear publicly, in the entire executing of
his Offices, which was about the thirtieth year of his age; Luke 3.23, with
4.1, 22, And Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost, etc. -- And all bare him
witness, and wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out of his mouth.
Which was typified in David's being twice anointed, once when he was first
designed King, 1 Samuel 16.13. And again, when he was invested in the presence of
the people, 2 Samuel 2.4. Which was also held forth in the visible sign of the
Holy Ghost, his descending upon him at his baptism, Mat. 3.16. And was
intimated to John beforehand, Joh. 1.33, 34, And I knew him not: but he that
sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, Upon whom thou shall see
the spirit descending and remaining on him, the same is he which baptizeth with
the Holy Ghost. And I saw, and bare record, that this is the Son of God, i.e.
That he who as man should receive the spirit, should also as God, yea, as
Mediator, give the spirit to others.

4. Concerning the extent of his Unction, as it reaches unto all the parts of
his Mediatorship, and the furnishing him for them. 1. He was anointed to be a
Prophet, furnished with a dexterity to preach the Gospel, Luke 4.18, 19, 22,
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the
Gospel to the poor, he has sent me to heal the brokenhearted, to preach
deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind: to set at
liberty them that are bruised: to preach the acceptable year of the Lord. --
And all bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious words which proceeded out
of his mouth. Isa. 50.4, The Lord has given me the tongue of the learned, that
I should know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary. Mat. 7.28,
29, And it came to pass when Jesus had ended these sayings, the people were
astonished at his doctrine. For he taught them as one having authority, and not
as the Scribes. Joh. 6.63, The words that I speak unto you, they are spirit,
and they are life. Yea, he was not only furnished with a spirit for that
calling, but also for prompting others, and fitting them for it, Ephesians. 4.8, 11,
And gave gifts unto men. -- And he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and
some Evangelists, and some Pastors, and some Teachers. 2. He was anointed (not
only called, but furnished) for his Priestly Office, for both the parts thereof
furnished by the Spirit, wherewith he was anointed, both for offering his
Sacrifice, and for making his intercession, Heb. 9.14, Who through the eternal
spirit offered himself without spot to God. Chap. 5. v. 7, Who in the days of
his flesh, when he had offered up prayers and supplications, with strong crying
and tears, etc. 3. He was anointed, and furnished for his Kingly Office, with a
spirit, and gifts for Government; for conquering his enemies, and for ruling
his people, Psalm. 45.3, 4, 5, Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O most Mighty,
with thy glory and thy Majesty. And in thy Majesty ride prosperously, because
of truth, and meekness, and righteousness: and thy right hand shall teach thee
terrible things. Thine arrows are sharp in the heart of the kings enemies,
whereby the people fall under thee. Isa. 11.2, And the spirit of the Lord shall
rest upon him, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel
and might, the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord, etc.

Use 1. Behold, how well furnished our Mediator is set out for his work: there
is a fullness in him to meet with all our emptiness; yea, his fullness was given
to him for this very end, that sinners which cannot come where the fullness of
God lies, to receive from him immediately, may receive it out of Christ's
fullness.

Consider then, I say, 1. What a fullness is in him, what a running-over Unction
he received; this is a work above us, and matter beyond our expression, wherein
we may more easily lose our selves, even in this depth, than express our
selves: by this Unction he is full of God, Col. 2.9, For in him dwells all
the fullness of the Godhead bodily. Full of the spirit, the Holy Ghost, Luke
4.1, And Jesus being full of the Holy Ghost, full of grace and truth. Joh.
11.4, Full of light and of life. Joh. 1.4, In him was life, and the life was
the light of men, etc. Full of saving grace, and sanctified gifts, Isa. 11.2,
And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, etc.

2. Consider for what end all this fullness was given unto him: he was full of
the spirit, that he might fill us with his spirit, Joh. 16.7, Nevertheless I
tell you the truth, it is expedient for you that I go away: for if I go not
away, the comforter will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him
unto you. Ephesians. 3.19, That ye might be filled with all the fullness of God. He
was full of grace, that we might receive of his fullness, Joh. 1.16. That his
Unction might run down upon us, 1. Joh. 2.27, But the anointing which ye have
received of him, abides in you, and ye need not that any man teach you. That
his grace might work mightily in us, Col. 1. last. He received gifts for our
use, to give them to men, to the worst of men, even to the rebellious, gifts to
be measured out again, Psalm. 68.18, with Chap. 4. v. 8.

Use 2. Let his fullness and complete Unction be improved, 1. For convincing
such as continue so empty, when Christ is so full? Ah, that we should be so
poor, when Christ is so rich! when we have so full an anointed one, that we
should never taste of his Unction! some have nothing, and some have little; but
very few are filled with the fullness of Christ, and made to run over-with his
Unction: the fault is in us that he is so wet, and we are so dry, John 5.40,
And ye will not come to me, that ye might have life.

2. For alluring and gaining the hearts of empty creatures. Things allure, as
there is much of precious furniture in them: but this is sad, when God has
anointed Christ with the Spirit above measure: that empty creatures care
nothing for him, that his fullness and furniture is propounded and offered every
day in the Gospel, and we are not allured by it. Song. 1.3, Because of the
savor of thy good ointments, thy name is as ointment poured forth, therefore
the virgins love thee.

3. For comforting believers: all this fullness of the Spirit, of gifts and
graces wherewith Christ was anointed, it is yours: it was not only for your
use, but it is your property. 1 Cor. 3.22, 23, All are yours, and ye are
Christ's, and Christ is Gods: You may use it as your own; you may come to the
Fountain, to the Treasure, to the storehouse of Christ's fullness, when-you
will: you may comfortably and confidently hold up your Cisterns, till they be
filled and run over, Isa. 12.3, Therefore with joy shall ye draw water out of
the wells of Salvation. Phil. 4.18, 19, But I have all, and abound: I am full
-- But my God shall supply all your need, according to his riches in glory by
Jesus Christ.

CHAP. XV. Of the Requisites in a Mediator, which are eminently to be found in
Christ the Mediator of the New Covenant.
IN the next place, I come to speak more particularly of this part of Christ's
Unction, or his Furniture for the work of Mediatorship, by laying open the
Requisites in a Mediator, which are all eminently to be found in Christ, and
may be reckoned as so many properties or qualifications in the Mediator of the
New Covenant.

The Requisites in a Mediator or Reconciler, that deals betwixt two parties,
are of two sorts: 1. Some Requisites which more directly relate to the
qualifying a person for such an Employment. 2. There be other Requisites which
look more directly to the managing of that trust: both the one and the other
are eminently to be found in Christ.

And 1. Of the Requisites fitting a Person for this trust: 1. A Mediator must
be such a Person that has Interest in both the parties, else he should be
suspected either by one party or other: yea, his interposing should not be
admitted of by the parties, without this Requisite: Christ has this Requisite
most eminently; he is such a Person who is not only of Kindred to both parties,
but by that rare conjunction of the two Natures in his Person, who is God man,
he is equally distant from, and drawing near to both parties (whereof I spoke
before when I treated of the Union of the two Natures: and therefore will not
insist here).

2. A Mediator must be a Person trusted by both parties: one to whom they can
confidently entrust their Interests: such a person is Christ, to whom God has
entrusted and committed whatsoever relates to his Honor and Interest: John
5.22, 27, For the Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the
Son -- And has given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the
Son of man. He is a Person, a Trustee, to whom we may commit all our Interests:
yea, Believers have done so, and will do so, 1 Pet. 4.19, Commit the keeping of
your souls to him in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator, 2 Timothy 1.12, And I
am persuaded, that he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him,
against that day: Yea, he is the person to whom our Interests were committed by
God before we were born, and before we were capable to dispose of our own
interests. When we were Minors, yea before we were, John 17.6, Thine they were,
and thou gave them me, and they have kept thy word.

3. A Mediator must be a Person which is well-affected to, and which seeks
the welfare of both parties: one who desires their union and agreement, else he
were not fit to deal betwixt them: such a person is Jesus the Mediator of the
New Covenant; one who desires and endeavors Gods honor and our happiness;
one who carries on his Fathers Honor in the promoting of our happiness; and
one who carries on our happiness in such way as may most highly advance his
Fathers Honor: one who is marvellously affected to the union of the
disagreeing parties: John 8.49, But I honor my father, and ye do dishonor me:
with Tit. 2.14, Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. 2
Cor. 5.19, God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself.

4. A Mediator must be a Person which has power over both the parties: one
that may determine the difference, and engage the parties to stand to the
decision: one that can lay his hands on both, Job 9.33. Such a person is
Christ, who has power with God, being his only Natural Son, Matthew. 3.17, This
is my beloved Son, in whom I am well-pleased. John 11.41, 42, Father, I thank
thee that thou have heard me; and I know that thou hear me always. And a
person who has power with us, can draw us after him, and make us do what he
will. John 12.32, And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men
unto me. Psalm. 119.35, Make me to go in the path of thy Commandments. Ezekiel.
36.27, And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes: and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them.

2. There are other Requisites, which relate more directly to the managing such
a work. And 1. A Mediator must be a condescending Person, which can humble
himself, and bow, for the compassing an union betwixt the parties: Christ is
such a Person. Zech. 9.9, Behold, thy king comes -- he is lowly. A
condescending Mediator, whose condescensions were eminent. 1. He showed himself
very condescending in taking on the Office of a Mediator. In this he bowed
himself, and stooped very low: he came off the Throne, and left it, to take on
a service, Phil. 2.6, 7, 8, Who being in the form of God, thought it not
robbery to be equal with God; but made himself of no reputation, and took upon
him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men: And b^ing found
in fashon as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even
the death of the cross. 2. Condescending to take on the duties of that Office:
he became a servant to both parties, that he might make peace betwixt them.
Isa. 42.1, Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul
delights. Ver. 53.11, By his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify
many, for he shall bear their iniquity. Matt. 20.28, Even as the Son of man
came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom
for many. 3. Condescending in his way of going about that Office, and the
things pertaining to it: condescending to the weakest and lowest condition of
his people, and showing his dealings accordingly. Isa. 42.2, 3, He shall not
cry, nor lift, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street; a bruised reed
shall be not break. And 40.11, He shall feed his flock like a shepherd, he
shall gather the lambs with his arms, and shall gather them in his bosom, and
shall gently lead those that are with young. Ezekiel. 34.16, I will seek that
which was lost, and bring again that which was driven away: and I will bind up
that which was broken, and will strengthen that which was sick, 4.
Condescending in all his carriage: not seeking his own honor, nor affecting
popularity, but doing his greatest works with little noise, and bidding tell no
man of them. John 6.15, When Jesus therefore perceived that they would come and
take him by force to make him a king, he departed again into a mountain himself
alone. Mat. 12.18, 19, Behold my servant whom I have chosen, mine elect in whom
my soul is well-pleased; I will put my spirit upon him, and he shall show
judgment to the Gentiles: he shall not strive nor cry, neither shall any man
hear his voice in the streets. And 8.4, And Jesus says unto him, See thou tell
no man.

2. A Mediator in carrying his business, must be mollifying, to bring the
parties from rigor and high courses and conditions, to abate for peace and
union-sake. This did eminently shine forth in Christ; he was a mollifying
Mediator; for 1. He brought God down, and took him off high demands of Law: 1.
Instead of personal satisfaction from Sinners, to accept of satisfaction in the
person of another, to wit, Christ our Surety, who was made a curse for us, Gal.
3.13. Isa 53.8, For the transgressions of mp people was he stricken. 2. In
place of an inherent righteousness, to accept an imputed Righteousness, 1 Cor.
1.30, But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption. 3. Instead of a perfect
obedience from man, to accept his poor endeavors after perfection, and to
pardon short-comings in duty; to accept a perfection of sincerity, where he
requires the rigor of perfection, 2 Cor. 8.12, For if there be first a willing
mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not according to that he
has not. 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19, The good Lord pardon every one that prepares his
heart to seek God, the Lord God of his fathers, though he be not cleansed
according to the purification of the Sanctuary.

2. He has brought up man in his own body, to come nearer to God, and to leave
the terms whereupon he stood at odds with God before: 1. By quitting his own
righteousness, and his seeking to establish it, Romans 10.3: to submit to the
righteousness of God, and to the way of Justification by a free-gifted
righteousness, Romans 3.24, Being justified freely by his grace, through the
redemption that is in Jesus Christ, etc. 2 Cor. 9.13, Whiles by the experiment
of this ministration they glorify God for your professed subjection unto the
Gospel of Christ. 2. Instead of personal satisfaction, to offer to God
satisfaction in the person of another, to present Christ to God, 2 Cor. 5.
last, For he has made him to be sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him. 1 Timothy 2.6, Who gave himself a ransom for
all, to be testified in due time. 3. Instead of that extreme undutifulness and
aversness to yield any obedience to God, to offer to God his utmost endeavors
of obedience and service, and not to think God his debtor when he has so done.
2 Cor. 5.15, And that he died for all, that they which live, should not
henceforth live to themselves, but to him which died for them, and rose again.

3. A Mediator must be affable, one to whom both parties may freely tell their
mind, and have access to do so. Christ is an affable Mediator, a Person who
courteously and kindly entertaineth both the parties in whatsoever they will
employ him; and this for the unions-sake, that he may make them one. 1. He is
affable to both parties, for he has Gods heart, and a man's heart.

1. Christ is an affable Mediator, in respect of his Father, the offended
party: and no wonder, for he dwells in his bosom, Joh. 1.18. He does kindly
entertain and receive his propositions, John 6.38, 39, For I came down from
heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me: And this is
the fathers will that has sent me, etc. 2. He is an affable Mediator in
respect of the offending-party: one who kindly and courteously receives and
etertaineth the worst of sinners that ever employed him: His carriage while he
was here on earth, did thoroughly bear witness of this before his death, and
after his resurrection; whereby he gave a proof how he would carry to us when
he should be in glory, being then in the way and first step to it. O, how
affable was he then! Luke 24. John 20, and 21 Chapters. And how affable is he
still now, when he is set down on the right hand of Majesty! Joh. 16.25, 26,
27, The time comes when I shall no more speak unto you in Proverbs, but I
shall show you plainly of the Father. -- At that day ye shall ask in my name:
and I say not unto you, that I will pray the Father for you, for the Father
himself loves you. Heb. 2.17, That he might be a merciful High Priest in
things pertaining to God. And 5.2, Who can have compassion on the ignorant, and
on them that are out of the way, for that he himself also is compassed with
infirmities.

2. He is affable to Justice and Mercy both, these two Attributes in God which
were to be eminently glorified in our Salvation: 1. He is affable to Justice,
ready always to speak with Justice, and to satisfy it with a Ransom and Price,
Heb. 12.24, And to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, and to the blood of
sprinkling, that speaks better things than that of Abel. 2. He is affable to
Mercy and Grace, and ready always to satisfy Mercy by entreaties, even for the
thing which he has bought, Heb. 7.25, Seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them: Yea, he pleads in our name with both these Attributes in
God, by virtue of his satisfaction and intercession, Heb. 9.24, For Christ is
not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the
true: but into heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us.

4. A Mediator must be meek and long-suffering for the Unions-sake, to bear
with both the parties, although they should smite him, and be angry with him:
Christ is such a Mediator, Matthew. 21.5, Tell the daughter of Zion, behold, thy
king comes unto thee, meek, and sitting upon an ass, and a colt, the foal of
an ass. And 11.29, I am meek and lowly in heart. Moses in his Mediation was a
type of him, Numb. 12.3, Now the man Moses was very meek above all the men that
were upon the face of the earth. O so meek a Mediator as Christ is! 1. He
endured his Fathers anger and wrath for our sake, and was smitten by him, Isa.
53.10, Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief: Romans
8.32, He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all. 2. He
endured our anger also; he was smitten by the other party, by his own, for
whose sake he was content to be smitten of his Father, Mat. 21.38, But when the
husbandmen saw the Son, they said among themselves, This is the heir, let us
kill him, and let us seize on his Inheritance. Isa. 53.3, He is despised and
rejected of men: a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief, and we hid as it
were our faces from him; he was despised, and we esteemed him not: And when he
was smitten by both parties at once, and endured the wrath and displeasure of
both at the same time, yet he carried as a meek Mediator, who did bear all for
the Unions-sake, that he might make peace, Isa. 53.7, He was oppressed, and he
was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he is brought as a lamb to the
slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he opened not his
mouth: with 1 Pet 2.23, Who, when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he
suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself to him that judges
righteously. He went through all the business with little clamor, noise or
complaint, Matthew. 12.17, 18, 19.

5. A Mediator must be merciful and tenderhearted, one that has bowels to
pity the unreconciled state of the offender: Christ is eminently such a Person.
1. One who has conjoined in his person the heart of God, and the heart of a
man: the infinite mercy of God, and the kindly compassion of an experienced
man; who in his Humane nature has felt our afflictions and temptations, Heb.
2.17, 18, Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his
brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest in things
pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people: For in
that he himself has suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor them that
are tempted. And 5.2, Who can have compassion on the ignorant, and on them that
are out of the way: for that he himself also is compassed with infirmity. 2. A
Person, who in all his dealings has showed himself merciful, and has
evidenced his compassionate disposition: one that has showed mercy to all that
ever came to God through him, and upon all occasions that ever were given him,
to show himself such. John 6.37, All that the Father gives me shall come to
me: and him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. Matthew. 15.22, And
behold a woman of Canaan came out of the same coasts, and cried unto him,
saying, Have mercy on me, O Lord, thou Son of David: my daughter is grievously
vexed with a Devil. And 9.27, And when Jesus departed thence, two blind men
followed him, crying and saying, Thou Son of David have mercy on us. One who
showed mercy, not only upon the matter, but even in the way and manner of his
dealings with his people: Matthew. 12.20, A bruised reed shall he not break, and
smoking flax shall he not quench, till he send forth judgment into victory.
And 9.17, Neither do men put new wine into old bottles, else the bottles break,
and the wine runs out, and the bottles perish; but they put new wine into
new bottles, and both are preserved. One who carries compassionately unto, and
is pitiful even of the wilful refusers of his mercy, Luke 19.41, And when he
was come near, he beheld the City, and wept over it, etc. One who was not only
pitiful in the days of his flesh, but has carried also the same heart and
bowels of a merciful and compassionate Mediator unto heaven with him, Heb.
2.18, For in that he himself has suffered being tempted, he is able to succor
them that are tempted. And 4.15, For we have not an High Priest which cannot be
touched with the feeling of our infirmities: but was in all points tempted like
as we are, yet without sin. 1 John 2.1, And if any man sin, we have an Advocate
with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.

6. A Mediator must be Potent, and able to compass his undertaking: Christ is
such a Mediator, Psalm. 89.19, I have laid help upon one that is mighty. Isa.
9.6, His name shall be called -- the mighty God. He is a potent Mediator, 1. In
respect of the power that is in his hands: Consider his ability to compass the
work committed unto him, in respect of his essential power and kingdom, and in
respect of his dispensatory power and kingdom, Isa. 9.6, 7, He is able to save
to the utmost, perfectly. Heb. 7.25, He is mighty to save, Isa. 63.1. He is
able to save from sin, and all that is in it, whether guilt, power, or
defilement: and from wrath, and all that may follow upon it: he is able to
supply all our wants, and to do for us exceeding abundantly above all that we
can ask or think, Phil. 4.19. Ephesians. 3.20. And consider his ability to perform
whatsoever he has undertaken, and that as well for God to man, as for man to
God. He is able to do what ever he has engaged to us on Gods behalf; to finish
the work that he gave him to do, John 17.4, etc. and for this cause he is a
King by Covenant, and has all power in heaven and earth given to him, Mat.
28.18. Heb. 10.12, But this man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins,
for ever sat down on the right hand of God. Chap. 8. v. 1, Now of the things
which we have spoken, this is the sum, We have such an High Priest who is set
on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heaven. Ephesians. 1.20.21, 22,
And set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places, far above all
principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and every name that is named,
not only in this world, but also in that which is to come. And has put all
things under his feet, and given him to be head over all things to the Church.
2. He is a potent Mediator in respect of the trust and delegation of power
given to him, for settling and removing the difference betwixt the parties: the
arbitration being rendered up to him to determine and lay his hands on both,
Joh. 5.22, For the Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to
the Son. This is a great power that is put in Christ's hands, that he shall
order the satisfaction that shall be given, so as to bring about the giving of
it upon the one part, and the acceptance of it upon the other part, Joh.
10.17, 18, Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I
might take it again. -- I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take
it again. Chap. 17. v. 2, As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he
should give eternal life to as many as thou have given him. 3. In respect of
the powerful interest he has with both the parties, 1. With God his Father
with whom he is very gracious, and has power with him to procure his
acceptance of such satisfaction as he offers, Mat. 3.17, This is my beloved
Son in whom I am well pleased. And to obtain from him whatsoever he desires
for the believer of the other party, Joh. 11.42, And I knew that thou hear
me always. Chap. 17. v. 24. Father, I will that they also whom thou have given
me, be with me where I am. 2. He has a powerful interest with man, to make him
offer the satisfaction which his Father is content to accept. To make him
subject his consent to the Gospel, 2 Cor. 9.13. Joh. 12.32, And I, if I be
lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me. And to make him walk in
that way which may please his Father, Ezekiel. 36.27, I will put my spirit in you,
and cause you to walk in my statutes. A potent Mediator, that has a great
stroke of power with both the parties, to reconcile God to man, by his
accepting the sacrifice of Christ's death; and to reconcile man to God, by his
humbling himself to offer satisfaction to God in Christ.

7. A Mediator must be faithful and true to the interest of both parties in his
Mediation, seeking and studying their good: Christ is eminently such, Heb.
2.17. Rev. 1.4. and 3.14. and 19.11.

Consider how he is faithful to both the parties, and how he is faithful to the
business of reconciliation, which is the end of a Mediator.

1. He is faithful to the parties. And, 1. To God, he is faithful to him that
appointed him, Heb. 3.2. True to his fathers interest, in seeking his honor,
executing his will, satisfying his justice, Joh. 6.38, For I came down from
heaven, not to do my own will, but the will of him that sent me. Chap. 8. v.
49, I honor my Father, and ye dishonor me.

2. He is faithful to man, and true to his interest in dealing effectually with
his Father on our behalf, in all things wherein we have dealing with God, Heb.
2.17, That he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest in things pertaining
unto God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. 1 John 2.1, We
have an advocate with the Father Jesus Christ the righteous; and he is the
propitiation for our sins.

2. He is faithful to the business, which is the end of his Office; to wit,
reconciliation, and making friendship betwixt the parties: this being entrusted
to him, he makes it his work, and minds it exceedingly, Luke 2.49, Wist ye not
that I must be about my Fathers business? Joh. 4.34, My meat is to do the will
of him that sent me, and to finish his work. And this appears, 1. In his
faithful agenting the business of our peace in Heaven, whither he is gone for
the making and maintaining peace between God and his people, there to appear in
the presence of God for us, Heb. 9.24. Joh. 17. throughout. Rev. 8.3, And
another angel came and stood at the altar, having a golden censor, and there
was given to him much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all
saints upon the golden altar which was before the throne. 2. In his faithful
reporting back again to his people what may be expected by them at his Fathers
hands: he is the messenger of the Covenant, and the true and faithful witness,
Mal. 3.1. Rev. 1.5. Joh. 14.2, In my Fathers house are many mansions, if it
were not so I would have told you. I go to prepare a place for you. Ephesians. 2.17,
And came and preached peace to them which were afar off, and to them that were
night. Joh. 1.18, No man has seen God at any time: the only begotten Son which
is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him. 3. In his effectual
procuring his peoples peace with his Father: he never gives over dealing in
the business, until it be done and ended, and the treaty be closed and signed;
until he have finished the work. Joh. 17.4, 24. and have said unto his people,
Peace I give unto you, Joh. 14.27. Ephesians. 2.14, 15, 16, For he is our peace, who
has made both one, and has broken down the middle wall of partition between
us: Having abolished in his flesh the enmity, even the law of commandments
contained in ordinances, for to make in himself, of twain, one new man, so
making peace. And that he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the
cross, having slain the enmity thereby.

8. A Mediator must be a Wooer of both the parties, to bring them in friendship
together: The Mediator of the new Covenant did this eminently, he wooed God for
us, and wooed us for God, which none of the parties had access to do
immediately, without his interposing betwixt them; and this he does several
ways: 1. By praising and commending both the parties, and speaking good of each
of them to the other, as it were behind their backs: he commends God to us,
Joh. 6.39, And this is the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all which
he has given me I should lose nothing, but should raise it up at the last day.
Chap. 14. v. 2, In my Fathers house are many mansions, if it were not so I
would have told it you: I go to prepare a place for you. Chap. 16. v. 17, For
the Father himself loves you. And he commends us to God, Joh. 17.8, 25, For
I have given unto them the words which thou gave me, and they have received
them, and have known surely that I came out from thee, and they have believed
that thou did send me. -- O righteous Father, the world has not known thee:
but I have known thee, and these have known that thou have sent me. 2. By
praying and requesting both the parties to be at peace: he entreats his
Father to be at peace with us, Joh. 17.9, I pray for them: I pray not for the
world, but for them that thou have given me, for they are thine. And he
entreats and requests us to be reconciled with his Father, 2 Cor. 5.20, Now
then we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we
pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled to God. 3. By engaging and becoming
Surety to both parties, for all that he speaks in the name of any of the
parties unto the other, Heb. 7.22, By so much was Jesus made surety of a better
Testament. He makes says, and undertaketh that we shall find God as good as
the commendation which he puts upon him; and he makes faith to Godward, that
he shall make us answer his promises in our name; and what we do not he shall
do for us.

9. A Mediator must be of a Courageous and unsubdued spirit, to go through
difficulties, discouragement, and opposition, without being laid by in his
work: else in dealing for reconciliation betwixt parties that are at a great
distance, he should be soon discouraged: Christ is eminently such a person; he
goes on in the work of redemption and reconciliation, saving his people, and
subduing his enemies; and though there be many enemies to this peace, and many
discouragements be cast in his way from some of the parties themselves; yet
does he go on in his work with a heroic and undaunted spirit, he can neither
be bowed, nor broken, nor laid by. Psalm. 42.4, He shall not fail, nor be
discouraged, till he have set judgment in the earth: and the Isles shall wait
for his law.

1. He was not broken nor discouraged by the weight of the work which he had
undertaken, his duty broke him not, but he went on in it till he had ended his
work. Joh. 17.4, I have finished the work which thou gave me to do. We read
indeed that he wept sometimes, Luke 19.41. Heb. 5.7. but he was not discouraged
then, but went on to do his work; the courage of faith of his victory was not
shaken nor crushed. 2. His enemies, and all the opposition they could make to
him, did not break him, nor lay him by, he would go up to Jerusalem, where they
sought to kill him, Luke 9.51, And it came to pass, when the time was come that
he should be received up, he steadfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem. And
13.32, And he said unto them, Go ye, and tell that Fox, Behold I cast out
Devils, and I do cures to day, and to morrow, and the third day I shall be
perfected. He would walk on his twelve hours, he knew not what unbelieving fear
was. 3. His sufferings did not break him, nor lay him by from his work; when he
sweat blood, and when he suffered on the Cross, even then he set about his
duty, and intermitted it not, but minded sinners more than himself; often in
prayer, caring for his Mother, preaching to the thief, etc. Mat. 26. Mark 14.
Luke 22 chapters. 4. His cold and bad entertainment which he got from his
people when he was about his work, did not break him, nor lay him by, John
1.10, 11, He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world
knew him not. He came unto his own, and his own received him not. And the many
scoffs, and the slighting carriage of his people, and the grieving his spirit,
and breaking his heart every day yet, does not discourage him, nor lay him by
from his work, and from endeavors for their reconciliation with God, Romans 10.
last, But unto Israel he says, All day long I have stretched forth my hands
unto a disobedient and gainsaying people. Luke 19.41, 42, And when he was come
near, he beheld the City, and wept over it, saying, If thou have known, even
thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace, but now
they are bid from thine eyes. 5. The displeasure and wrath of both the parties,
which he knew he behoved to go through, brake him not, laid him not by, but he
ventured to take on the displeasure of both, that he might agree them, and take
away the difference, Zech. 13.7, Awake, O sword, against my shepherd, and
against the man that is my fellow, says the Lord of Hosts. Smite the shepherd,
and the sheep shall be scattered; and I will turn my hand upon the little ones.
Luke 19.14, But his Citizens hated him. Mat. 21.38, This is the heir, come let
us kill him, and let us seize on his inheritance. 6. The fair offers of the
world, and smiles of temptation from it, laid him not by, nor took him off the
work which he came to do, Joh. 6.15, When Jesus therefore perceived that they
would come and take him by force, and make him a King, he departed again into a
mountain himself alone. Mat. 4.8, 9, Again the Devil takes him up unto an
exceeding high Mountain, and shows him all the kingdoms of the world, and the
glory of them, and says unto him, All these things will I give thee if thou
will fall down and worship me.

Besides all these Requisites in a Mediator which shine forth so eminently in
Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, there are also some other Properties in
our Mediator, qualifying him for that Office, which are peculiar to his
Mediation, and are not to be found in any other Mediator among men; namely, 1.
His Oneness and Sameness with both the parties betwixt whom he mediates. There
have been mediators among men who have had some interests and relations to both
parties, but never any like to this one and only Mediator of the New Covenant,
who is perfectly one with both the parties which stand at so great distance,
Phil. 2.6, Who being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal
with God. Heb. 2.17, Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like
unto his brethren. And therefore he is so much engaged to make them one in him;
he is nearly concerned in the union of these two parties: 1. In point of
Interest, he gains by it, his Fathers honor is gain to him, and so is our
happiness also, John 16.14, 15, He shall glorify me, for he shall receive of
mine, and shall show it unto you. All things that the Father has, are mine,
therefore said I, that he shall take of mine, and shall show it unto you. Isa.
59.16, Therefore his arm brought salvation unto him. 2. In point of
Faithfulness, he has undertaken it, and will do it, for he is faithful and
true, Rev. 1.5. and 3.14. and 19.11. 3. In point of Honor; it is a Crown to him
to make the agreement betwixt God and man, Joh. 17.4, 5, I have glorified thee
on the earth: I have finished the work which thou gave me to do: And now, O
Father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with
thee before the world was. Isa. 53.12, Therefore will I divide him a portion
with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong; because he has
poured out his soul unto death, and he was numbered with the transgressors, and
he bare the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors. Psalm.
110. last, He shall drink of the brook in the way, therefore shall he lift up
the head. 4. In point of Satisfaction; it is comfort to him to see this union,
Isa. 53.11, He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied.

2. Christ is a Mediator, who never declined to mediate in the business of all
those who have any dealing with the King and Court where he lies, being a
potent, accessible Mediator to all who will employ him, Heb. 7.25, Wherefore he
is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he
ever lives to make intercession for them. Joh. 6.37, All that the Father
gives me, shall come unto me: and him that comes unto me, I will in no wise
cast out.

3. A Mediator who is always at hand, never absent from the Court, never
missing when sinners have any business with God. He is a constant Agent, who
lies always in heaven to make the Address of his people to his Father, Rev.
8.3, And another angel came and stood at the altar, having a golden censor, and
there was given unto him much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers
of all saints, upon the golden altar which was before the throne. Heb. 9.24,
For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are the
figures of the true; but into heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of
God for us. But Mediators among men are oft-times far to seek, and ill to find,
2 Samuel 14.29, as Joab was when Ahsolom would have sent him to the King; who
when he was sent for the first and second time, would not come to him.

4. A perpetual Mediator, who neither dies, nor lays down his Office. Moses,
who was a typical mediator, and Joseph who dealt with Pharaoh for Israel, died,
and then it went hard with Israel: But Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant,
continues for ever, Heb. 7.23, 24, And they truly were many priests, because
they were not suffered to continue by reason of death. But this man, because he
continues ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood.

Let us shortly hint some Uses of these things: And 1. of the Qualifications
fitting Christ for this Employment.

Use 1. If Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, be a person interested in
both parties, Then there can be no ground to suspect him of partiality, but to
look upon all that he propounds in the Gospel in order to the reconciliation
of God with sinners, as coming from one who is nearly interested, and well
affected to both parties: it is our sin that we look upon Christ, and the
things propounded by him in the Gospel, as if he were for God only, and not for
us also, Joh. 17.19, And for their sakes I sanctify my self, that they also
might be sanctified through the truth.

Use 2. If the Mediator be so trusty a Person, Then let us entrust to him the
managing of our everlasting interests: know him to be such, that you may
without fear and jealousy confidently commit to him what ever you have to do
with God, 2 Timothy 1.12, For I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that
he is able to keep that which I have committed unto him, against that day.

Use 3. If the Mediator be marvellously affected toward the union of God and
sinners, for the good of both parties: Then bear with his way of promoting your
happiness, so as he may honor his Father: for he must have both in his eye,
and therefore will make your peace, and will make you happy, by humbling you,
and making you seek his peace, and by making you holy, etc. Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 6,
According as he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that
we should be holy and without blame before him in love. Having predestined us
unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ, to himself, according to the
good pleasure of his will, to the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he
has made us accepted in the beloved. And 2.10, For we are his workmanship,
created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before ordained, that
we should walk in them. And think not that any way that Jesus Christ will have
his Father honored in you, is contrary to your happiness.

Use 4. If Christ have power with both the parties betwixt whom he is a
Mediator, then you must needs let him dispose of you, and command you wherein
he will, for making your peace with his Father; and whatever power you yield to
him, over you, with your own consent, believe it, he will improve it for your
advantage; and he has credit with his Father to effectuate the business for
his part also, Joh. 11.42, And I know that thou hear me always.

2. From the special requisites and graces which shine forth eminently in
Christ's managing the work of Mediation.

Use 1. If Christ be a condescending Mediator, who has stooped low to compass
an union betwixt you and God: Then it is your duty to stretch and raise your
self to meet him: Come and meet him: Will you let all the condescendance be on
his side, and will you not yield and bow to him in any thing? Nay, be it far
from you. 2 Chronicles. 30.8, Now be ye not stiff-necked, as your fathers were, but
yield your selves unto the Lord.

Use 2. If he be a mollifying Mediator, who has brought down God from high
demands of Law: Then 1. Consider with what ease your conditions with God is now
granted: Consider the terms upon which Christ has brought you an offer of God.
2. Be you brought off the terms of distance whereupon you stand proudly with
him. And 3. If Christ have broken you off from your proud terms wherein you
stood with God, then you may judge thereby and conclude, that he has mollified
himself also.

Use 3. If Christ be so affable, Then put away your prejudices at him, and your
misshapen thoughts of him, as if he were austere to his people; and be
encouraged to come to him with every thing relating to your peace with God; you
shall find courteous and kind entertainment, and shall experience that the
Mediator is good to speak to.

Use. 4. If the Mediator be so meek and gentle, Then believers may expect that
he will bear with their infirmities, wherein they do not allow themselves, yea,
cannot bear with themselves, Psalm. 103.9, 13, 14, He will not always chide,
neither will he keep his angar for ever. Like as a father pitieth his children,
so the Lord pitieth them that fear him: for he knows our frame, he remembers
that we are dust: yet so, as you would not tempt Christ, 1 Cor. 10.9, nor abuse
his meekness and gentleness: for there is such a thing in Christ as
Gospel-severity: the Lamb of God is a Lion when he is stirred up to he angry,
Heb. 2.2, 3, For if the word spoken by angels was steadfast, and every
transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward: How shall
we escape if we neglect so great salvation, which at the first began to be
spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him. And
10.26, For if we sin wilfully after that we have received the knowledge of the
truth, there remains no more sacrifice for sins.

Use 5. If the Mediator be so eminently merciful, Then, 1. if your condition be
so miserable, and the evils of your estate such that can plead pity, put no
doubt but they shall find pity with him, even when you can scarce speak for
pity to them, but only lay them before him, set them in his eye, Luke 19.4, And
he ran before, and climbed up into a sycamore-tree to see him, for he was to
pass that way. 2 Fear not to meet with rough dealing, repulses, untenderness,
harsh answers, Isa. 40.11, He shall feed his flock like a shepherd, he shall
gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently
lead them that are with young. Believers, beware that ye do not upon the
matter, deny your Mediators merciful disposition; say not by your carriage,
that he is a hard man, Mal. 25.24.

Use 6. Is he a Potent Mediator, Then, 1. let sinners only deal to get Christ
engaged for their peace, and the business is done, he shall bring it about,
Isa. 38.14, O Lord, I am oppressed, undertake for me. And 53.10, And the
pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. 2. Believers, know whom you
have believed, how potent he is to do what is entrusted to him, Psalm. 89.19, I
have laid help upon one that is mighty; that you may be comforted, and your
faith strengthened. Romans 4.20, 21, He staggered not at the promise of God
through unbelief, but was strange in faith, giving glory to God. And being fully
persuaded that what he had promised he was able also to perform.

Use 7. If he be a faithful Mediators, Then 1. be persuaded to give him more
trust in the employment you put upon him: in all your business leave your care
upon this trusty person: 1 These. 5.24, Faithful is he that calls you, who
also will do it. Psalm. 37.5, Commit thy way unto the Lord: trust also in him,
and he shall bring it to pass. 2. Then it must be a great sin and provocation
in any who have employed Christ, to be jealous of him, and to distrust his
undertakings; sure such do not know him well whom they have believed, 2 Timothy
1.12. 3. Believers who have fled to him for refuge, and rolled over your
temporal and everlasting interests upon him, you may quiet your minds, and lie
down securely without fear of the miscarrying of any thing that is good for
you, Phil. 4.6, 7, Be careful for nothing, but in every thing with prayer and
supplication, with thanksgiving, let your requests be made known to God. And
the peace of God which passes all understanding, shall keep your hearts and
minds through Christ Jesus. Psalm. 3.5, 6, I laid me down and slept, I awaked,
for the Lord sustained me. I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people that
have set themselves against me round about.

Use 8. If our Mediator be the Wooer and Suitor of both the parties unto the
peace: Then, to be you willingly wooed by him: be not nice and wild when he is
courting your hearts to wed with him, and to make peace with God, 2 Chronicles.
30.8, Now be not yet stiff-necked as your fathers were, but yield your selves
unto the Lord, and enter into his sanctuary. When he prays you, and beseeches
you to be reconciled to God, be not hard to be entreated, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20. 2.
Fear not, if your hearts have become toward to his Propositions, if you be
content to be wooed by him, doubt not but he will get his Father's consent to
whatsoever he propounds to you; yea, he had his mind and good will to
whatsoever he propounds to you, before he spoke with you, Joh. 6.37, 38, All
that the Father gives me, shall come to me: and him that comes to me, I will
in no wise cast out -- And this is the Fathers will which has sent me, that of
all which he has given me I should lose nothing, but should raise it up at the
last day. And 17.16, I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gave
me out of the world: thine they were, and thou gave them me, and they have
kept thy word. 3. No thanks to us that ever God and we were in good terms; but
all thanks to the Mediator, the Wooer of both parties, the Peacemaker, who
came and preached peace, and made peace, 2 Cor. 5.20. Ephesians. 2.14, 15, 17.

Use 9. If our Mediator be of so heroic and so unsubdued a spirit: Then, 1.
Let all his enemies be afraid, and pack them out of his way, and stand not in
the way to hinder the work which he has undertaken for his people: he is of an
unsubdued spirit, and cannot be laid by; pack you, or he will ride over you,
Psalm. 110.1, 5, The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, until I
make thine enemies thy footstool. The Lord at thy right hand shall strike
through Kings in the day of his wrath. Rev. 6.2, And I saw and beheld a white
horse, and he that sat on him had a bow: and a crown was given unto him, and
be went forth conquering and to conquer. Psalm. 45.3, 4, 5. Gird thy sword upon
thy thigh, O most Mighty, with thy glory and thy majesty; and in thy majesty
ride prosperously, because of truth, and meekness, and righteousness: and thy
right hand shall teach thee terrible things. Thine arrows are sharp in the
heart of the Kings enemies, whereby the people fall under thee. 2. Believers,
comfort your selves in Christ's Heroic spirit; he cannot be laid by, nor turned
from his purpose, neither by the opposition made by the enemies of your
happiness, nor by the discouragements received from your selves, 1 John 4.4,
etc. Isa. 42.4, He shall not fail nor be discouraged. See an eminent example of
this in his dealing with the woman of Samaria, Joh. 4.10, etc.

3. Let us make some use of the whole Properties and Qualifications of our
Mediator, taking in also those which are peculiar to him: Hence a threefold
Exhortation.

First, Be exhorted to know what a Mediator Christ is: A Mediator, and such a
Mediator, the Apostle Paul has many hints in his Epistle to the Hebrews (which
is written to set forth Christ in his Offices) whereby he lays a deal of
weight upon the qualities of our Mediator, being such a person, such a
High Priest, etc. as the like was never heard of, chapter 1.4. and 3.1. and 4.14,
15. and 5.11. and 7.16, 24, 26. and 8.1, 2. and 9.11, 24. The ignorance of
this, or not considering these things, is the cause why Christ's Mediatorship is
so little comfortable to Believers: study to know this better, that you may be
comforted by it, that you have such a Mediator, one whose office, interests,
relations, engagements to you, and qualities before enumerated, may assure you
that you have a Friend in Heaven, one to whom you may come for pity and help in
all your miseries and distresses.

2. Be exhorted to more boldness; in coming to the Throne of Grace; Believers,
you dishonor your Mediator, who having so great a Favorite at the Court of
Heaven, should not with greater confidence come to God; yet this boldness ought
to be humble and awful, keeping in sight your own unworthiness, and the awe of
Gods Majesty; but be confident of the prevalency of Christ's Mediation, Heb.
4.14, 15, 16, Seeing then that we have a great High Priest that is passed into
the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession, for we have
not an High Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities,
but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without Sin: let us therefore
come boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain Mercy, and find Grace
to help in time of need. And, 10.19, 20, Having therefore, Brethren, boldness
to enter into the Holiest by the Blood of Jesus, by a new and living way which
he has consecrated through the vale, that is to say, his flesh, Gr. (...) with
open mouth. Lay not weight upon your liberty, but let the confidence you have
in your Mediator, give you boldness, which would beget and draw forth liberty
in Prayer for your selves and for others, 1 Timothy 2.1, 5, I exhort therefore,
that first of all supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks,
be made for all men -- for there is one God, and one Mediator between God and
men, the man Christ Jesus.

3. Be exhorted, you who have the offer of so great salvation, and of Christ
Mediator to be a friend to you in Heaven, to take heed that you slight it not,
Heb. 2.1, 3, Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed to the things
that we have heard, lest at any time we should let them slip. -- How shall we
escape if we neglect so great salvation, which at the first began to be spoken
by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him? And 12.25, 29,
See that ye refuse not him that speaks: for if they escaped not who refused
him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape if we turn away from him
that speaks from Heaven: For our God is a consuming fire. And, 10.26, 29, 39,
For if we sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there
remains no more sacrifice for sins. -- Of how much sorer punishment suppose
ye shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of God, and
has counted the blood of the Covenant, wherewith he was sanctified, an unholy
thing, and has done despite unto the Spirit of Grace? -- But we are not of
them who draw back unto perdition, but of them that believe, to the saving of
the Soul. There is no sin nor judgment comparable to sins against the Mediator,
and judgment that follow these sins, Joh. 15.22, If I had not come and spoken
to them, they had not had sin: but now they have no cloak for their sin. Matthew.
11.21. Woe unto thee Corazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida: for if the mighty works
which were done in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have
repented long ago in sackcloath and ashes.

CHAP. XVI. Of Christ's execution of the Office of Mediatorship.
IT remains now that something be spoken of Christ's excution of the Office of
Mediatorship, into which he was called, and for which he was fitted and
furnished: before I speak particularly how he carries on the work committed to
him as Mediator; I shall first lay down some general conclusions relating to
his execution of the Office of Mediatorship: Namely, 1. That Christ executes
this Office of Mediatorship according to both natures. 2. That he executed this
Office from the beginning of the World, before he came in the flesh. 3. That he
executes this Office, as well in the state of his exaltation, as in the state
of his humiliation.

And 1. Of that Question, See Mr. Ball treat. of the Covenant, p. 266. And Mr.
Brinsley of Christ's Mediat. p. 203. Aquin. 3. part. quest. 26. Act. 2. Bellarm.
de Christ. Mediat. lib. 5. cap. 7. vid. etiam, Bonavent. and Magistr. sent.
August. de Ovibus bom. 12. Chamier de Mediat. cap. 7. sect. 2. Jun. contr. l.
2. c. 5. not. 29. and paral. l. 3. m. c. 9. ad Hebr.
According to which Nature Christ is Mediator? Whether according to his Divine
Nature as God, or according to his human Nature only as Man, or according to
both as God-man?

Most part of the Popish Writers hold that Christ performs the Office of
Mediatorship, not according to his Divine Nature, but according to his Human
Nature, only as Man.

Orthodox Divines, hold that Christ is Mediator according to both Natures, and
does not execute that Office only as God, nor only as Man, but as (...) God-man.

For clearing whereof, I shall premise a few things. 1. The Question is not,
whether there be in the Mediator the concurrence of both natures in the unity
of his Person? for that is confessed by all. But whether both Natures concur in
the Works of Mediation, or in the execution of that Office. 2. Nor is the
Question, Whether the two Natures in Christ be distinct in their essence and
properties, and so in their operations, for we yield that the Human Nature does
that which pertains to the Humanity, and the Divine Nature that which
pertains to the Divinity: yet so, as the Natures being united in one Person,
so the operations concur to make up one Work of a Mediator, the Human and
Divine Natures concurring to produce one act or work of Mediatorship. 3. Nor is
the Question, Whether all the Works of Christ the Mediator, were the Works of
both Natures: For it is certain, some of them were the Works of his Humanity,
some of his Divinity, in respect of the thing done: but, Whether there were not
a concurrence of both Natures acting jointly, although distinctly in the
performing of them?

2. That Both Natures concur in Christ's performing the Office of Mediatorship,
and what he does as Mediator he does as God-man, may be confirmed by these
reasons.

1. According to what Nature Christ is the King, Priest, and Prophet of his
Church, accordingly he is Mediator, for he carried these Offices as he was
Mediator: but according to both Natures, Christ is King, Priest, and Prophet of
his Church; for according to the approved rule, Names of Office which are given
to Christ, they agree to him according to both Natures: therefore Christ
executes the Office of Mediatorship as God-man, according to both Natures.

2. If the Godhead of Christ concurred with the Manhood in all the acts of
Mediatorship: then Christ performs not the Office of Mediator as Man only,
but as God-man: but we find the Godhead interested in every act which Christ
did, or does as Mediator: It is evident from the several acts of each of his
Offices, from his Obedience, Suffering, Resurrection, Intercession, Heb 9.14,
How much more shall the Blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered
up himself without spot to God, purge your Conscience from dead works, to serve
the living God. And 7.25, Wherefore he is able also to save them to the
uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession
for them. Ephesians. 1.19, 20, According to the working of his power, which he
wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own
right hand in the heavenly places. None of which could be performed by his
Human Nature alone, without concurrence of his Godhead. True it is indeed, we
may conceive some Acts wherein the Humanity of Christ did not concur with his
Divinity, viz. Those that he wrought before his Incarnation: but none wherein
his Humanity acted without his Divinity. It follows therefore, that Christ
performs this Office as God-man.

3. If many chief essential acts of Christ's Mediation, are from the Deity of
Christ, as from the next, proper, formal, and immediate cause, then Christ
performs not the Office of Mediator as Man only, but as God-man: but many
chief essential acts of Christ's Mediation are from his Deity, as the next,
proper, formal, immediate cause: Ergo, etc. The Minor is proved by these
instances: The Incarnation of Christ is from the Deity, which did assume the
Humanity; which when it was not, could not assume it self. The manifestation of
God was a work truly divine, which was from the Deity as the true cause; though
from the Humanity as an Instrument, Joh. 1.18, No man has seen God at any
time: the only begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, he has
declared him. Matthew. 11.27, All things are delivered unto me of my Father, and
no man knows the Son but the Father, neither knows any man the Father fave
the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. Christ as Man teaches
as an Instrument, and Christ the Word teaches as Mediator; the works of
Authority and Power were all performed by the Divine Nature.

4. If Christ as Mediator performed many divine acts, which cannot be from his
Humanity alone, Then Christ performs not the Office of Mediatorship as Man
only, but as God also: But Christ as Mediator performs many Divine acts,
which cannot be from his Humanity alone, such as his rising from the dead,
which was by the power of his Deity, Romans 1.4, And declared to be the Son of
God with power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by the resurection of
Jesus from the dead. And 8.3, 4, Who is he that condemns? it is Christ that
died, yea rather that is risen again; who is even at the right hand of God, who
also makes intercession for us. Ephesians. 1.19, 20, Christ as Mediator has power
and authority to forgive sins, and send the holy Spirit, to enlighten the
understandings, to soften the hearts of men, and that not only meritoriously,
but efficiently, which are the proper works of God: Mar. 2.10, But that ye may
know that the Son of man has power on earth to forgive sins. Joh. 15.26, But
when the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father, even the
Spirit of truth which proceeds from the Father, he shall testify of me. And
16.7, But if I depart, I will send him unto you.

5. If none of the works performed by Christ as Mediator, whether the works of
Ministry that were performed by him, in the Nature of man, or the works of
Authority and Power performed by the Divine Nature, were performed without the
concurring of the other Nature in Christ; Then Christ performs the Office of
Mediator not as God alone, nor as Man only, but according to both Natures as
God-man: but the former is true, Ergo, etc. The Major is proved by parts. 1.
The works of Ministry which were performed in the Nature of man, and were the
works of Christ's Humanity, such as were his death upon the Cross, etc. yet the
Divine Nature was concurring in these, not only to support and sustain the
Human, but the thing done had its efficacy, dignity, and value, from his
Divinity, in that they were the works of him that is God. It was the Son of
God, the Lord of life, that died on the Cross, but it was the Nature of Man,
not of God, wherein he died; yet it was the Divine Nature that did support him,
and gave worth to his sacrifice. 2. The works of authority and power, such as
the remitting of sins, giving the Spirit, raising the dead, etc. which were the
works of his Divine Nature; yet were not done without an instrumental
concurrence of the Nature of man.

6. If the end of the Personal union of the two Natures of Christ, be the
fitting and qualifying of him for the Office of Mediatorship (as is before
cleared), then the two Natures do and must necessarily concur in the works of
mediation (at least after these were united) else the union of the two Natures
had not been necessary in Christ; for the same necessity is for the concurring
of the proper works of the two Natures in the Mediators work, that is, for the
union of the two Natures in his person: the end of that union being to fit him
to act in this Office as a qualified person.

Object. 1 Timothy 2.5, The Mediator is called, the man Christ Jesus. Hence some
infer that he is Mediator according to his Human Nature only.

Answ. There is a vast difference betwixt these two: the man Christ is
Mediator, and he is Mediator only as Man: the man Christ is that person, not
any other man, not any mere man; that person who was God and Man in one person,
and stood as a fit middle betwixt both the parties: so that Man is not here
taken naturaliter, but personaliter: not naturally but personally; it being
most usual to name the person of Christ from either nature (...), a
communication of Properties: see 1 Cor. 2.8, For had they known it, they would
not have Crucified the Lord of Glory. Act. 20.28, The Church of God, which he
has purchased with his own Blood. Joh. 3.13, And no man has ascended up to
Heaven, but he that came down from Heaven, even the Son of man which is in
Heaven. See Mr. Ball, and Mr. Brinsley, ubi supra.
But there are better reasons assigned why the Mediator is called the man
Christ, than to point out that nature according to which he is Mediator. See
Brnisley of the Mediat. p. 208.

Object. Paul here distinguishes betwixt God and this Mediator; And therefore
Christ is not Mediator as God, Cham. de Med. c. 5. sect. 6.7.
Answer has been made by learned men. 1. That the Word of God is there not to
be taken essentially but personally, as denoting the Father, betwixt whom and
mankind Christ the Son is said to be a Mediator. 1 John 2.1, And if any man
sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. So its
taken Joh. 3.16, For God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten
Son. 2 Cor. 5.19, God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself. 2. The
naming of God in the first place does not hinder that it should be understood
in the second also: see Joh. 14.1, Ye believe in God, believe also in me.

See more to this purpose, Jun. Animad. in Bell. contr. lib. 5. cap. 3. Ball on
the Covenant. p. 270. Brinsley of the Mediator, p. 210. etc. And of the
illustration of the Word God-man. Brins. p. 220.

Use. If Christ be Mediator according to both Natures. Then Believers may be
comforted in the prevalency of his mediation, and in the condescendency
thereof. Your Mediator is God-man. 1. Your Mediator acts as God, he carries his
matters very strongly and effectually. 2. He acts as a man also, very tenderly
and condescendingly, Heb. 7.25, Wherefore he is able also to save them to the
uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession
for them. With 2.17, 18, Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like
unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest in
things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people.
For in that he himself has suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor them
that are tempted. Psalm. 2.7, 8, I will declare the decree: the Lord has said
unto me, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee: Ask of me and I shall
give thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance, and the utmost parts of the Earth
for thy possession.

Conclus. 2. That Christ has executed this Office ever since the beginning of
the World, ever since the first Covenant was dissolved and broken, since enmity
entered betwixt God and man, as well before his being made manifest in the
flesh, as after; as well before and under the Law, as in the days of the New
Testament: For although he be called Mediator of the New Covenant, or New
Testament. Heb. 12.24. which is to be understood, 1. by way of opposition to
the first Covenant, whereof he was not Mediator. 2. (...) because he was then
exhibited, and then he perfected the work of Redemption: Yet did Christ enter
upon the execution and execrise of this Office of Mediatorship (to which he was
before designed) from the time that fallen man was at variance with God; the
execution of this Office extends to the first ages of the World, from the time
that the promise made to our first parents (while they were yet in Paradise)
took place, Genesis 3.15, It shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his
heel. 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself. Heb.
13.8, Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, and to day and for ever. Gal. 3.17, And
this I say, that the Covenant that was before confirmed of Christ, the Law
which was Four hundred and thirty years after, cannot disannul, that it should
make the promise of none effect. Rev. 13.8: he is called the Lamb slain from
the foundation of the world: As in respect of Gods destination, being designed
before time, to be offered up in time; so also in respect of the efficacy of
his sacrifice and mediation, which extended to the first ages of the world.
For, 1. From that time there was need of a Mediator. 2. From that time begun
the works of the Devil to be destroyed: Genesis 3.15, And I will put enmity
between thee and the Woman, and between thy seed and her seed: it shall bruise
thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. 1 John 3.8, He that commiteth sin is
of the Devil, for the Devil sins from the beginning; for this purpose the
Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the Devil. 3.
From that time were some sinners saved, by the Messiah that was to come:
Therefore from thence we must reckon the exercise of his Mediatorship.

Understand this with three distinctions. 1. That before Christ's Incarnation,
he was a Mediator virtually, and undiscernedly, i. e. the virtue and efficacy
of that Office, to which he was designed, did extend to the first ages of the
world, (though the way of his acting in that Office before his Incarnation,
transcend our understanding) but after his Incarnation, when he had taken our
nature upon him; then he was manifestly an actual Mediator. 2. Before his
Incarnation he was not Completely fitted for all the parts of that Office, not
being yet the Man Christ, 1 Timothy 2.5, but after his Incarnation he was a
Complete Mediator: Heb. 10.5, 7, Wherefore when he comes into the world, he
says, Sacrifice and offering thou would not, but a body have thou prepared
me. Then said I, Lo I come, (in the volume of the Book it is written of me) to
do thy will, O God. 3. Before his Incarnation, he was secretly and invisibly a
Mediator in Heaven: after his Incarnation, he did visibly act that part upon
Earth, and then went into the holiest to continue in the exercise of this
Office, Heb. 9.24, Now to appear in the presence of God for us.

Use. This also should contribute to establish our faith, while ur Mediator is
absent from us, or rather while we are absent from him, and he is out of our
sight: If this Office was effectual for the good of believers, before he
actually offered sacrifice, or interceded, how much more when he has actually
done both these? Have we any better support of Faith? if his Mediation was
effectual before he was a complete Mediator, and had not yet taken our nature
upon him, shall we not believe now the efficacy thereof, after he is the Man
Christ? If his Mediation was effectual while he had not yet come down from
Heaven to act visibly here on Earth; how much more when he has finished the
work, and is now returned, and gotten his Fathers welcome? Believe it, he is at
Court, though he be out of our sight.

Conclusion 3. That Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant executes this
Office, as well in the state of his Exaltation, as Humiliation. Heb. 7.24, 25,
But this man, because he continues ever, has an unchangeable Priesthood.
Wherefore he is able also to save them to the utmost that come unto God by him,
seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. But with some observable
difference, which is to be seen, 1. In his exercising, the three Offices which
were parts of his Mediatorship. And, 2. In the distinct parts of these Offices.

1. It was mainly his Priestly Office, which the Mediator discharged here on
Earth, in his state of Humiliation; his entry upon his Kingly Administration,
being eminently reserved to the state of Exaltation: Heb. 1.3, When he had by
himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high.
And, 8.1, We have an High Priest, who is set on the right hand of the throne of
the Majesty in the Heavens. Phil. 2.8, 9, And being found in fashion, he
humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross.
Wherefore God also has highly exalted him. Mat. 28.18, All power is given unto
me in Heaven and in Earth. But his Prophetical. Office was excercised by him in
both these states, of his Humiliation, and Exaltation: Luke 24.47, And that
repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his Name among all
Nations, beginning at Jerusalem. Heb. 12.25, See that ye refuse not him that
speaks; for if they escaped not who refused him that spoke on Earth, much
more shall we escape, if we turn away from him that speaks from Heaven.

2. His Priesthood, which he discharges in both parts thereof, as well in his
Exaltation as Humiliation; Yet eminently he sacrificed here, and eminently he
intercedeth in Heaven, Heb. 9.24, 26, Now to appear in the presence of God for
us. -- Now once in the end of the world has he appeared to put away sin, by
the sacrifice of himself: His Kingdom, which was reserved for his Exaltation,
understand it by way of eminency also, Matthew. 28.18, And Jesus came and spoke
unto them, saying, All power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth. Rev. 5.6,
And I beheld, and lo in the midst of the Elders stood a Lamb: For he was a King
when he was here on Earth, and carried matters in a Princely way, although his
glory was over-clouded by his leaving the Throne for a time, that he might sit
down in it afterward in greater honor, Phil. 2.6, 8, Wherefore God also has
highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name. His
Prophetical Office, which was exercised in both states, yet was in his
Humiliation visible, and in his own person, Joh. 1.10, He was in the world, and
the world was made by him, and the world knew him not. Heb. 1.1, 2, God, who at
sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in the time past unto the Fathers by
the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son. Luke 24.27,
And beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, he expounded unto them in all the
Scriptures, the things that concerned himself. But in his Exaltation it is done
by his Messengers, or more secretly by his Word and Spirit, Ephesians. 4.11, 12, And
gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors
and Teachers: For the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry,
for the edifying the Body of Christ. Joh. 14.26, But the Comforter, which is
the holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name, he shall teach you all
things, and bring all things to your remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto
you. 1 John 2.27, But the anointing which you have received of him, abides in
you: and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same anointing teaches
you all things, and is truth, and is no lie: and even as it has taught you, ye
shall abide in him.

Use. Believers, think not that Christ is out of his Office, when he is out of
your sight: or that the height of honor unto which he is now exalted at the
right hand of God, does abate any thing from his carefulness and condescendency
for sinners behoof: but be you rather comforted from this; As high as the
Mediator is now, upon his Throne, he yet carries that Office, and is made high
for your advantage and consolation, Heb. 4.14, 16, Seeing then that we have an
High Priest that is passed into the Heavens, Jesus the Son of God; Let us hold
fast our profession, -- Let us therefore come boldly unto the Throne of Grace,
that we may obtain mercy, and find grace in time of need. And 10.21, 22, And
having an High Priest over the House of God, let us draw near with a true
heart, in full assurance of faith; having our hearts sprinkled from an evil
conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water. You may come as familiarly
and boldly to him now, as when he was in his humbled condition, conversant
among men, seeing he is about the same work, and exercising the same Office now
as then, Heb. 13.8, Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever.

It is a Question not unfitly moved: Answ. Two Scriptures seem to appropriate
the benefit of Christ's Mediation to Mankind. Yet I conceive they may admit one
native interpretation, without straining the word, which does not shut out the
Angels. The first Scripture is that, 1 Timothy 2.5, For there is one God, and one
Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus: which seems to set forth
the object of Christ's Mediation to be men, not Angels; but consider, that there
is a twofold Mediation of Christ; the one of Redemption or Reconciliation, the
other of Preservation or confirmation: Christ is only a Mediator of Redemption
betwixt God and man, for he never undertook for the fallen Angels, Matthew.
25.41, Then shall he say unto them on his left hand, Depart from me ye cursed
into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Jude, ver. 6, And
the Angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation, he
has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the
great day. And of this Mediation speaks that Text, 1 Timothy 2.5, A Mediation
which had a ransom and propitiation in it: that Christ died only for man, not
for the Angels. The other Scripture is that, Heb. 2.16, For verily he took not
on him the nature of Angels, but he took on him the seed of Abraham: Which will
indeed prove, and speaks it plainly, that when fallen men and Angels were
before him, sinking into their misery, he took hold of the one, not of the
other: And so that none of the fallen Angels have benefit by Christ's Mediation:
It will prove that herein Christ expressed his love more to Men than Angels, in
that he saved some of the fallen men, but none of the Angels; and would carry
this Office not in their Nature, but in ours; Yet I conceive it will not prove
that the elect Angels have no benefit by Christ's Mediation. I incline therefore
to think it most probable, that the elect Angels are not to be excluded from
the benefit of Christ's Mediation: whether they had need of a Mediator or not
(as Calvin upon Col. 1.20. labors to prove), I shall not debate; but these
two things only I shall speak of: 1. I shall show, that the good Angels have
benefit by Christ, which is certain. 2. That there are probable grounds to
judge, that they have this benefit through Christ's Mediation.

1. By Christ the Angels have knowledge of the mysteries of our Salvation, even
a glorious addition of knowledge, by this new discovery and bright manifestation
of God in all his Atributes that have shined forth in Christ, Ephesians. 3.10, To the
intent that now unto the Principalitics and Powers in Heavenly places, might be
known by the Church, the manifold wisdom of God. 1 Pet. 1.12, Which things the
Angels did desire to look into. 2. By Christ they have an honorable Office,
they became Principalities and Powers in governing the world; and Ministering
Spirits, that Christ may be honored in the Church, Col. 1.16, For by him were
all things created that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth, visible and
invisible: whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers,
all things were created by him, and for him. Heb. 1.14, Are they not all
ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for them, who shall be heirs of
Salvation. And therefore when Christ shall give up his dispensatory Kingdom,
then shall all rule be put down, which is not only to be understood of the
being of no Magistracy, and no Ministry, but even of the Angels,
Principalities, and Powers. 3. By Christ the Angels have joy at the conversion
of sinners. Luke 15.10, Likewise I say unto you, there is Joy in the presence
of the Angels of God, over one sinner that repents. Matthew. 18.10, Take heed
that ye despise not one of these little ones: For I say unto you, that in
Heaven their Angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in Heaven.
Luke 2.13, And suddenly there was with the Angel a multitude of the Heavenly
Host, praising God. By Christ the Angels have a more perfect and firm union
with God, a kind of econciliation, Col. 1.20, And having made peace by the
blood of his Cross, by him to reconcile all things to himself: by him I say,
whether they be things on Earth, or things in Heaven. Where by things in
Heaven, is understood Angels, who are said to be reconciled to God, not
properly: for where there is no breach, there can be no reconciliation; this is
peculiar unto man, but improperly and annalogically they may be said to be
reconciled, by confirming and establishing them in the grace and favor of God,
Tollendo peccata hominum and possibilitatem peccandi in Angelis: taking away
all possibility of defection in them.

2. These benefits which the Angels certainly have by Christ, they may be
probably conceived to have them by Christ's Mediation: 1. Because Christ is a
head to the elect Angels as well as to elect men; and they are part of his
mystical body, Col. 2.10, And ye are complete in him which is the head of all
Principality and Power. Ephesians. 1.10. That in the Dispensation of the fullness of
times, he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in
Heaven, and which are on Earth, even in him: they are reckoned a part of the
Catholic Church, and inhabitants of the Heavenly Jerusalem, Heb. 12.23, 24,
Now if Christ be head of the Church as he is Mediator, then whatsoever benefit
they, as part of his Body, have from Christ the Head, I do not see how we can
avoid to say they must have it through his Mediation: For how can it be
conceived that one part of Christ's Body has benefit from Christ's Mediation,
and another part of it has benefit by him, and yet another way than by his
mediation? 2. Because whatsoever benefit the Angels have by Christ, they were
elected unto it; 1 Timothy 5.21, I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus
Christ, and the elect Angels. Now Christ being the head of the election, in
whom all that are elect are elected, Ephesians. 1.4, According as he has chosen us
in Christ, before the foundation of the world: And the benefits unto which we
are elected in Christ, coming through his Mediation, to all the elect; these
must come so to the elect Angels also, Ephesians. 1.4, 5, 10, According as he has
chosen us in Christ, before the foundation of the world, that we should be
holy, and without blame before him in love: Having predestined us unto the
Adoption of Children, by Jesus Christ. -- That in the dispensation of the
fullness of time, he might gather together in one all things in Christ. 3.
Because whatsoever creature is not under a possibility of sinning, Aquin. part.
1. Q^ust. 63. Art. 1.
it has that, not by the condition of its nature, but by grace: Now the elect
Angels being freed from all possibility of sinning, this they must have by
Grace, which comes not only from Christ, but through his Mediation, Joh. 1.17,
For the Law was given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ: being
some other thing supervenient, beside the good of their natural condition
wherein they were created, which was mutable.

More particularly, The execution and work of Christ's Mediatorship, may be
reduced to these Five heads: 1. To bring the elect into a capacity of
covenanting with God. 2. To bring them within the bond of the Covenant, after
he has thus prepared the way. 3. To enable them whom he brings into this
New-Covenant-state, to perform the duties of the Covenant. 4. To keep those
whom he brings into this Covenant state, from falling away from it, or to
enable them to continue in it. 5. To bring those whom he has brought up to the
terms of a Covenant with God, to that height of that Blessedness which is
appointed for them, and to Crown his work in them.

The first part of the Mediators work, and execution of his Office is, to
prepare a way for man's covenanting with God; to make the way of God accessible,
and to put man in a capacity to enter in terms with God: For man by sin was
made incapable of covenanting with God, until the Mediator comes in to compose
the difference, and to restore the love and friendship that once had been
betwixt God and man; who to prepare a way for man's covenanting with God, does
two things himself, and works two things in us. The first, to make God
accessible; the other, to make men capable of covenanting with God, who is made
accessible in Christ's death. 1. He takes on man's nature, that a Sacrifice
might be among mankind, who had sinned; he puts his name in our Obligation,
that the Law might reach him. Gal. 4.4, 5. God sent forth his Son, made of a
Woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law, that we
might receive the Adoption of Sons. 2. In our nature he obeys the Law, and
suffers: he pays a price for our Ransom, 2 Cor. 5.21, He is made sin for
us; an offering for sin, he stood in the sinners stead here, he purchases a
liberty to the elect, and has it in his just and legal power to set them free
when he will, Act. 20.28, being the Church of God which he has purchased with
his own Blood. 3. He convinces men of their sin, and of their bondage, and
impossibility to satisfy Justice, and to this end he attacheth them before
Divine Justice, Joh. 16.8, And when he is come, he will reprove the World of
sin, of righteousness and of judgment. Romans 7.9, For I was alive without the
Law once: but when the Commandment came, sin revived, and I died. Gal. 3.24,
Wherefore the Law was our Schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we might
be justified by Faith. 4. He works their Hearts to a yielding-frame,
listening, and ready to welcome the news of delivery (which have not yet been
actually spoken to their hearts), to be content to come out of their bondage,
and to enjoy freedom by him: to be content to come in his will, and to yield
the weapons to him, and to change the state and righteousness whereof sometimes
they had no small content, Act. 9.6, Lord, What will thou have me to do? Arise,
and go into the City, and it shall be told thee what thou must do. They pant
after a Savior, as Paul did for complete Redemption, Romans 7.29, O wretched man
that I am, Who shall deliver me from the body of this death? And when all this
is done, Sinners are but in a capacity of covenanting with God, till more be
done by Christ in the work of his Mediatorship for man: he is not yet in a
covenant with God; all this is to make ready a people prepared for the Lord.
Luke 1.17. For though Christ has paid the price of the ^^ects ransom, and
has purchased their liberty on the Cross, yea, and has also convinced a man
of his need of this ransom, and made him toward and tractable to listen, to
accept of it; yet till a man come in by faith, and manifest his acceptance, or
rather actually accept of Christ's proposals, he is not yet actually in a
Covenant with God, but concluded under wrath, Joh. 3.36, And he that believes
not the Son, shall not see life; but the wrath of God abides on him.

The second part of the Mediators work and execution of his Office, is, to
bring the elect within the bond of the Covenant. And for bringing about this,
1. Christ makes an offer of a New Covenant state, with all suitable allurements
and encouragements which may invite the Souls of the elect to accept of it; And
for this end he has appointed the Ministry of Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20,
God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their
trespasses unto them, and has committed unto us the word of reconciliation.
Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we
pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled to God. And 6.17, 18, Wherefore come
out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the
unclean thing, and I will receive you, and will be a Father unto you, and ye
shall be my Sons and Daughters, says the Lord Almighty. Isa. 55.1, 3, Ho,
every one that thirsts; come ye to the waters -- Incline your ear, and come
unto me: hear and your Soul shall live: and I will make an everlasting Covenant
with you, even the sure mercies of David. 2. He shapeth and frames the hearts
of his people for acceptance of his offer, and brings them unto a liking and
satisfaction with the Covenant, and the terms of it; 2 Samuel 23.5, For this is
all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to grow. Psalm. 73.
last, But it is good for me to draw near to God -- I have put my trust in the
Lord God, that I may declare all thy works. 3. He actually makes them to
embrace it, and enter into it: for after he has shaped their hearts for
acceptance, he actually engages them by consenting and agreeing on their
part, Hos. 2.14, 19, Therefore behold, I will allure her, and bring her unto
the Wilderness, and speak comfortably unto her. -- And I will betroth thee unto
me for ever. Ezekiel. 20.37, And I will bring you into the bond of the Covenant.
Joh. 6.37, All that the Father gives me, shall come to me. And this he does,
1. By making us receive and welcome the Gospel, and subject our consent unto it,
by taking on the very bonds and rebukes of the Word, and yielding our selves
captives unto it, 2 Cor. 9.13, Whiles by the experiment of this ministration
they glorify God for your professed subjection unto the Gospel of Christ. And
10.4, For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, to
the pulling down of strong holds. Romans 6.17, But ye have obeyed from the heart
that form of Doctrine which was delivered unto you. 2. By making us receive and
embrace the Promises, Heb. 11.13, and take hold of the Covenant, Isa. 56.4, 6.
And this is a further step of the Mediators work, in making the Soul close with
God in a Covenant. 3. By making us receive Christ himself in the promises, Joh.
1.12, But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of
God, even to them that believe on his name. For as Faith has for the object of
it, the whole Word of God; so especially the promises, and more especially
Christ in the promises. 4. By making us give up our selves to be Christ's, and
no more our own; Isa. 44.5, One shall say, I am the Lords: and by making us
subject our Consent unto him, as the Wife does to the Husband in a
Marriage-Covenant, 2 Cor. 9.13. And all this is the Mediators work, and the
execution of his Office. For, 1. It is he that offers the Covenant, Heb. 12.25,
See that ye refuse not him that speaks. 2. It is he that shapeth the heart
for acceptance of the offer, Ezekiel 36.26, A new heart also will I give you, and
a new Spirit will I put within you, 3. It is he that engages the heart to God
by a Covenant, Jer. 30.21, And I will cause him to draw near, and he shall
approach unto me; for who is this that engaged his heart to approach unto me,
says the Lord? Joh. 12.32, And I, if I be lifted up from the Earth, will draw
all men unto me. 4. It is he that makes us give up our selves to him, Ezekiel.
36.27, 28, And I will put my Spirit into you, and cause you to walk in my
ways. -- And ye shall be my people, and I will be your God. The third part of
the Mediators work in the execution of his Office, is to enable them whom he
brings into the Covenant of Grace, to perform the duty of the Covenant
according to his undertaking to his Father on their behalf: and for this
effect, 1. He circumciseth their hearts, and takes away the stone and natural
aversness and rebellion against Covenant-duties, Deuteronomy. 30.6, And the Lord thy
God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, that thou may live. Ezekiel.
36.26, And I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give
you an heart of flesh. 2. He engraffeth a new inward principle in their hearts,
of compliance with, and propension unto their duty, Jer. 31.33, I will put my
Law into their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their
God, and they shall be my people. And 32.40, I will put my fear in their
hearts, that they shall not depart from me. 3. He affords strength to them,
for performing the duties of the Covenant, and makes his Grace effectual in
them for that end: see Ezekiel 36.37, And I will put my Spirit within you, and
cause you to walk in my Statutes, and ye shall keep my Judgments and do them.
He craveth his Rent, and fills the hand wherewith to pay it; Psalm. 1.11,
Being filled with the fruits of righteousness which are by Jesus Christ, unto
the glory and praise of God. 2 Cor. 9.8, And God is able to make all grace
abound toward you, that ye always having all sufficiency in all things, may
abound to every good work. 4. He breathes upon the graces of his people, and
acts them by daily fresh and quickening assistances, Song. 4.16, Awake, O
North wind, and come, O South, blow upon my Garden, that the spices thereof may
flow out: Yea, he works in us, and for us, all that which we take upon us as
duty in the Covenant of Grace, Isa. 26.12, For thou also have wrought all our
works in us. Phil. 2.13, For it is God that works in you both to will and to
do of his good pleasure.

The fourth part of the Mediators work in executing this Office, is, to keep
those whom he brings into the Covevenant, from falling away from that blessed
estate: If it were not for the Mediators traveling in this work, the
reconciliation once made could not stand: if he did not continue for ever
Mediator of the New Covenant, we should not for ever continue in that
Covenant-state, Heb. 7.24, 25, But this man, because he continues ever, has
an unchangeable Priesthood. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the
uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession
for them. And for keeping believers in this Covenant, Christ the Mediator,
beside his contriving the Covenant so, that breaches shall not make it void,
Psalm. 89.30, 33, If his Children forsake my Law, and walk not in my Judgments:
Nevertheless my loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my
faithfulness to fail. Jer. 31.34, I will forgive their iniquity, and will
remember their sin no more. 1. He gifteth them with, and conveyeth to them an
immortal and everlasting principle of Grace that cannot dye nor utterly perish,
Joh. 4.14, But the water that I shall give him, shall be in him a Well of water
springing up into everlasting life. 1 John 3.9, His seed remains in him, and
he cannot sin, because he is born of God. 2. He keeps life by his
intercession, in that engaging principle of Faith, that it fail not, Luke
22.32, But I have prayed for thee that thy Faith fail not. But all this could
not effect the business, being but our gripe of him; therefore, 3. Consider how
he keeps a gripe of them, he engages his Father to keep his people, and he
himself employeth all the power, credit, and interest that he has in Heaven
and Earth, to keep them in that blessed state, Joh. 17.11, 12, And now I am no
more in the World, but these are in the World: And I come to thee: holy Father,
keep through thine own name those whom thou have given me, that they may be
one, as we are. While I was with them in the world I kept them through thy
name: those whom thou gave me I have kept, and none of them is lost but the
Son of perdition, that the Scripture might be fulfilled. 1 Pet. 1.5, Who are
kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, ready to be revealed in
the last time. Joh. 10.28, 29, And I give unto them eternal life, and they
shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. My Father
which gave them me, is greater than all; and no man is able to pluck them out
of my Fathers hand. Deuteronomy. 33.27, The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath
is the everlasting arms. Isa. 40.29, He gives power to them that are faint,
and to them that have no might he increases strength. 4. He maintains the
peace and agreement that he made through his own being in Heaven, a constant
and ordinary Agent to apear in the presence of God for us, Heb. 9.24. Who lies
there of purpose that the Covenant betwixt God and his people may continue, and
that league never be broken; for so long as Christ appears in Heaven, there
shall be peace and friendship for all Believers, Romans 5.1, 2, Therefore being
justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. By
whom also we have access by Faith unto this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice
in hope of the glory of God. Ephesians. 2.14, For he is our peace, who has made both
one. 5. He keeps intercourse and good correspondence betwixt his Father and
his people, that their trading with Heaven be not stopped, Ephesians. 2.18, For by
him we both have an access through one Spirit unto the Father. And 3.12, In
whom we have boldness and access with confidence by the Faith of him: 1 Pet.
3.18, For Christ also has once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust;
that he might bring (...), a word that signifies leading by the hand, Heb.
10.19, Having therefore, Brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest by the
blood of Jesus. And 4.16, Let us therefore come boldly unto the Throne of
Grace. 6. He takes up emergent differences, and removes the incident breaches
of Peace betwixt both parties, Isa. 53.12, And he was numbered with the
transgressors, and be bare the sin of many, and made intercession for the
Transgressors, Heb. 9.7, Not without blood, he which offered for himself and
for the errors of the people, (...) -- the word signifies the infirmities to
which the people of God are daily subject, which would break the league of
Peace, were it not for the Mediators doing his Office, to hold it firm: And
this he does, 1. As an Agent, making his constant residence in Heaven, that
upon all occasions he may appear in the presence of God for us, Heb. 9.24. 2.
As an Advocate, pleading his peoples cause, and showing that satisfied Justice
must be for them 1 John 2.1, And if any man sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. Heb. 12, 24, And to Jesus the Mediator of
the New Covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things
than that of Abel. 3. As an Intercessor, praying for them; Joh. 17, througout,
Romans 8.34, Who is he that condemns? It is Christ that dyed, yea rather that
is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes
intercession for us. 4. As a Solicitor, presenting and promoting the Prayers
and desires of his people, to his Father, Rev. 8.3, And another Angel came and
stood at the Altar, having a golden Censor, and there was given unto him much
incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all Saints, upon the
golden Altar which was before the Throne.

The fifth part of the Mediators work in executing this Office, is to bring all
those whom he has engaged by this Covenant, to the height of that blessedness
which he has appointed for them, that as a Captain of Salvation he might bring
many Sons to glory, Heb. 2.10, which stands in perfect and glorious
conformity with Christ, and in perfect and glorious communion with God, 1 John
3.2, But we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall
see him as he is. For accomplishing whereof, Christ in executing the Mediators
Office, 1. He prepares that happiness for them, and a fit place where they may
enjoy it for ever, 1 Cor. 2.9, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has
it entered into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them
that love him. Joh. 14.2, 3, In my Fathers house are many Mansions: if it were
not so, I would have told you; I go to prepare a place for you; and if I go and
prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive you unto my self, that
where I am, there ye may be also. 2. He keeps this happiness for them, when
they can contribute nothing to keep it; all this while that it is hid, it is
sure and reserved for them in Heaven, 1 Pet. 1.4, To an Inheritance
incorruptible, and that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for you. 2 Timothy
4.8, Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of righteousness, which the
Lord the righteous Judge shall give me at that day, and not to me only, but unto
them also that love his appearing. 3. He keeps them for it: for we have as
much need of keeping as our Crown and Inheritance; as we cannot keep it, so we
cannot keep our selves, 1 Pet. 1.5, Who are kept by the power of God through
Faith unto Salvation, ready to be revealed in the last time. Luke 22.32, But I
have prayed for thee that thy Faith fail not. 4. Christ Mediator in executing
his Office, he goes before his people, and breaks the opposition that is in
their way to Glory; so that he leaves them no Adversary to fight with, but
broken forces, such as he has routed and conquered, Psalm. 68.18, Thou have
ascended on high, thou have led captivity captive, thou have received gifts for
men, yea for the rebellious also, that the Lord God might dwell among them:
with Ephesians. 4.8, Wherefore he says, when he ascended up on high, etc. Yea, he
went before his people to take possession for them, and in their names, Heb.
6.20, Whither the forerunner is for us entered. Joh. 14.2, I go to prepare a
place for you. 5. He makes his people meet and fit for that glorious condition
which is reserved for them: for we need preparation, being unpolished matter,
and unfit for such a house as Heaven is: we must be made meet for it, before we
enjoy it, Col. 1.12. Giving thanks unto the Father, which has made us meet to
be partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in light: the Father does this
work by the Son; it is the Mediators work immediately to make the Saints meet
for their Inheritance, Ephesians. 5.26, 27, That he might sanctify, and might cleanse
it with the washing of water by the Word: that he might present it to himself a
glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing: but that it
should be holy and without blemish. Joh. 17.19, And for their sakes I also
sanctify my self, that they also might be sanctified through the truth: he is
the Author and finisher of our faith, Heb. 12.2. 6. When all his people are
fitted and ready to receive what he has prepared for them: he will not then
send any Ambassador to bring them, but he himself in his own person will come
and bring them home to the place of immediate everlasting enjoyments of God,
which he has prepared, and will crown and perfect his work in all his people,
Joh. 14.3, And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come again and
receive you unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be also. Col. 3.4, When
Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in
Glory. Rev. 19.7, 8, Let us be glad and rejoice, and give honor to him, for
the marriage of the Lamb is come, and his Wife has made her self ready. And to
her was granted that she should be arrayed in fine linen clean and white; for
the fine linen is the righteousness of Saints.

CHAP. XVII. Of the grounds of Comfort and supports of Faith, arising to
Believers from Christ's Mediatorship.
I Shall shut up this part of the Doctrine of Christ's Mediatorship with some
grounds of Comfort, and supports of Faith, which arise thence.

1. There is Comfort here, and support for Faith to all who are convinced of
enmity betwixt God and them, and do desire reconciliation with him: Lo here are
glad tidings, there is a Mediator, a Peacemaker betwixt God and men. 1 He is
already long ago designed and appointed for this Office. 2. He has already
done the work, he has purchased and proclaimed the Peace, even to Rebels who
will come in and accept of it; Ephesians. 2.16, 17, And that he might reconcile both
unto God in one body by the Cross, having slain the enmity thereby; and came
and preached Peace to you which were afar off, and to them that were nigh: and
being now removed out of our sight, he has appointed it to be done by his
messengers, Romans 10.15, How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the
Gospel of Peace, and bring glad tidings of good things? 3. He is now ready to
accept of, and make intercession for all those that shall come in and declare
their acceptance of his offer, Heb. 7.25, Wherefore he is able also to save
them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them: Joh. 6.37, And him that comes to me, I will in no wise
cast out. Why then do you haesitate? Why stand you off? What aileth you? Is
there not here encouragement and support of Faith? Is there not comfort against
the selt-enmity and feared-wrath to come? Joh. 1.29, Behold the Lamb of God
which takes away the Sin of the World.

2. There is comfort, and support for Faith from Christ's Mediatorship, namely
to Believers, and to those who have come to God through him. 1. To all forts of
Believers. 2. In all the variety of their several conditions. 3. Against all
their fears and evils wherewith they are afflicted.

1. To all Believers, I mean sound Believers, 1 Pet. 1.1, to the weak as well
as the strong, to them who have like precious Faith with the Apostles, although
they have not like perfect and strong Faith: he is not a Mediator for the
strong only, but for all that believe on him, Joh. 6.37, All that the Father
gives me, shall come to me: and him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast
out. And 17.20, Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also that shall
believe on me through their word. Goodwin, Christ set forth:
And it is well observed by Mr. Goodwin ^^om Heb. 17.25, that the comfort and
encouragement proposed there from Christ's Intercession, is fitted for a
Recumbents Faith: the proper act whereof, as it is distinguished from the Faith
of Assurance, is a coming to Christ: he is a Mediator for all that have cast
themselves on him in their way of coming to God, though their Faith be not yet
grown up to assurance.

2. To all Believers in their several conditions he is Mediator, and does the
Office of a Mediator, not only when Believers can act faith, and employ him;
but when their Faith is well-near failed, like a worn week, when they are at
the weakest, and at the worst: Luke 22.32, But I have prayed for thee that thy
Faith fail not. Not only when his elect people are doing him service; but when
they are ignorantly opposing him, as many times they do, especially before
their Conversion, Act. 9.5, 6, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest. -- And he
trembling and astonished said, Lord what will thou have me to do? And the Lord
said, arise and go into the City, and it shall be told thee what thou must do.
Luke 23.34, And Jesus said, Father forgive them for they know not what they do.
Not only when they are in his way, but when they are out of the way, Heb. 5.2,
Who can have compassion on the ignorant, and on them that are out of the way.
Not only when they can pray, and wrestle for themselves, Rev. 8.3, And another
Angel came and stood at the Altar, having a Golden Censor, and there was given
unto him much Incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all Saints
upon the Golden Altar which was before the Throne: but when they cannot utter
their heart before the Lord, Romans 8.26, 27, Likewise the Spirit also helps
our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the
Spirit it self makes Intercession for us with groanings that cannot be
uttered. And he that searches the hearts, knows what is the mind of the
Spirit, because he makes Intercession for the Saints according to the will of
God. Isa. 59.16, And he saw that there was no man, and wondered that there was
no Intercessor: therefore his arm brought salvation unto him, and his
righteousness it sustained him. Not only when all is well, and at peace, and
when nothing is charged against them; but when they are under Challenges, and
condemning-things are laid to their charge, Romans 8.33, 34, Who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods Elect? it is God that justifies: who is he that
condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again, who is even
at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us. Not only in time
of peace, but when wrath and destruction is gone forth against his people,
Ezekiel. 9.4, And the Lord said unto him, Go through the midst of the City, the
midst of Jerusalem, and set a mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh, and
that cry for all the abominations that be done in the midst thereof. Zech.
1.12, Then the Angel of the Lord answered and said, O Lord of Hosts, how long
will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, and on the Cities of Judah, against
which thou have had indignation these Threescore and ten years? Not only at
their first coming, but in all their after-addresses to God through him, Heb.
7.25, Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto
God by him, seeing he ever lives to make Intercession for them: With 4.14, 16,
Seeing then that we have an High Priest that is passed into the Heavens, let us
therefore come boldly unto the Throne of Grace, that we may obtain mercy, and
find Grace to help in time of need.

3. The Comfort and support of Faith flowing from Christ's Mediatorship,
reaches to all the evils wherewith Believers can be afflicted. Namely, 1. It
may comfort against the daily infirmities wherewith believers are compassed;
these shall not make a breach betwixt God and us, for as much as Christ's
Mediation is intended to prevent that, 1 John 2.1, 2, And if any man sin, we
have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous: and he is the
propitiation for our sins. 2. Against the many challenges, whether of an
accusing-conscience, or of the great accuser of the Brethren, Romans 8.33, 34,
Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that justifies
who is he that condemns? It is Christ that dyed, yea rather that is risen
again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes Intercession for
us. 3. Against the more foul and gross stumblings of Believers, for as much as
it is also intended for the helping of these, Luke 22, 32, But I have prayed
for thee, that thy Faith fail not. 4. Against the fear of their falling away
from the blessed Covenant-state, with which fear believers have often been
buffeted, Psalm. 51.11, Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy
holy Spirit from me. And 17.5, Hold up my goings in thy paths, that my
footsteps slip not. It is by Christ Mediation that we have establishment in
Grace, Joh. 6.39, And this is the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all
which he has given me I should lose nothing, but should raise it up at the
last day. Romans 5.10, For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled, to God by
the death of his Son, much more being reconciled we shall be saved by his life.
5. Against the manifold afflictions wherewith Believers are tossed here: the
Mediator was sometimes an afflicted man, and went through much suffering, and
has the feeling of these, Isa. 53.3, 7, A man of sorrow, and accquainted with
grief -- He was oppressed, and he was afflicted: Psalm. 22 throughout. 6.
Against the many temptations of all kinds which occasion much heaviness to
Believers, 1 Pet. 1.6, Ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations. The
Mediator had the experience of all sorts of temptations, and now sympathizeth
with his people like condition, Heb. 2.17, 18, For in that he himself has
suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted. And 4.15,
For we have not an High Priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our
infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are; yet without sin. 7.
Against the empty and needy condition unto which Believers are subject, through
the manifold wants wherewith they are daily pressed: We have confidence through
the Mediator, to come-speed in every petition that is acceptable to God, and
profitable to us, 1 John 5.14, 15, And this is the confidence that we have in
him, that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us: And if we
know that he hear us, whatsoever we ask; we know that we have the petitions
that we desired of him. Joh. 14.13, And whatsoever ye shall ask in my name,
that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son. 8. Against the
fear of death, which is terrible to nature: Joh. 11.25, Jesus said unto her, I
am the resurrection, and the life: he that believes in me, though he were
dead, yet shall he live, etc. 1 Cor. 15.26, The last Enemy that shall be
destroyed, is Death. Job 19.25, For I know that my Redeemer lives, and that he
shall stand at the latter day upon the Earth. Joh. 17.2, As thou have given him
power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou have
given him. 9. Against the second appearing of Christ (which is sometimes
terrible without cause to believers) and the last Judgment that shall be given,
concerning the everlasting interests of the creatures: the Man Christ, whom you
have owned for your Mediator, shall sit as Judge, Act. 17.30, 31, And the times
of this ignorance God winked at, but now commands all men every where to
repent: Because he has appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in
righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained. 2 These. 7.10, And to you who
are troubled, rest with us -- When he shall come to be glorified in his Saints.
Then shall he perform a comfortable act of his Mediatorship, Jude ver. 24, Now
unto him that is able to keep you from falling and to present you faultless
before the presence of his glory, with exceeding joy, etc.

And there is good ground for all Believers to be comforted from Christ's
Mediatorship, if we consider, 1. The person who Mediates. 2. The Person with
whom he Mediates. 3. The Persons for whom he Mediates. 4. The cause for which
he Mediates.

1. For the Person who Mediates: Consider, 1. His Graciousness with his Father,
O so great a Courtier with God as the Mediator is, Joh. 11.41, 42, Father I
thank thee, that thou have heard me. And I knew that thou hear me always:
and no wonder he be so, being his Son, his only begotten Son, Joh. 1.18. His
beloved Son, Matthew. 3.17. His obedient Son, Phil. 2.8. 2. His Greatness and
absolute Power to do of himself whatsoever he Mediates for with his Father.
Matthew. 28.18, All power is given unto me in Heaven and Earth. Joh. 5.21, 23,
26, 27, For as the Father raises up the dead, and quickneth them; even so the
Son quickneth whom he will: That all men should honor the Son, even as they
honor the Father: He that honors not the Son honors not the Father that
sent him. For as the Father has life in himself, so has he given to the Son
to have life in himself. And Has given him authority to execute Judgment also,
because he is the Son of Man. Therefore he is called a Priest upon a Throne; a
Priest who is a King, to command whatsoever he prays for, Heb. 1.3. and 8.1,
Zech. 6.13. 3. The oneness of his will with his Fathers, which makes sure the
prevalency of his Mediation, being sure to ask nothing but what is his Fathers
will; and all that he asks being his Fathers will as much as his; how can it be
ineffectual? Joh. 17.24, Father I will that they also whom thou have given me,
be with me where I am.

2. The Person with whom he Mediates: Consider 1. His nearness of relation both
to the Mediator, and to the Persons for whom he Mediates: He is Christ's Father,
and our Father, Joh. 20.17, But go to my brethren and say unto them, I ascend
unto my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God. 2. His graciousness
and affection both to Christ and to us; he loves Christ, and he loves us; and
therefore it is that he is as inclinable to hear Christ for his people, as
Christ is to mediate for them, Joh. 16.26, 27. At that day ye shall ask in my
name, and I say unto you, that I will pray the Father for you. For the Father
himself loves you, because ye have loved me, and have believed that I came out
from God.

3. In the Persons for whom he Mediates: Consider, 1. Our nearness of alliance
with the Mediator, Heb. 2.11, 14, 17, For both he that sanctifies, and they
who are sanctified are all one: for which cause he is not ashamed to call them
Brethren. For as much then as the Children are partakers of flesh and blood, he
also himself took part of the same -- Wherefore in all things it behoved him to
be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful
High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of
the people. Joh. 17.23, I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made
perfect in one. 2. Our nearness to God through Christ the Mediator, 2 Cor.
6.18, And I will be a father unto you, and ye shall be my Sons and Daughters
says the Lord God Almighty, etc. 1 Cor. 6. ver. 17, But he that is joined to
the Lord is one Spirit.

4. In the Cause for which he Mediates: Consider, 1. The Righteousness thereof;
Christ having now satisfied Justice, and his cause being justified, he has a
strong plea in Law and Justice, 1 Cor. 1.8, 9, 10, Who shall also confirm you
unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. God
is faithful by whom ye were called unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ
our Lord -- And 2.2, For I determined not to know any thing among you, save
Jesus Christ and him Crucified. 2. The honourableness of it, not to Christ
only, but to God: his Mediation being contrived to exalt his Fathers Grace by
Intercession, even after Justice is satisfied by Sacrifice, Heb. 9.26, But now
once in the end of the world has he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice
of himself. With 7.25, Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost
that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them.

CHAP. XVII. Of the several Relations which Christ sustaineth in the Covenant
of Grace: and, 1. Christ a witness to the People.
IT is not easy to find out and determine all Christ's relations to the
Covenant of Grace; they are so many and so comprehensive, that I know not
whether to say, that Christ's relations seem to exhaust the total of the
Covenant; or that the compend and sum of the Covenant is comprised in his
relations, which he sustaineth in it. I suppose there is a truth in both; for
whatsoever is necessarily related to the Covenant, is in him, whether it be
Parties, Articles, Promises, Conditions, Confirmations, Witness, Mediator,
Messenger, etc. and in him is to be found the whole Covenant, therefore he is
called the Covenant it self, Isa. 42.6. and 49.8.

Christ has several relations to the Covenant: See Mr. Rutherf. trial, etc.
Triumph of says. p. 1. c. 7.
1. He is a Party Covenanting. 2. He is Mediator of the Covenant. 3. He is the
witness of the Covenant. 4. He is the Messenger of the Covenant. 5. He is a
Servant in the Covenant. 6. He is the Surety of the Covenant. 7. He is the
Testator. 8. He is the Covenant it self.

I shall speak nothing here of the first two relations, how Christ is a side,
or the one half of the Covenant; nor how he stands as a middle person between
the disagreeing Parties. But for these I refer to that I have said of the
Parties covenanting, and of the Mediator of the Covenant; only before I proceed
to speak of these other relations, I shall premise these few things, as being
of common use for understanding of the whole relations.

First, Whatsoever relations Christ bears in the Covenant, he was from
Eternity chosen and designed unto those in the counsel of God, and by an
everlasting Decree, Psalm. 2.7, I will declare the decree, the Lord has said
unto me, thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee; and Isa. 42.1, Behold
my servant whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delights.

Secondly, Whatsoever relations Christ sustaineth in the Covenant, he does it
by voluntary dispensation, and not by any natural necessity or compulsion: that
he is a Party contracting, or that he is Mediator, or that he is Messenger of
the Covenant, etc. nothing could compel Christ to put his name in any of these
relations, it was all of consent; Phil. 2.7, But made himself of no reputation,
and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men.
Heb. 10.9, Then said he, L^ I come to do thy will, O God.

Thirdly, All these relations which Christ sustaineth in the Covenant, are all
acts of Grace, both upon Gods part, who designed Christ unto these relations,
that he might act Grace in Christ as the first copy of Free Grace, and that we
might share with him; and also upon Christ's part, who could not be hired to
undertake these relations, knowing what they would cost him; but the Free Grace
of his own heart engaged him in these relations: 2. Sam. 7.21, According to
thine own heart have thou done all these great things. Romans 8.32, How shall he
not with him also, freely give us all things? with Gal. 2.20, Who loved me, and
gave himself for me.

Fourthly, Though in the Covenant of Grace Christ be dispensed in all his
offices, and and the efficacy and fruit of all these offices, as appears from
Isa. 55.4, with Romans 8.32, and Jer. 31.33, 34; yet some of his relations which
he sustaineth in the Covenant, do more especially respect one of his offices,
and some another; as also some of them directly respect all his offices: Take
for instances, His relation as Mediator, respects all his offices: His
relation as Party contracting, respects all his offices, wherein he was a
public person, who did represent many: His relation as Surety does especially
relate to his Kngly office, in regard of which he was undertaker, and made
potent to help, Psalm. 89.19. His relations as Witness, Messenger, and Servant,
does respect especially his prophetical office: His relation as Testator,
respects especially his Priestly office, etc.

Fifthly, Whatsoever relations Christ sustaineth in the Covenant of grace, he
beareath all these relations by Covenant, and by explicit contract he has
undertaken them; so that as we say of his offices, he was a King, a Priest, and
a Prophet by Covenant, Psalm. 89.3, I have made a Covenant with my chosen; I
have sworn unto David my servant: We say the same of all his relations in
respect of the Covenant. He is by Covenant and Compact with God, by the
Covenant of Suretiship, whatsoever he is in Covenant-relations. He is by
Covenant, Mediator of the Covenant: He is by Covenant, a Party in the Covenant,
representing others. He is by a Covenant, the Witness, Messenger, Servant,
Surety, Testator of the Covenant, Heb. 10.9. Isa. 59.21. and 53.10, 11, 12.
Heb. 2.10, 12. Joh. 17.2, 6, 12, etc.

Sixthly, For whomsoever he bears any of these relations in the Covenant, for
them he bears them all; if he be for, and unto any persons, Mediator to
Godward, he has engaged as party contracting with God for such persons; he is
become Surety for such, he has and shall be Witness, Messenger and Servant,
for promoting and manifesting the things of this Covenant unto such; he has
tested in his Legacy things pertaining to such persons, etc. Isa. 42.1. and
53.10. Joh. 6.37. Joh. 17, throughout.

I proceed now to the third relation which Christ sustaineth in the Covenant of
Grace; he is the Witness of the Covenant, Isa. 55.4, Behold, I have given him
for a witness to the people. Rev. 3.14, These thing says the Amen, the
faithful and true witness. Rev. 1.5, And from Jesus Christ, who is the faithful
witness. Christ may be considered as the witness of the Covenant in a double
respect. 1. He is the Witness witnessed. 2. He is the Witness witnessing. The
Hebrew word (...) Ghned is rendered, and does frequently signify Testimonium,
as well as Testis; and so the LXX render it, Isa. 55.4. (...). -- Christ is the
Testimonium and the Testis, the (...), or (...), and the (...), see Rev. 3.14;
Write, these things says the Amen, the faithful and true witness; with 1 Timothy
2.6, Who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time. First, I
say Christ is the Witness witnessed, or the great evidence and testimony of the
Covenant betwixt God and his people, (and in this sense a Witness is used
frequently in the Scripture to signify not only a person that bears
testimony, but for any thing that does evidence as a witness. Heb. 11.4, By
which he obtained witness, that he was righteous; God testifying of his gifts.
Luke 22.71, And they said, what need we any further witness, for we our selves
have heard of his own mouth)? For, First, He is given of God as the great
evidence of Covenant-love, and of that special good will to sinners which gave
the first rise to the Covenant, Joh. 3.16, For God so loved the world, that he
gave his only begotten son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish,
but have everlasting life. Luke 2.10, 11, And the Angel said unto them, fear
not; for behold I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all
people; for unto you is born this day, in the city of David, a Savior, which
is Christ the Lord. Secondly, He is given as the great evidence of
Covenant Interest, and relations betwixt God and sinners, as the sign and
evidence that the disagreeing parties are made one in him: Isa. 7.14, Therefore
the Lord himself shall give you a sign: Behold, a virgin shall conceive and
bear a Son, and shall call his name Immanuel. Thirdly, As the great evidence
and witness of Gods fulfilling all the promises of the Covenant, 2 Cor. 1.20,
For all the promises of God in him are Yea, and in him they are Amen; therefore
Christ was of old given as the sign of fulfilling all promises, and
accomplishing all deliveries to the Church before his coming in the flesh.
Zech. 6.12, and he shall build the temple of the Lord, Isa. 7.14. Fourthly, As
the great evidence and witness of the standing-perpetuity of these
Covenant-relations betwixt God and his people, Psalm. 89.34, 35, 37, My Covenant
will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. Once have I
sworn by my holiness, that I will not lie unto David. It shall be established
for ever as the moon: and as a faithful witness in heaven. Selah. Fifthly, As
the great evidence of the nature and complexion of the Covenant, he is so given
of God for a witness, that all the Covenant is comprised in him, Isa. 42.6, And
will give thee for a Covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles: and
therefore also when it was first revealed, there was nothing heard of but this
witness Christ, in the promise of whom all the Covenant, the union of God and
man, was simmed up, Genesis 3.15, And I will put enmity between thee and the
woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou
shall bruise his heel.

If Christ be given to the people for a witness in this sense; then, 1. You who
are under the Preaching of this Gospel, qua faedus anunciatum, consider the
office of Christ, and understand it as the great witness and evidence of Gods
commanding and approving will, that you should enter in Covenant with him, and
that you ought to believe on the Son of God; and know for a certainty, that if
you obey not the command of believing and taking hold of this Covenant, the
offers of Christ that has been made unto you, shall be for a witness and
evidence that shall acquit the Lord of your condemnation, and shall cut off all
excuse from you, in as much as your Obligation and Duty to believe, was
revealed unto you, and the offer of Christ is the witness of this, to all the
people who have heard the Gospel, 1 John 5.23, And this is his commandment,
that we should believe in the name of his son Jesus Christ. Joh. 15.25, If I
had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin: but now they have no
cloak for their sin.

2. To such as have the Covenant of grace acted in an effectual and powerful
way upon their hearts, according to Gods Decree and Will of purpose; I mean,
such as have been brought under the bond of this Covenant upon their hearts,
Eze. 20.37, in which sense the Covenant is spoken of, Jer. 31, and Ezekiel. 36,
etc. I would have you to understand Gods giving of Christ unto you, as he does
intend it, to wit, as a witness and testimony of his Covenant with you, as the
greatest evidence and demonstration that can be of his Covenant-love to you, of
your Covenant Interest in him, of the continuance of that Covenant Relation
betwixt you and him, and of the nature and substance of that Covenant: you
fearch for witnesses within you, and from Heaven, to testify of your
Covenant-state through grace; you long for that which may evidence it
satisfyingly unto you (and it may be most of us sin more on the other hand,
through neglect of fearching after these witnesses which are attainable); but
it is a pity that believers who have received Christ freely given to them by
God, should slight the greatest witness that ever God gave to his people; a
witness is at hand, and you receive not the testimony thereof: it may of this
be said, He that believes on the son of God has the witness in himself, 1 John 5.10, 11, 12. He has Christ the great witness of the Covenant; and who
knows but we may be left of God to wander the more in the dark, about our
Covenant state, because we lay so little weight upon the having of him whom God
has given for a witness to the people? O let us not tempt God by slighting him
thus; but let us look upon the having of him given to us, as the witness of all
these things beforementioned, concerning a Covenant betwixt God and us, he
being given of God for this end; so may we find the door and way which we grope
for, how to be established in the faith of our Covenant Relation to God.

But I come to speak of the second, which I take to be chiefly meant, Christ is
the Witness witnessing, or the person who bears witness of all that is
contained in the Covenant: For opening of this, consider these four
particulars. Christ is the Beholding-witness, the Acting-witness, the
Declaring-witness, the Confirming-witness of the Covenant.

1. Christ is an Eyewitness of the Covenant; that is, he was present, and
heard and saw the whole transaction of the Covenant, from the beginning to the
end; in which respect the Scriptures call persons present at any thing, and
beholders of it, witnesses, 1 Timothy 6.12. and 2.22. 1 John 1.2, 3, because they
are fit to bear witness in that thing, having certain grounds of knowledge of
it: Thus was our Lord Jesus a fit witness of the Covenant, for he was present
at the very first motion of it, and heard and saw all the convey of it, Prove.
8.22, 23, 30, The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way, before his
works of old. I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning; or ever the
earth was, then I was by him, as one brought up with him; and I was daily his
delight, rejoicing always before him. 2 Timothy 1.9, Who has saved us, and called
us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own
purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus, before the world began.
So that we may say of him in reference to the Covenant-transaction, that which
John says of him with reference to creation, Joh. 1.2, 3, The same was in the
beginning with God, all things were made by him, and without him was not any
thing made that was made. Nothing was done in that business without him,
neither indeed could it be, he being not only present, but the alone party with
whom God had first dealing with reference to this Covenant.

2. Christ is an Acting-witness of the Covenant, who not only was present, and
did-see the whole transaction of that business; but had an active hand in it;
yea it was acted upon his person, when before Pontius Pilate he witnessed a
good confession, 1 Timothy 6.13: and in this sense it is that the Apostle Peter, 1
Ep. 5, calls himself a Witness of the sufferings of Christ: because he had
experience of them in his own person; he was partaker of them, and had them
acted upon him. It Is beyond question, that Christ was such a witness of the
Covenant, he had an active hand in it from beginning to the end, in the making
of it, and in the fulfilling of it; he was a prime actor and undertaker from
eternity. Hence it is that the Apostle, Heb. 8.10, 11, ascribes the making of
the new Covenant, to Christ; for its of him and his Ministry that the Apostle
speaks in that place; so Joh. 17.2, 6, etc. As thou have given him power over
all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou have given him.
I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gave me out of the world:
Thine they were, and thou gave them me; and they have kept thy word, Joh.
15.15: for all things that I have heard of my father, I have made known unto
you: yea, I say the whole Covenant was acted upon him, the union of the
contrary disagreeing parties was acted upon his person; the bringing of man
near to God, and Gods coming near to man; the paying of the ransom, and the
acceptance of it, it was acted upon him; it was a bloody act upon his person,
Isa. 53, throughout. Zech. 13.7, Awake, O sword, against my shepherd, and
against the man that is my fellow, says the Lord of hosts; smite the shepherd.
2 Cor. 5.10, To wit, that God, was in Christ, reconciling the world unto
himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them.

3. Christ is the witness of the Covenant, who did declare and reveal the great
secret of the Covenant, even all that he heard, and faw, and acted about it; he
does witness and declare even the whole Counsel of God concerning his Covenant,
his purpose and will of grace concerning his people; which things we had never
known, had not the witness of the Covenant revealed and declared them, Psalm.
25.14, The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him: and he will show them
his Covenant. Joh. 1.18, No man has seen God at any time: the only begotten
son which is in the bosom of the father, he has declared him. Ephesians. 2.17, And
came and preached peace to you which were afar off: and to them that were near.
The reason is manifest, because Natures light, which can show something of God,
yet it is utterly blind concerning Christ and the Covenant of grace. 1 Cor. 2.7,
8, 12. But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden wisdom
which God ordained before the world, unto our glory, which none of the princes
of this world knew: For had they known it, they would not have crucified the
Lord of Glory. Now we have received, not the spirit of the world, but the
spirit which is of God, that we might know the things that are freely given to
us of God. Mat. 13.11, He answered and said unto them, because it is given unto
you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of Heaven, but to them it is not
given. And in this sense it is that the Ministers of the Gospel who reveal and
declare that mystery, are called witnesses, Act. 1.8. Rev. 11.3, 10. There be
three great mysteries and secrets of the Gospel and Kingdom of Heaven, which
had never been known unless Christ the witness of the Covenant had declared
them, but by him they are revealed and discovered unto us.

1. The mystery of the Covenant, the Gospel Covenant, is one of the greatest
mysteries that ever the world heard of; Ephesians. 6.19. To make known the mystery of
the Gospel. Col. 1.26, Even the mystery which has been hid from ages and from
generations, but now is made manifest to his saints. It Is a treasure of hidden
mysteries of science and knowledge, truly so called; Psalm. 19.7, 8, knowledge of
God and of our selves, Joh. 17.6, I have manifested thy name unto the men which
thou gave me out of the world. Job 42.5, 6, But now mine eye sees thee,
wherefore I abhor my self, and repent in dust and ashes. A treasure of
mysteries of commerce and trade with the Land that is afar off, I mean with
Heaven: Col. 3.1, 2, 3, If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things
which are above, where Christ sits on the right hand of God: set your
affection on things above, not on things on the earth, for ye are dead, and
your life is hid with Christ in God. A treasure of the mysteries of State of
the Kingdom of Heaven, Matt. 13.11, He answered and said unto them, Because it
is given unto you to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but to them
it is not given. A treasure of the mysteries of intelligence and secrets of
correspondence, about what is doing in Heaven and Earth, Psalm. 25.14, The
secret of the Lord is with them that fear him: and he will show them his
Covenant. Genesis 8.17, And the Lord said, shall I hide from Abraham that thing
which I do? A treasure of the mysteries of duty, or of the approving,
commanding will of God in all cases, Isa. 8.20, To the law, and to the
testimony: If they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no
light in them. Psalm. 119.9, Wherewith shall a young man cleanse his way? by
taking heed thereto according to thy word. A treasure of the mysteries of
dispensations, whereby we may know the most unknown footsteps of providence in
dark dispensations, Psalm. 77.19, And thy footsteps are not known: with Psalm.
73.17, Until I went unto the sanctuary of God; then understood I their end. A
treasure of the mysteries of the secret Counsels and will of God, as it is acted
upon the hearts of men, Ephesians. 1.9, Having made known unto us the mystery of his
will, according to his good pleasure, which he had purposed in himself. Heb.
6.17, Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise,
the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an Oath. A treasure of
mysterious paradoxes, and seeming contradictions, wherewith the Gospel Covenant
is filled, Gal. 2.20, I am crucified with Christ; nevertheless I live, yet not
I, but Christ lives in me, and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live
by the faith of the son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.

2. The mystery of Christ, Ephesians. 3.4, Whereby when ye read, you may understand
my knowledge in the mystery of Christ. Col. 2.2, To the acknowledgment of the
mystery of God, and of the father, and of Christ. There is a complication of
mysteries in him; he is all secrets; which had never been known unless himself
had witnessed and declared them; the wisest nutural Politicians, are stupid
here, 1 Cor. 2.8, Which none of the princes of this world knew: for had they
known it, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. Hence it is that he
is so often spoken of, with a [Behold!]: There is a mystery in his name; all
his names need an Interpreter, need his own declaration and witnessing, Jer.
23.6, And this is his name whereby he shall be called: The Lord our
righteousness. Rev. 19.13, And his name is called, the word of God. Matt. 1.23,
Behold, a virgin shall be with child, and shall bring forth a son, and they
shall call his name Emmanuel, which being interpreted, is, God with us. There
is a mystery in his person, a high mystery in his natures, the union of two
natures in that blessed person, 1 Timothy 3.16, And without controversy, great is
the mystery of godlyness: God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the
Spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world,
received up into glory. A mystery that cannot be thoroughly understood in this
life. There is a mystery in his offices, in his bearing them, and in his
exercising them, Heb. 5.11, Of whom we have many things to say, and hard to be
uttered, seeing ye are dull of hearing. Heb. 8.1, Now of the things which we
have spoken, this is the sum: we have such an High Priest who is set on the
right hand of of the throne of the Majesty in the Heavens. A mystery in his
union with his Church, and his inhabitation in them, which are referred to be
thoroughly understood till the day when Christ shall come again. Ephesians. 5.32, This
is a great mystery: But I speak concerning Christ and the Church. Col. 1.27,
To whom God would make known, what is the riches of the glory of this mystery
among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you the hope of glory. Joh. 14.20, At
that day ye shall know that I am in my father, and you in me, and I in you.

3. The mystery of the Gospel-righteousness and way of justifying and saving
sinners: This is the mystery upon which many wise learned men have stumbled,
because it has not been revealed unto them by the witness of the Covenant,
Romans 9.31, 32, 33, But Israel which followed after the law of righteousness,
has not attained to the law of righteousness; wherefore, because they sought
it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the law: for they stumbled at
that stumblingstone; as it is written, behold, I lay in Sion a stumblingstone,
and rock of offense: and whosoever believes on him, shall not be ashamed. 1
Cor. 1.20, 23, Where is the wise? where is the scribe? where is the disputer of
this world? has not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? But we preach
Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block, and unto the Greeks
foolishness. You may observe several great mystries concerning the
Gospel-righteousnes; There is,

1. A mystery in the imputation of it to us: what greater mystery, than that a
real Righteousness should come to us by the imputation of the righteousness of
another! 2 Cor. 5.21, For he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin,
that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.

2. There is a mystery in the instrument apprehending this righteousness, I
mean in Faith, 1 Timothy 3.9, Holding the mystery of the faith: Which is a
mysterious hidden grace in the manner of its life and acting, Col. 3.3, For ye
are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God.

3. There is a mystery in the persons to whom it is imputed, or rather in the
imputation of it with reference to the persons unto whom it is imputed; a
passing by of the worthiest in the worlds acount, and imputing it to the
nothings of the earth, Heb. 2.16, For verily he took not on him the nature of
Angels; but he took on him the seed of Abraham. 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, For ye see
your calling, brethren, how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many
mighty, not many noble are called; but God has chosen the foolish things of
the world, to confound the wise: and God has chosen the weak things of the
world to confound the things that are mighty: Which has been matter of wonder
unto many. 2 Samuel 7.18. Then went King David in, and sat before the Lord, and
he said, Who am I, O Lord God, and what is my house, that thou have brought me
hitherto! All these, and many things more, concerning the Covenant, had never
been known, if the Witness of the Covenant had not revealed, them and testified
of them, Joh. 17.6, I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gave
me out of the world.

4. Christ is the Witness of the Covenant, who establishes and confirms the
truth of all that is contained in it: Christ the true and faithful witness,
has sworn it, and testified all the Articles of the Covenant upon Oath, Rev.
3.14. These things says the Amen, the faithful and true witness. 2 Cor. 1.20,
For in him all the promises of God are Yea, and in him they are Amen. I say, he
is the Witness who has established the Covenant by his testimony, and that in
two respects: 1. He has set his Seal to the Covenant, and attested all that is
in it, Rev. 21.5, And he said unto me, write: for these words aro true and
faithful. Rev. 22.6, And he said unto me, these sayings are faithful and true.
2. He says and swears that all things contained in the Covenant are true;
the true and faithful Witness of the Covenant testifies these things, and
says Amen to them all. All that is contained in the Covenant may be summed up
in Commands, Promises, Conditions, Threatenings, Predictions and Exceptions; the
truth of all which the witness of the Covenant has testified and sworn: 1.
Commands: this is the great command of the new Covenant, That ye believe on the
son of God, 1 John 3.23. Christ the Witness of the Covenant testifies, that
that is the revealed will of God; he has said it, and sworn that it is true;
nothing would please his father better, Joh. 6.40. And this is the will of him
that sent me, that every one which sees the son, and believes on him, may
have everlasting life: and I will raise him up at the last day. The new
Covenant commands that we be holy, and that we love God, and live to him who
has loved us; and love one another, etc. 1 Pet. 1.16, Be ye holy, for I am
holy. 2 Cor. 5.15, And that he died for all, that they which live, should not
henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose
again. Psalm. 31.23, O love the Lord all ye his Saints: for the Lord preserves
the faithful. Gal. 5.14, For all the law is fulfilled in one word, even in
this, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. And the Witness of the
Covenant, Christ, testifies that it is true indeed; these things are the Will
of God, Mark. 12.30, And thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart,
and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, and with all thy strength: this
is the first commandment. Joh. 13.34, A new commandment I give unto you, that
ye love one another as I have loved you; that ye also love one another. Mat.
5.48, Be ye therefore perfect, even as your father which is in Heaven, is
perfect. 2. Promises and Proposals of mercy and good things. The Covenant
proposes and promises life to sinners through the death of Christ, Romans 4.15,
Who was delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our justification.
Romans 3.25, Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his
blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past,
through the forbearance of God. Romans 5.8, 9, In that while we were yet sinners,
Christ died for us; much more then being now justified by his blood, we shall
be saved from wrath through him. And Christ the Witness of the Covenant
testifies these things, and says that they are the true and faithful sayings
of God, Rev. 1.18, I am he that lives, and was dead, and behold I am alive for
evermore, Amen; and have the keys of Hell and of Death. 1 Timothy 1.15, This is a
faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the
world to save sinners, of whom I am chief. Luke 19.10, For the son of man is
come to seek and to save that which was lost. The Covenant propoposeth and
promises peace with God upon easy terms, freegifted righteousness, perfect
Holiness, complete Victory over all the adversaries of our happiness, 2 Cor.
5.19, 21. Romans 3.21, to the 27. and 5.15, to 20. Ezekiel. 36.25, etc. Christ the
Witness of the Covenant testifies these things, he establishes them all, 2
Cor. 1.20, For all the promises of God in him are Yea, and in him Amen, unto
the glory of God by us. He says Amen to them all, and swears that they are
true, Rev. 21.5, And he said unto me, write; for these words are true and
faithful. Rev. 22.6. And he said unto me, these sayings are faithful and true.
Where the Witness of the Covenant sets his Seal of Confirmation unto all
that is promised in the Gospel Covenant. 3. These things which the new Covenant
promises, it promises upon Condition of Faith, it promises them only to the
believer; Romans 10.9, That if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus,
and shall believe in thine heart, that God has raised him from the dead, thou
shall be saved. Romans 3.22. Even the righteousness of God, which is by faith of
Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all them that believe: for there is no
difference. Joh. 1.12, But as many as received him, to them gave he power to
become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name. Christ the
Witness of the Covenant testifies, that that is true; if ye believe not, ye
shall never be the better of any thing proposed by the new Covenant; and if ye
believe, ye shall, Joh. 3.18.36, He that believes on him, is not condemned:
but he that believes not, is condemned already, because he has not believed
in the name of the only begotten son of God. He that believes on the son, has
everlasting life, and he that believes not the son, shall not see life: but
the wrath of God abides on him. Joh. 11.40, Jesus says unto her, said I not
unto thee, that if thou would believe, thou should see the glory of God? 4.
There are also Threatenings annexed unto the Covenant, denouncing wrath and the
vengeance of the Gospel, upon all unbelievers and wilful rejecters of the new
Covenant, 2 These. 1.8, In flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that know not
God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. 16.22, If
any man love not the Lord Jesus Chirst, let him be Anathema Maranatha. And
denouncing woes and evil to the Hypocrite in heart, to the backslider, to the
careless seeker of God, to the barren fruitless professor, Mat. 23.13, But woe
unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites. Rev. 2.5, Remember therefore from
whence thou art fallen, and repent and do thy first works; or else I will come
unto the quickly, and will remove thy candlestick out of his place, except thou
repent. Rev. 3.16, So then, because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor
hot, I will spew thee out of my mouth. Heb. 6.8, But that which bears thorns
and briars is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing, whose end is to be burned.
Christ the Witness of the Covenant testifies these things, and affirms they
are the true sayings of God, as well as his promises, Rev. 3.14. Write, these
things says the Amen, the faithful and true witness. Joh. 3.18, But he that
believes not, is condemned already. Joh. 8.24. I said therefore unto you, that
ye shall die in your sins; for if ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in
your sins. 5. There are Predictions and Prophesies in the Gospel Covenant, I
mean especially these which concern Eternity, the last Judgment, Hell and
Heaven; which are the things that are least believed of all that ever men heard
tell of. Christ the Witness of the Covenant testifies also, that these things
are true; the Covenant tells us that this world shall have an end, and time
shall be no more, Eternity is coming, Psalm. 102.26, They shall perish, but thou
shall endure; yea, all of them shall was old like a garment, as a vesture shall
thou change them, and they shall be changed. 2 Pet. 3.10, But the day of the
Lord will come as a thief in the night, in the which the Heavens shall pass
away with a great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat; the
earth also, and the works that are therein, shall be burnt up. Christ the
Witness of the Covenant, testifies and swears that is true, Rev. 10.5, 6,
And the Angel which I saw stand upon the sea, and upon the earth, lift up his
hand to Heaven, and swear by him that lives for ever and ever, who created
Heaven, and the things that therein are, and the earth and the things that
therein are, and the sea, and the things which are therein, that there should
be time no longer. The Covenant says, that God has appointed a day wherein
Christ shall judge the world, and all shall bow to him, Act. 17.31, Because he
has appointed a day in the which he will judge the world in righteousness, by
that man whom he has ordained. And this witness of the Covenanant testifies
and confirms that with an Oath, Rom 14.10, 11, 12, We shall all stand before
the judgment seat of Christ; for it is written, As I live, says the Lord,
every knee shall how to me, and every tongue shall confess to God; so then
every one of us shall give account of himself to God. The Covenant says, there
is a Hell and a Heaven, there is a resting place prepared for the people of
God, and a place of torment for all the wicked, 1 Cor. 2.9, 10, But as it is
written, eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has entered into the heart
of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him. But God has
revealed them unto us by his spirit: for the spirit searches all things; yea,
the deep things of God. Luke 16.23, And in Hell he lift up his eyes, being in
torment, and sees Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom. Rev. 14.10, 11,
The same shall drink of the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out
without mixture into the cup of his indignation, and he shall be tormented with
fire and brimstone in presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the
lamb: and the smoke of their torment ascends up for ever and ever. The
Witness of the Covenant testifies that these things are true, for he was both
in Hell and Heaven, i. e. he saw both, and tasted of the things that are in
them, Psalm. 16.10, For thou will not leave my soul in Hell. Luke 23.43, Jesus
said unto him, Verily I say unto thee, to day thou shall be with me in
paradise. Joh. 17.5, And now O father glorify thou me, with thine own self,
with the glory which I had with thee before the world was. 6. There are
Exceptions and Reservations of the crosses and afflictions in several cases, by
the Covenat, Psalm. 89.30, 32. If his Children forsake my law, then will I visit
their transgressions with the rod. The Witness of the Covenant testifies it is
true, and confirms it by making it an express Reservation and Exception in
all his dealings with his people, Luke 9.23, And he said unto them all, If any
man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross daily and
follow me. Luke 14.27. And whosoever does not bear his cross, and come after
me, cannot be my Disciple, Mat. 16.24. Then said Jesus unto his Disciples, if
any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his cross and
follow me.

2. The Covenant may be said to be established and confirmed by Christ the
Witness, in regard that it is his witness that puts an end to controversies
about all things pertaining to the Covenant; for in him they have a double
establishment; they are sure in themselves, and they are sure unto us. 1. All
which is contained in the Covenant is firm and sure in Christ, 2 Cor. 1.20, For
all the promises of God in him are yea, and in him, Amen, unto the glory of God
by us. Act. 13.34, And as concerning that he raised him up from the dead, now
no more to return to corruption, he said on this wise, I will give you the sure
mercies of David. His Witness makes it certain that there are such things, and
that these things are irrevocable and unalterable, not to be done away nor
broken, because the Oath of God and witness of his Christ is in this Covenant,
which was not in the first Covenant, Psalm. 89.34, 35, My Covenant will I not
break: nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. Once have I sworn by my
holiness, that I will not lie unto David. 2. His witness makes them sure to
us, as well as sure in themselves; for it is that which puts the business of
our salvation beyond doubting, at least should put it beyond doubting because
we have Christ's testimony for it, he has made it a sworn article of the
Covenant, Heb. 6.17, 18, Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto the
heirs of promise, the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an Oath (to
wit, the Promise and Covenant made and confirmed with Abraham by the Angel of
the Covenant), that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God
to lie, we might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay
hold upon the ho^ set before us. 1 John 5.9, If we receive the witness of men,
the witness of God is greater.

For application of this: Let us first reflect upon our selves, and the way of
our hearts with the Lord, that we may be convinced how much we have slighted
this Covenant Relation of Christ's, how little use we have made of him as the
witness of the Covenant; and how small weight we have laid upon his testimony.
That this may appear; Consider, 1. He has not been employed by us, to witness
in all things wherein we have wanted certainty, in the matters pertaining to
the Covenant; such as the revealing the secret of his Covenant, the certifying
us of his Covenant love; and our Covenant-state and interest in him, etc. How
often have we fled unto, and trusted in means and marks for the attaining of
these things, and have not employed him who was given for a witness to declare
and assure of these things? Joh. 1.18, No man has seen God at any time; the
only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the futher, he has declared him.
Psalm. 25.14, The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him: and he will
show them his Covenant. Romans 8.16, The spirit it self bears witness with: our
spirit, that we are the children of God. ^. He has come and spoken, and has
testified of things which concern our Covenant-state, by his spirit and by his
work in us; and we have not heard nor taken notice that it was the Witness of
the Covenant, testifying the things that concern himself and his Kingdom, Heb.
1.2, God has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son; whom he has
appointed heir of all things. Heb. 3.1, Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of
the heavenly calling; consider the Apostle and High Priest of our profession,
Christ Jesus. Heb. 12.25, See that ye refuse not him that speaks: for if they
oscaped not, who refused him that spoke on earth; much more shall not we
escape, if we turn away from him that speaks from Heaven. Joh. 16.5. 1 John
5.6, 8, etc. 3. His Witness and testimony has been heard, and observably
discerned and yet not received; sometimes we have known that it was Christ
speaking, and that it could be no other; and yet we have not received his
restimony, Joh. 21.12, And none of the Disciples durst ask him who art thou?
knowing that it was the Lord. Joh. 1.3^. He came unto his own, and his own
receive him not. He does sometimes speak, and we will not believe that it is
he: Luke 24.37, 41, But they were terrified and affrighted, and supposed th^^
they had seen a spirit. And while they yet believed not, for joy, and wondered,
be said unto them, have ye not here any meat? 4. At other times we receive and
believe his testimony and witnessing, and by and by upon the smallest
temptation to unbelief, we fall a quarrelling, and disputing with the testimony
which we received, and straightway we reject it as a delusion, Luke 24.21, But
we trusted that it had been be which should have redeemed Israel: and besides
all this, to day is the third day since these things were done.

Use 2. Consider what manner of Witness he is, and what manner of witnessing
his testimony is, that you may lay weight upon whatsoever the witness of the
Covenant says. Christ the witness of the Covenant may be commended, in order
to the weight and credit of his testimony, from these properties of the
Witness, and the manner of his witnessing. 1. He is an Eyewitness of the
Covenant, who was present, and heard, and s^w all the Covenant transacted; yea,
he was an actor in it throughout, as has been said before; this testimony he
takes to himself, Prove. 8.22, to 32, And the same is given him also by such as
were sent to witness of him, Joh. 1.7, 18, The same came for a witness, to bear
witness of the light, that all men through him might believe; no man has seen
God at any time: The only begotten Son which is in the besome of the father, he
has declared him. 2. He is the true and-faithful witness, Rev. 1.5, and 3.7,
14, which cannot lie, and is not capable of being biased from the truth for
any respect; for he is the truth it self, Joh. 14.10. 3. He is a Witness above
all exception, there can be no exception laid against him; yea, all the great
witnesses which God has made use of in declaring this Gospel from the
beginning, do bear witness of him, Act. 3.24, Yea, and all the Prophets from
Samuel, and these that follow after, at many as have spoken, have likewise
foretold of these days. Act. 10.43, To him give all the prophets witness. 4.
His Witness is greater than the testimony of men, 1 John 5.^, If we receive the
witness of men, the witness of God is greater: Not only in respect of the
Authority of him who witnesses, (...), but in respect of the weight and
impression of his testimony: For, 1. His Witne^^ speaks to the heart. 2. It
ends the controversy; there needs no further witnessing after he speaks, Hos.
2.14, Therefore behold, I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness,
and speak comfortably into her. Hebr. speak to her heart. Mat. ^.8, The
centurion answered and said, Lord, I am not worthy that thou should come
under my roof: but speak the word only, and my servant shall be healed. 5. Of
all these various things which, he has witnessed from the beginning of the
world until now, there has not failed one word, neither of one kind nor
another, Jos. 21.45. and 23.14, 15. with Isa. 63.9. Act. 7.30. 1 Cor. 10.9. 1
Kings 8.15, 24, 56, Isa. 38.15. Luke 24.44. Romans 22.6, And he said unto me,
These sayings are faithful and true. And the Lord God of the holy prophets sent
his ^ing^t, to show unto his se^uants the things which must shortly be done.
Zech. 1.5, 6. Your fathers, where are they? and the prophets, do they live for
ever? but my words and my statutes, which I commanded my servants the prophets,
did they not take hold of your fathers? And they returned, and said, Like as
the Lord of hosts thought to do unto us, according to our ways, and according
to our doings, so has he dealt with us.

Use 3. Be exhorted to receive him under this Covenant Relation, as he is given
of God for a Witness to the people. Under this I comprehend these particulars.
1. If you would, make use of Christ as the Witness of the Covenant, then in all
matters doubtful, appeal to his testimony for decision: if you have any doubt
about any matter of says or salvation, about any duty, about any thing
pertaining to God, or unto your own Covenant state and interest in him, make
his testimony and witness your Judge in that matter; go familiarly and boldly to
him, that he may determine the question, and resolve your doubt, Isa. 8.20, To
the law, and to the testimony. 2 Pet. 1.9. We have also a more sure word of
prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that shines
in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts. As
his Disciples did upon all occasions, Joh. 13.21, 22, 25, and 14.5, 8, 22. 2.
Hear and give ear to whatsoever he witnesses; and take it off his hand, Luke
9.35 This is my beloved Son, bear him, And look carefully: that you neither
neglect to hear what he will say and witness of you, and to you, of your way
(...) state, or present fit and temper, for you or against you; nor interrupt
his witnessing; but let him speak out: nor that you stop the ear against it:
These are marked in Scripture, as manifest sins against, and rejecting of his
witnessing, Act. 24.25, Go thy way for this time; when I have a convenient
season, I will call for thee. Zech. 7.7, 11, Should ye not hear the words which
the Lord has cried by the former Prophets? But they refused to hearken, and
pulled away the shoulder, and stopped their ears that they should not hear.
Heb. 12.25, See that ye refuse not him that speaks: for if they escaped not,
who refused him that spoke on cauth; much more shall not we escape, if we turn
away from him that speaks from Heaven. Neh. 9.10, And testified against them
by thy spirit, in the Prophets: yet would they not give ear: therefore gave
thou them into the hand of the people of the Lands. 3. If you receive him in
this Covenant Relation, you must take his testimony for sufficient proof of
whatsoever he speaks unto you; lay such weight upon his witnessing, that it may
be to you an end of all strife and controversy, 1 John 5.9, 10, If we receive
the witness of men, the witness of God, is gr^^^er: He that believes on the
Son of God, has the witness in himself: He that believes not God, has made
him a liar, because he believes not the record that God gave of his Son. You
must believe his Witness, else you wrong him exceedingly, Joh. 14.11, Believe
me that I am in the father, and the father in me: or else believe me for the
very works sake. Psalm. 35.3, Say unto my soul, I am thy salvation. 4. If you
receive him as the Witness of the Covenant, having received him in this
Covenant Relation, you may never come in the contrary of any thing that he
says; you must neither suspect, nor quarrel, nor be jealous of any thing which
he has witnessed, Prove. 14.5, A faithful witness will not lie. For Christ will
no more lie unto you, wherein he has sworn and witnessed, than God will lie
unto him, which is impossible, Psalm. 80.35, Once have I sworn by my holiness,
that I will not lie unto David. Heb. 6.17, Wherein God, willing more abundantly
to show unto the heirs of promise, the immutability of his counsel, confirmed
it by an Oath. 5. If you receive him as the Witness of the Covenant, then must
you not only receive whatsoever he says, for a cerrain truth of the Covenant;
but what he speaks not and testifies not, concernining your Covenant-state
and relation, that you must take to be no truth, though it were otherwise
suggested to you by temptation, Joh. 14.2, In my fathers house are many
mansions; if it were not so, I would have told you: I go to prepa^^ a place for
you. If he had other thoughts toward you, then those which he has told you,
he would have revealed them, (I speak to believers), Jer. 29.11, For I know the
thoughts that I think toward you, says the Lord, thoughts of peace, and not
of evil, to give you an expected end. 6. Whatsoever way he does witness and
testify, take his Witness, and prescribe not a way unto him, but make all his
ways of witnessing welcome, whether he Witness by his word, or by his work, by
his spirit, or by your spirit, 2 Pet. 1.19, We have also a more sure word of
prophecy, whereunto ye do do well that ye take heed, as unto a light that
shines into a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your
hearts. 1. Joh. 5.10, He that believes on the Son of God, has the witness in
himself. Romans 8.16, The spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that we
are the Children of God. Neh. 9.30, Yet many years did thou forbear them, and
testifiedst against them by thy spirit, in thy Prophets. Romans 10.8, But what
says it? the word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart; that is,
the word of faith which we preach.

Use 4. For decision of the great practical controversies which are in the
world (to say nothing here of Doctrinal controversies relating to the Covenant,
which are also decided by his Testimony); as well those which are amongst
Athiests, and in the unbelieving world, as those which are among believers;
Christ is given for a Witness to the people, and what he says must put an end
to every controversy. 1. It Is a controversy to the world, whether time shall
have an end, or whether the fashion of this world shall pass away, or whether
all things shall continue as now they are; and whether too morrow shall be as
this day, Psalm. 49.11, Their inward thought is, that their houses shall
continue for ever. Isa. 56.12, Come y^^ say they, I will fetch wine, and we
will fill our selves with strong drink; and to morrow shall be as this day, and
much more abundant. The Witness of the Covenant has decided the controversy
by his Testimony and Oath, and has said, that time shall be ^o more, Rev.
10.6.) 2. It Is a controversy to the world, whether Eternity be coming after
time, or whether there be another life and world after this, 2 Pet. 3.4, And
saying, where is the promise o^ his coming? For since the fathers fell asleep,
all things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation. The
Witness of the Covenant has decided this also, Rev. 22.20, He which testifies
these things, says, surely I come quickly, Amen. Tit. 1.2, In hope of eternal
life, which God that cannot lie, promised before the world began. Joh. 6.47,
Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that believes on me, has everlasting life.
30 It Is a controversy to the world, whether there be any resurrection and
judgment to come, or any immortality of the Soul, Isa. 22.13, And behold, joy
and gladness, slaying oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine:
let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye. Luke 12.19, And I will say to
my soul, soul, thou have much golds laid up for many years, take thine ease,
eat, drink, and be merry. The Witness of the Covenant has decided that
controversy, and testifies, that he himself had experience of it; he was dead
and is alive, Rev. 1.18, I am he that lives, and was dead, and behold I am
alive for evermore, Amen. Joh. 6.40, And this is the will of him that sent me,
that every one that sees the Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting
life: and I will raise him up at the last day. Heb. 12.23, To the general
assembly, and Church of the first born, which are written in Heaven; and to God
the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect. Mat. 22.23, to
31. 4. It Is a controversy to the world, whether there be any Heaven or Hell;
they say in their hearts, who knows that there are such things, and what they
be, and where they are? Luke 16.31, And he said unto him, If they hear not
Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from
the dead. Isa. 28.15, Because ye have said, we have made a Covenant with death,
and with Hell are we at agreement, when the overflowing scourage shall pass
through, it shall not come unto us. The Witness of the Covenant testifies that
there are such things, and that he saw both, and experienced the truth of the
things that are written of them, Psalm. ^0.10, For then with not leave my Soul
in Hell, neither will thou suffer thine holy one to see corruption. Luke 23.43,
Verily I say unto thee, to day shall thou be with me in Paradise. Joh. 13.1, 3.
and 14.2. Luke 16.23, 24, 25. Heb. 12.23, 24. 2 These. 1.9. Rev. 21. and 2^. 5.
It Is a controversy to the world, whether there be a God, or a Providence that
rules the world, Psalm. 14.1, The fool has said in his heart, there is no God.
Isa. 29.15, And they say, who sees us? and who knows us? The Witness of the
Covenant has decided this controversy, Joh. 20.17, I ascend unto my father,
and (...) father; and to my God, and your God. Joh. 6.57, As th^^ (...) father
has sent me, and I live by the father: so he that ^ateth me even he shall live
by me. Dan. 5.21, 23, Till he knew that the most high God ruled in the kingdom
of men, and that he has appointed over it whomsoever he will. And the God in
whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways, have thou not glorified.
Rev. 15.3, 4, And they sing the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song
of the lamb, saying, Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty,
just and true are thy ways, thou king of saints. Who shall not fear thee O
Lord, and glorify thy name? for thou only art holy: for all nations shall come
and worship before thee, for thy judgments are made manifest. 6. It Is a
controversy with the world, yea and sometimes also with the saints, whether
the people of God, or the wicked of the world have the better lot, Psalm. 73.3,
12, For I was envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked.
Behold, these are the ungodly who prosper in the world: they increase in
riches. But this also is decided by the Witness of the Covenant, Psalm. 49.18,
19, Though whiles he lived, he blessed his Soul: and men will praise thee, when
thou do well to thy self. He shall go to the generation of his fathers, they
shall never see light. Joh. 3.18, 36, He that believes on him, is not
condemned: but he that believes not, is condemned already, because he has not
believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God. He that believes on the
Son, has everlasting life; and he that believes not the Son, shall not see
life, but the wrath of God abides on him. Isa. 3.10, 11, Say ye to the
righteous, it shall be well with hem: for they shall eat the fruit of their
doings. Woe unto the wicked, it shall be ill with him, for the reward of his
hands shall be given him. Rev. 21.4, And God shall wipe all tears from their
eyes: and there shall be no mor death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither
shall there be any more pain, for the^^former things are passed away. Again, it
is a controversy to doubting believers, whether God has chosen them and loved
them with an everlasting love, Psalm. 88.4, 14, I am counted with them that go
down to the pit. Lord, why castest thou off my Soul? This controversy is
decided by the Witness of the Covenant, who gives that double certainty of all
these things, whereby they are not only made sure in themselves, because he
(...) ^^ified them; but are also made sure unto us, Jer. 31.3, (...) Lord has
appeared of old unto me, saying, yea, I have loved thee with an everlasting
love: therefore with loving kindness have I drawn thee. Heb. 8.10, For this is
the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after these days, says
the Lord: I will put my laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts:
and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people. Where the
sayings of Jeremy are applied to Christ who made the Covenant. Joh. 15.13, 16,
19, Greater love has no man then this, that a man lay down his life for his
friends. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that
you should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit should remain. But
because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world,
therefore the world hates you. Joh. 6.69, And we believe and are sure than
thou art that Christ, the Son of the living God. 2. It is a controversy to
doubting believers, whether they be the Children of God, and whether they be
effectually called by the Grace of Christ, Psalm. 22.6, But I am a worm and no
man; a reproach of men, and despised of the people. Christ decides the
controversy by interposing his Testimony, Joh. 13.35, By this shall all men
know that ye are my Disciples, if ye have love one to another. Romans 8.16, The
spirit it self bears witness with our spirits, that we are children of God.
Isa. 43.1, Fear not, for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name,
thou art mine. 3. It is a controversy to doubting-believers, whether they
shall ever see Christ, and meet with him again, when he does but a little
withdraw out of their sight, Isa. 49.14, But Sion said, the Lord has forsaken
me, and my Lord has forgotten me. Whether they shall at any time again be
comforted with his presence: but he decides the controversy, and witnesses
clearly, that he and they shall meet again, Joh. 16.22, And ye now therefore
have sorrow: but I will see you again, and your heart shall rejoice, and your
joy no man takes from you. Joh. 14.18, I will not leave you comfortless, I
will come to you. Isa. 54.8, In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a
momeni; but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord
thy redeemer. Isa. 49.15, Can a woman forget her sucking-child, that she should
not have compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet will I
not forget thee. 4. It Is a controversy to the doubting-believer, whether there
be any reality in his presence, and in the fellowship of his company, both when
they enjoy it, and when they want it, Luke 24.21, 37, 41, But we trusted that
it had been he which should have redeemed Israel: and beside all this, to day
is the third day since these things were done. But they were terrified and
affrighted, and supposed that they had seen a spirit. And while they yet
believed not for joy, and wondered. 2 Chronicles. 6.18. But will God in very deed
dwell with men on the earth? But by his Witness he decides that controversy,
Luke 24.38, 39, 40, 42, And he said unto them, why are ye troubled? and why do
thoughts arise in your hearts? Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I my
self: handle me and see, for a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me
have. And when he had thus spoken, he showed them his hands and his feet. And
they gave him a piece of a broyled fish, and of an honeycomb. Joh. 6.20, But he
says unto them, it is I, be not afraid. 1 Cor. 1.9, God is faithful by whom ye
were called unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord. 5. It is a
controversy to the doubting believer, whether his Salvation be sure or not,
whether he shall be saved and inherit Life-eternal, Psalm. 88.11, 12, Shall thy
loving kindness be declared in the grave? or thy faithfulness in destruction?
shall thy wonders be known in the dark? and thy righteousness in the land of
forgetfulness? But Christ has interposed his Witness to decide that
controversy, Joh. 6.57, As the living father has sent me, and I live by the
father: so he that eats me, even he shall live by me. Joh. 3.15, 16, That
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have Eternal life. For God
so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. Psalm. 35.3, Say
unto my soul, I am thy Salvation. 6. It is a controversy to believers, whether
they shall ever be Victorious over their Lusts, and prevail against their
temptations, when they seel the strength and working of corruption in
themselves, as Paul did, Romans 7.14, 15, But I am carnal, sold under sin: For
that which Ido, I allow not: for what I would, that I do not, but what I hate,
that I do. Many a time they utter that language, Lam. 3.18, And I said, my
strength and my hope is perished from the Lord. But the Witness of the Covenant
testifies in this also, and decides the controversy in their favors, 1 John
4.4, Ye are of God, little children, and have overcome them: because greater is
he that is in you, then he that is in the world. 1 John 5.4, 5, For whatsoever
is born of God, overcomes the world: and this is the victory that overcomes
the world, even our faith: who is he that overcomes the world, but he that
believes that Jesus is the Son of God? Romans 16.20, And the God of peace shall
bruise Satan under your feet shortly. 7. It is a controversy to
doubting-believers, whether they shall persevere to the end, or shall not
rather fall away finally. Psalm. 51.11, Cast me not away from thy presence: and
take not thy holy spirit from me. But Christ has decided the controversy,
Joh. 17.12, Those that thou gave me, I have kept, and none of them is lost,
but the son of perdition. Joh. 10.28. And I give unto them eternal life, and
they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. Joh.
14.19, Because I live, ye shall live also. 8. It is a controversy to the
doubting-believer, whether it be good for him to be so dealt with, to be
afflicted, deserted, tempted, etc. Psalm. 42.9, I will say unto my God, my rock,
why have thou forgotten me? why go I mourning because of the oppression of the
enemy? Psalm. 73.13, 14, Verily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my
hands in Innocence. For all the day long I have been plagued, and chastened
every morning. Christ has decided this controversy also, not by his verdict
only of the matter, but by his Witness in his peoples hearts, Joh. 16.7,
Nevertheless I tell you the truth, it is expedient for you that I go away: for
if I go not away, the comforter will not come unto you: but if I depart, I will
send him unto you. Romans 8.28, And we know that all things work together for
good to them that love God, to them who are the called according to his
purpose. 1 Pet. 1.6, Wherein ye greatly rejoice: though now for a season (if
need be) ye are in heaviness through manifold temptations. Psalm. 119.71, It is
good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy statutes. It is
a controversy to the doubting-believer, while he reaps not the present fruit
of his seeking God, whether it be in vain to serve God; and to follow duties,
Psalm. 73.13, Verily have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in
innocence. But it is the Witness of the Covenant who only can decide this; and
he has done it, Isa. 45.19, I said not unto the seed of Jacob, seek ye me in
vain: I the Lord speak righteousness, I declare things that are right. Psalm.
73.28, But it is good for me to draw near to God: I have put my trust in the
Lord God, that I may declare all thy works.

Use 5. This Covenant Relation of Christ's, lays grounds of comfort to
believers.

1. That you want not a Witness to testify unto you concerning all things
which are dark and doubtful, Isa. 55.4, Behold, I have given him for a witness
to the people. 1 John 5.8, 9, 10, And there are three that bear witness in
earth, the spirit, and the water, and the blood, and these three agree in one.
If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater: for this is
the witness of God, which he has testified of his Son: He that believes on
the Son of God has the witness in himself: he that believes not God, has
made him a liar, because he believes not the record that God gave of his Son.
So that if you be doubtful, and in the dark about any thing pertaining to God
and to the matters of your Salvation, you know how to have that witnessed and
plainly made out unto you, by Christ the Witness of the Covenant; and if you
continue under your doubting, blame your selves, Isa. 42.6, And I give thee for
a Covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles.

2. Another ground of comfort, resulting from this Covenant Relation, is, that
we not only have a Witness, but that we have such a Witness, him for a Witness;
that God who might have given us other witnesses, and have denied this Witness,
has given him for a Witness, Heb. 1.1, 2, God who at sundry times, and in
diverse manners, spoke in times past unto the fathers by the Prophets; has in
these last days spoken unto us by his Son, whom he has appointed heir of all
things, by whom he also made the worlds. Act. 14.17, Nevertheless, he left not
himself without witness, in that he did good, and gave us rain from heaven, and
fruitful seasons, filling our hearts with food and gladness. So fit a Witness,
1 John 1.2, 3, who heard and saw, and acted all the business of the Covenant,
Prove. 8.22, to 32. So saithful a Witness, that will not lie, that cannot lie,
Rev. 1.5. and 3.14. So great a Witness, a person of such Authority, being God,
1 John 5.9. Luke 9.35. So compassionate a Witness, who can pity his
doubting-people, Heb. 5.2. So condescending a Witness, who can stoop to teach
and persuade the weaklings of the people, Isa. 40.11. Joh. 9.39, as all his
carriage did prove, while he was upon the earth: So convincing a Witness, whose
testimony can put an end to all strife, if he will only speak the word, Mat.
8.8. And all this is for the stronger consolation of Believers, Heb. 6.17, 18,
Wherein God, willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise, the
immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath: That by two immutabile
things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong
consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us.

3. Another ground of comfort which this relation affords to believers, is,
That Christ is by office a Witness, and that he is a Witness by Covenant: i. e.
not only does the office which is upon him, bind this upon him; but by Covenant
and voluntary condescension, he is engaged, and has consented to be a Witness
to the people: therefore says the Lord, Behold I have given him for a witness,
Isa. 55.4. And he says, Lo I come to do thy will, Heb. 10.9. This is your
comfort, Believers, that Christ is a Witness by office and Covenant, and can no
more deny to testify unto you the things pertaining to the Covenant, than ye
can deny his office, or break his Covenant.

4. Another ground of comfort in this Covenant Relation, is, that he is given
for a witness to the people: I mean, that whatsoever belongs to him by this
office and relation of being a Witness, and whatsoever he is by virtue thereof,
that he is; and that he performs to all the people of God without exception
or respect of persons, what he has been in his way of witnessing, and what he
has testified and declared to others of the people of God; insomuch that he
has settled, quieted and comforted them, by doing the part of a Witness, to
reveal and to prove unto them, things about which they doubted, concerning
their Covenant-state, and his Covenant-love; that same he will do to thee and
to any of his people, Romans 3.22, Even the righteousness of God, which is by
faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all them that believe: for there is
no difference. Gal. 3.28, There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond
nor free, there is neither male nor female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus.
Act. 10.34, Then Peter opened his mouth, and said, of a truth I perceive that
God is no respector of persons. 1 John 1.3, That which we have seen and heard,
declare we unto you, that ye also may have fellowship with us; and truly our
fellowship is with the father, and with his Son Jesus Christ.

CHAP. XVIII. Christ the Messenger or Angel of the Covenant.
THE fourth relation which Christ bears in the Covenant of Grace, is, That he
is the Messenger of the Covenant. Mal. 3.1, The Lord whom ye seek shall
suddenly come to his temple, even the Messenger of the Covenant whom ye delight
in. That this is spoken and meant of Christ, is acknowledged both by Christian
and Jewish Interpreters: It is also clear from the Text, that it can be meant
of no other for the Messenger of the Covenant is he, before whom John the
Baptist was sent a Messenger to prepare the way, Mal. 3.1, Behold, I will send
my Messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me. Luke 7.27, This is he of
whom it is written, behold, I send my Messenger before thy face, which shall
prepare thy way before thee. Luke 1.76, And thou Child shall be called the
Prophet of the Highest: for thou shall go before the face of the Lord, to
prepare his ways. This is he who is the Lord, whom the people seek, and in whom
they delight; he whose coming was much longed and looked for, by the people of
God: this is he who sits as a refiner, v. 2, 3. Now this can be no other but
Christ: compare this with Luke 2.25, 38. Isa. 59.20. with Romans 11.26. 2 These.
2.8.

The word in the Original here (...) umalach haberith, the Messenger or Angel
of the Covenant, as Arr. Mont. renders it; or the Angel of the Testament, as
the Chald. Paraphrast, with the (70), and Hieron read it; the Hebrew word, I
say, is of a large signification, as (...) is in the Greek Language, and is
used for any delegate, whether Messenger, Ambassador or Minister, employed for
any effect, whether to declare or to act and effect any thing; and is applied
to, and used of men of created spirits, and of Christ; which shall appear in
the opening of the name as it is applicable to Christ.

For the better understanding of this relation which Christ fustaineth in the
Covenant: We shall shortly hold forth, 1. What the name Messenger or Angel of
the Covenant does import, as to the nature of the thing. 2. In what respects it
is applicable to Christ. 3. Betwixt what parties he is a Messenger. 4. Whose
Messenger he is; of one of these parties, or of both. 5. In what business he is
a Messenger. 6. Somewhat of the properties of this Messenger of the Covenant,
which commend his traveling in this employment.

And 1. the name Messenger or Angel does import, 1. A delegation or Trust: a
Messenger is a Trustee; it is a name of office or employment, and does
necessarily import a Mission; therefore it is often joined with sending, See
Mal. 3.1. Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before
me. Mat. 11.10, Behold, I send my messenger before thy face. 1 Kings 19.2, Then
Jezzebel sent a messenger unto Elijah, saying, etc. If it be asked, unto which
of Christ's offices does this name relate? I answer, it does in some respect
relate to all his offices, because his Message is as large as his Mission and
Unction, which includes all his offices; but it does more especially relate to
his Prophetical and Priestly Office, because in regard of these mainly, he
traveled betwixt the parties, and carried Messages and Reports hither and
thither. 2. This name of Messenger does import a subordination or subjection,
in regard that he who sends, is greater than he who is sent, Joh. 13.16,
Verily, verily I say unto you, the Servant is not greater than his Lord,
neither he that is sent, greater then he that sent him. Mat. 8.9, For I am a
man under Authority, having soldiers under me: and I say to this man, go, and
he goes: and to another, come, and he comes: and to my servant, do this, and
he does it. And therefore it must be understood of Christ, in regard of his
dispensatory employment and voluntary condescension, whereby he humbled himself
to travel in the work of Redemption, Phil. 2, And took upon him the form of a
servan. 3. This name of Messenger of the Covenant, does import on the part of a
Messenger, a traveling betwixt the parties of the Covenant, betwixt him who
sends Christ, and these to whom he is sent, Isa. 53.11, He shall see of the
travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied. Joh. 16.28, I came forth from the
father, and am come into the world: again, I leave the world, and go to the
father. Joh. 14.2. I go to prepare a place for you. 4. This name imports
correspondence and intercourse betwixt the parties, through the Messenger, and
by his means and travel, 2 Samuel 11.22, 23, 25, So the messenger went, and came
and showed David all that Joab had sent him for. And the Messenger said unto
David, surely the men prevailed against us: Then David said unto the messenger,
thus shall thou say unto Joab, let not this thing displease thee, etc. Joh.
17.6, 8, I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gave me out of
the world: and they have believed that thou did send me. Joh. 13.3, And that
he was come from God, and went to God.

2. Consider next, in what respects the name Messenger is applicable to Christ
with relation to the Covenant. 1. In regard of the power and trust committed
unto him in the matters of the Covenant; he is the Messenger of the Covenant,
that is, the great Lord Ambassador extraordinary, and Trustee of Heaven, who
represented his father, and who was Plenipotentiary, being perfectly
instructed, and fully empowered to propound, treat and conclude in all matters
pertaining to the Covenant, and the settlement of peace 'twixt God and man; and
in this sense the word is used, 1 Kings 16.7. and 17.4, (...) malakim
Messengers, i. e. Ambassadors, and Isa. 33.7. (...) melache, the Ambassadors
of peace: thus Christ is the Messenger of the Covenant; this power and trust is
committed unto him, to represent his father, 2 Cor. 5.19, To wit, that God was
in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself. Heb. 1.1, 3, God has in these
last days spoken to us by his Son. And to treat and conclude with us a Covenant
in his name, Joh. 5.22, For the father judges no man: but has committed all
judgment unto the Son. Joh. 17.2, As thou have given him power oven all flesh,
that he should give eternal life to as many as thou have given him. Mat. 28.18,
All power is given unto me in Heaven and earth.

2. This-name of Messenger of the Covenant, is applicable to him in regard of
his pains and travel in the matters of the Covenant: I mean, in regard of his
work as well as his trust; and thus in regard of several pieces of his work and
travel, he may be called the Messenger of the Covenant: 1. He is the Messenger
who carried the Message of a new Covenant, who traveled from Heaven to Earth
with this Message, to make a Covenant betwixt God and sinners; he came expressly
for this one errant, Gal. 4.4, 5, But when the fullness of the time was come,
God sent forth his Son made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that
were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of Sons. 1 John 5.6,
This is he that came by water and blood, even Jesus Christ, not by water only,
but by water and blood. 1 John 1.5, This then is the message which we have
heard of him, and declare unto you, that God is light, and in him is no
darkness at all. And in this sense the word is frequently used for an Express,
or one sent for a particular Errant and purpose, Joh. 1.6, 7, There was a man
sent from God, whose name was John The same came for a witness, to bear witness
of the light, that all men through him might believe. Mat. 11.10, For (...) is
he of whom it is written, Behold, I send my messenger before thy face, which
shall prepare thy way before thee. 2. He is the Messenger who did publish and
intimate the new Covenant, and Gods gracious purpose in it, as that thing which
was his errant in the World, he did it Authoritatively, others only
Ministerially, 2 Cor. 5.20, Now then we are ambassadors for Christ, as though
God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, he ye reconciled to
God. He is the chief Minister of the new Testament, others only by commission
from him, Isa. 61.1, The spirit of the Lord God as upon me, because the Lord
has anointed me to preach good ridings unto the meek, Heb. 8.2, 6, 10, A
minister of the Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle which the Lord pitched,
and not man. But now has he obtained a more excellent ministry, by how much
also he is the mediator of a better Covenant, which was established upon better
promises. For this is the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel,
after those days says the Lord, etc. Ephesians. 4.9.11, Now that he ascended, what
is it, but that he also descended first into the lower parts of the earth? and
he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers. Luke 19.10, Ephesians. 2.17. Pov. 9.1, 3. So the word is taken
for one that intimates or brings word, and gives notice of any thing, Joh
1.14. 3. He is the Messenger who does interpret and declare the Message of the
new Covenant, who travelleth to be an Interpreter of the mind of God in that
matter, Mat. 11.27, All things are delivered unto me of my father: and no man
knows the Son but the father: neither knows any man the father save the
Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him. Joh. 1.18, No man has seen
God at any time: the only begotten Son which is in the besome of the father, he
has declared him. Romans 3.25, 26. Whom God has set forth to be a propitiation,
through Faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of
sins that are past, through the forbearance of God. To declare, I say, at this
time his righteousness: that he might be just, and the justifier of him (...)
hith believes in Jesus. Luke 24.17, And beginning at Moses, and all the
Prophets, he expounded unto them in all (...) Scriptures, the things concerning
himself. Hence he is called a Prophet, Act. 3.22. And th^^ Prophet. Joh. 6.14.
and 7.40. And in this sense this word is taken, Job. 33.23, If there be a
messenger with him, an interpreter, one among a thousand, to show unto man his
uprightness. 4. He is the messenger, which acts the Covenant upon the hearts
of his people, effective and physice, I mean, the Messenger which attacheth the
hearts of his people (as a Sergeant at Arms, that lays hands upon a man) and
brings them into the bond of the Covenant: the Messenger that never leaves
pursuit until he has apprehended, Ezekiel. 20.37, And I will bring you into the
bond of the Covenant. Heb. 8.10, For this is the Covenant that I will make with
the house of Israel, after those days, says the Lord: I will put my laws into
their mind, and write them in their hearts: and I will be to them a God, and
they shall be to me a people. Hos. 2.19, And I will betroth thee unto me for
ever; yea, I will betroth thee unto me in righteousness, and in judgment, and
in loving kindness, and in mercies. Ezekiel. 36, 27, And I will put my spirit
within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my
judgments, and do them. Joh. 6.29, 37, Jesus answered and said unto them, this
is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom he has sent. All that the
father gives me, shall come to me. So this word is used, 1 Samuel 19.11, 14,
Saul also sent messengers unto David's house to watch him, and to slay him in
the morning: And when Saul sein messengers to David, she said, he is sick. 5.
He is the messenger which reports the Covenant, and the transactions with
every Soul that receives this Gospel, where, and with whom the treaty took
effect; and where, and with whom the proposal of the Covenant halted, Joh.
17.6, 7, 8, I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gave me out of
the world: thine they were; and thou gave them me; and they have kept thy
word. Now they have known that all things whatsoever thou have given me, are of
thee. For I have given unto them the words which thou gave me, and they have
received them, and have known surely that I came out from thee, and they have
believed that thou did send me. So the word is used, Genesis 32.6, And the
messengers returned to Jacob, saying, etc.

3. Betwixt whom does Christ travel as Messenger of the Covernant? For a right
understanding of this, we are to make use of these two necessary distinctions:
1. The Covenant may be considered, either as it is preached and offered
generally to all who hear it, Act. 13.46, 47, Then Paul and Barnabas waxed
hold, and said, it was necessary that the word of God should first have been
spoken unto you: but seeing ye put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy
of everlasting life. Lo, we turn to the Gentiles. For so has the Lord
commanded us, saying, I have set thee to be a light of the Gentiles, that thou
should be for salvation unto the ends of the earth. Mark. 16.15, And he said
unto them, go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel unto every creature:
Or it may be considered, as it is acted, and effectually fulfilled upon the
hearts of the Elect, Act. 13.48, And when the Gentiles heard this, they were
glad, and glorified the word of the Lord: and as many as were ordained to
eternal life, believed. Heb. 8. with Jer. 31. 2. This different consideration
of the Covenant, affords a distinction of the parties in the Covenant: the
parties contracting in the Covenant preached, are God, and all within the
visible Church, Act. 3.25, Ye are the children of the Prophets, and of the
covenant which God made with our fathers, saying unto Abraham, And in thy seed
shall all the kindreds of the earth be blessed. Act. 2.39, 40, For the promise
is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off; even as many
as the Lord our God shall call. But the parties contracting in the Covenant,
considered in that second respect, as it is acted upon hearts, are only the
elect people, upon whose hearts the law is written, and in whom God has put
his spirit, Jer. 31.33, But this shall be the covenant that I will make with
the house of Israel; after those days, says the Lord, I will put my law in
their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will be their God, and
they shall be my people. Ezekiel. 36.27, And I will put my spirit within you, and
cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them.
These things premised for clearing the point in hand, I lay down four
Conclusions: 1. Christ is in some respect a Messenger betwixt God and all the
visible multitude to whom the Covenant is offered, and the Gospel preached;
therefore it is said of him, That he is given for a light to the Gentiles, and
for a witness to the people, even to nations, Isa. 49.6. and 55.4, 5. Romans
15.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. I said in some restect; because he did procure the Gospel
to be preached to all narions, and does carry the Message of the Covenant to
multitudes, Romans 10.18, But I say, have they not heard^ yes verity, their sound
went into all the earth, and their words into the ends of the world. 2. Christ
is in a more special respect, Messenger betwixt God and his few chosen people,
because he has a Message from God to act upon their hearts, that which is only
externally revealed, commanded and offered unto others; and he has undertaken
for them, and for their receiving the Message which he carries unto them, Joh.
6.37, 39, All that the father gives we, shall come to me. And this is the
fathers will which has sent me, that of all which he has given me I should
lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day. Joh. 17.6, 8, I
have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gave me out of the world:
thine they were; and thou gave them me; and they have kept thy word. For I
have given unto them the words which thou gave me, and they have received
them, and have known surely that I came out from thee, and they have believed
that thou did send me. Act. 13.26, And whosoever among you fears God, to
you is the word of this salvation sent. 3. Christ is a Messenger of the
Covenant to many Hypocrites and Reprobates unto whom he brings the offer and
Message of the Covenant; not for their sake and cause, but for the Elects sake,
with whom they are mixed here in societies upon the earth, 2 Cor. 4.15, For all
things are for your sakes, that the abundant grace might, through the
thanksgiving of many, redound to the glory of God. 2 Timothy 2.10, Therefore I
endure all things for the elects sakes, that they may also obtain the salvation
which is in Christ Jesus, with eternal glory. So that the Message of the
Covenant is preached to them by way of concomitancy, in respect that they are
in these societies, unto which the Gospel is sent for salvation to the Elect,
Joh. 17.18, 19, 21, As thou have sent me into the world, even so also have I
sent them into the world. And for their sakes I sanctify my self, that they
also might be sanctified through the truth. That they all may be one, as thou
father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: that the
world may believe that thou have sent me. 4. Christ is a Messenger to the
multitudes unto whom the Gospel is prepared, only for carrying unto them the
commanding Will of God, which reveals unto them their duty and obligation to
receive the Gospel, and to take hold of the Covenant, 2 Cor. 16.17, Wherefore
come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the
unclean thing, and I will receive you. But Christ is a Messenger unto the
Elect, not only for carrying unto them Gods Will of command, but also his Will
of Counsel and Pleasure, that is, the things which he has resolved to act upon
their hearts, and to work in them, Heb. 6.17, Wherein God, willing more
abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel,
confirmed it by an oath. Ephesians. 1.9, Having made known unto us the mystery of his
will, according to his good pleasure which he had purposed in himself. 4. Whose
Messenger is Christ in this Covenant Relation? whether of one of the parties;
or of both? Answ. 1. In some respects he is only the Messenger of one of the
parties, I mean, as the name does import a Mission, Delegation and
Subordination, so he is only Gods Messenger; because Christ Mediator, the Angel
of the Covenant, had his commission only from God, and is to give an account of
that honorable trust and employment to him only, Isa. 42.1, Behold my servant
whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delights. Joh. 5.22, For as the
father judges no man, but has committed all judgment unto the Son, etc. 1
Cor. 15.24, Then comes the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to
God, even the father. Yea, even in these things which he acts upward (toward
his father) as Messenger of the Covenant, put case his negotiating with God for
his people, he has his Mission and Delegation from God, for that special
effect, Joh. 1.2, 24, As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he
should give eternal life to as many as thou have given him. Father, I will that
they also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold
my glory which thou have given me. 2. In some respects he is the Messenger of
both the parties; as namely, 1. In respect of the business about which he is
employed; his Message is about matters of huge concernment to both the parties
of the Covenant; for his fathers honor, and his peoples happiness, lay equally
in the business about which he is employed, Joh. 17.2, 4, That he should give
eternal life to as many as thou bast given him. I have glorified thee on the
earth: I have finished the work which thou gave me to do. 2. In respect of
the travels of his soul in that business and Message; he did it cordially, and
condescendingly did he run the Errants of both the parties; he came his fathers
Errant to us, and he went our Errant to his father, Joh. 13.3, Jesus knowing
that the father had given all things into his hands, and that he was come from
God, and went to God. Joh. 14.2, 12, I go to prepare a place for you, because I
go unto my father. Joh. 16.5, 28, But now I go my way to him that sent me, and
none of you asks me, whither go thou? I came forth from the father, and am
come into the world: again, I leave the world, and go to the father. 3. In
respect of his Embassage and Agency; he was an Ambassador and Agent on Gods
part; while he was here upon the earth, he was his Messenger, who came to
declare and to confirm the Covenant, 2 Cor. 5.19, To wit, that God was in
Christ, recanciling the world unto himself. Gal. 4.4, 5, But when the fullness
of the time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the
law, to redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the adoption
of sons. And he is now our Agent, he is Messenger and Lieger in Heaven on our
part, in regard of his constant residence there for our business, Heb. 9.24,
For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are the
figures of the true; but into heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of
God for us. Act. 3.21, Whom the heavens must receive until the times of
restitution of all things. 4. In respect of his correspondency with both
parties: he is correspondent with God for his people, Joh. 17.8, 25, For I have
given unto them the words which thou gave me, and they have received them,
and have known surely that I came out from thee, and they have believed that
thou did send me. And these have known that thou have sent me. And he is
correspondent with us for God, Joh. 6.38, 39, For I came down from heaven, not
to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me. And this is the fathers
will which has sent me, that of all which he has given me, I should lose
nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day. Luke 12.32, Fear not
little flock, for it is your fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom. He
is correspondent betwixt the confederate parties.

5. About what busmess is he Messenger? and what is the special subject matter
of his employment? Answ. His Name and Covenant-relations do declare the
business; he is Messenger of the Covenant, Legatus faederis, Mal. 3.1. His
Message is as large and broad as all things pertaining to the Covenant. Heb.
2.17, Wherefore in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren,
that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest in things pertaining to
God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. So that there is
nothing which does any way relate to the Covenant betwixt God and believers,
which falls not under this Covenant Relation; a sum whereof may be
comprehended under these three heads. 1. Whatsoever appertains to the making
of the Covenant, he is Messenger betwixt God and his people for that effect;
whether it be any thing which belongs to the courting and wooing of his
peoples hearts, by commending his father, and making offers of himself, and of
his love unto them, Joh. 14.2, In my fathers house are many mansions; if it
were not so, I would have told you. Joh. 15.1, I am the true Vine. Joh. 16.27,
For the father himself loves you. Joh. 3.16, For God so loved the world, that
he gave his only begotten Son. Joh. 10.14, 29, I am the good shepherd: my
father which gave them me, is greater then all. Wisdom cries, who will have
Christ? Prove. 9.1, Wisdom has builded her house, she has hewn out her seven
Pillars, etc. Joh. 7.37, 38, In that last day, that great day of the feast,
Jesus stood, and cried, saying, if any man thirst, let him come unto me and
drink. He that believes on me, as the scripture has said, out of his belly
shall flow rivers of living water. Mat. 11.28, Come unto me all ye that labor,
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Hos. 2.14, Therefore behold, I
will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness, and speak comfortably unto
her. Song. 2.1, I am the rose of Sharon, and the lilly of the valleys. Or
whether it be any thing which belongs to the engaging the hearts of his
people, in determining them by his grace, and acting the Covenant upon their
hearts; he is Messenger also for that, to command Souls to engage with him, and
to arise and go after him, and to forsake all for him, Ezekiel. 20.37, And I will
cause you to pass under the rod, and I will bring you into the bond of the
Covenant. Ezekiel. 36.27, And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to
walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments and do them. Heb. 8.10, For
this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel; after those
days says the Lord: I will put my laws into their mind, and write them in
their hearts, and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people.
Psalm. 45.10, Hearken, O daughter and consider, and incline thine ear: forget
also thine own people, and thy fathers house. Genesis 12.1.4, Now the Lord had
said unto Abraham, Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from
thy fathers house, unto a Land that I will show thee. So Abraham departed as
the Lord had spoken unto him. Mat. 4.19, 20, And he says unto them, follow me,
and I will make you fishers of men. And they streight-way left their nets and
followed him. 2. Whatsoever appertains to the maintaining and preserving of
the Covenant and confederacy betwixt God and his people, Christ is Messenger
for that and herein he does; the part of the Messenger of the Covenant: 1. By
traveling betwixt the parties for keeping up free access betwixt them, and
liberty to speak with one another: for it is by him that God has access to
speak to our hearts, and that we have access to him by frequent mutual
Messages, the Messenger being a Courtier and Favorite with both the parties,
Ephesians. 2.18, For through him we both have access, by one spirit, unto the father.
Ephesians. 3.12. In whom we have boldness and access with confidence, by the faith of
him. Heb. 1.1, 2, God who at sundry times, and in diverse manners, spoke in
times past unto the fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken
unto us by his Son. 2. By traveling betwixt the parties for correspondence and
intercourse, to maintain communion and a good understanding betwixt them, to
the end that none of the parties engaged in the Covenant of kindness, become
strangers to one another through the want of converse and corresponding. Christ
is a Messenger betwixt them to maintain the peace and friendship, Joh. 16.16, A
little while and ye shall not see me: and again a little while, and ye shall
see me: because I go to the father. Joh. 14.18, 19, I will not leave you
comfortless, I will come to you. Yet a little while, and the world sees me no
more; but ye see me: because I live, ye shall live also. 3. He is a Messenger
to maintain the Covenant betwixt God and his people, by traveling betwixt the
parties with good reports, Heb. 12.24, 25, And to Jesus the mediator of the new
covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaks better things then that
of Abel. See that ye refuse not him that speaks, etc. Commending God to his
people, and his love, and speaking good of all his way with them, Joh. 10.29,
My father which gave them me, is greater then all. Joh. 16.27, For the father
himself loves you, because ye have loved me. Psalm. 25.10, All the paths of the
Lord are mercy and truth, unto such as keep his covenant, and his testimonies.
And commending believers unto his father, and speaking good of them, and for
them, frequently behind their back, when they do not hear him, Joh. 17.6, 8,
25, I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gave me out of the
world: thine they were, and thou gave them me; and they have kept thy word.
For I have given unto them the words which thou gave me, and they have
received them, and known surely that I came out from thee, and they have
believed that thou did send me. O righteous father, the world has not known
thee, but I have known thee, and these have known that thou have sent me. Jer.
31.20, Is Ephraim my dear son? is he a pleasant child? for since I spoke
against him, I do earnestly remember him still: therefore my bowels are
troubled for him: I will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord. Jer. 12.7,
I have given the dearly beloved of my soul, into the hand of her enemies.
Christ makes both a good report of his father to his people here on Earth, and
a good report of them to his father in Heaven; he puts good constructions,
not only upon his fathers way with his people, (which cannot reasonably bear an
evil construction), Romans 8.28, And we know that all things work together for
good, to them that love God, to them who are the called according to his
purpose. But also upon his peoples way and walk, and duties to Godward, a
construction and report of them, which they would stand in awe to give of
themselves; yea they are in hazard to contradict this blessed Messengers
report many a time, Joh. 14.4, 5, And whither I go ye known, and the way ye
know. Thomas says unto him, Lord, we know not whither thou go; and how can
we know the way?

3. Whatsoever appertains to the repairing of the Covenant, or to the
renewing and establishing thereof, in the case of any breach betwixt the
parties, he is a Messenger for that: he is the repairer of the breach, and does
declare himself the Angel of the Covenant, 1. By taking up emergent differences
betwixt God and his people, that they may not controvert about them, but may
rather have satisfaction in him, Isa. 53.12, And he was numbered with the
transgressors, and he bare the sin of many, and made intercession for the
transgressors. Heb. 9, 7, But into the second, went the High Priest alone once
every year, not without blood, which he offered for himself, and for the errors
of the people. For as our High Priest, he makes offering for the errors of the
people: for all the differences arising betwixt God and his people, are taken
away alone by his travels. 2. By renewing the Covenant-kindness, and love, and
engagements, he travels as a Messenger, and cannot rest after breaches and
differences betwixt his father and his people, or betwixt himself and them,
until the wonted kindness be renewed, and till it be betwixt God and his
people, as it used to be, 1 John 2.1, 2, And if any man sin, we have an
advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the
propitiation for our sins. Jer. 2.2, Go and cry in the ears of Jerusalem,
saying, Thus says the Lord, I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth, the
love of thine espousals, when thou wentest after me in the wilderness, in a
land that was not sown. Isa. 54.8, In a little wrath I hid my face from thee
for a moment; but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, says
the Lord thy Redeemer. Ezekiel. 16.60, Nevertheless, I will remember my covenant
with thee in the days of thy youth, and I will establish unto thee an
everlasting covenant.

6. Let us a little consider the properties of the Messenger and Angel of the
Covenant, which do commend his travels in that business, and may hold forth a
pattern to all the inferior Messengers of the Covenant, and Angels of the
Churches. 1. He is a faithful Messenger, and true to the trust committed unto
him; one who varied not, and departed not from his commission in a tittle, in
any thing of his fathers will, and the welfare of his people (I do not say, the
will of his people; for though he be very condescending to satisfy them, yet
he not holding his commission of them, he is constrained, for their good, to
cross their will sometimes, that he may be faithful to him who appointed him)
Heb. 3.1, 2, Wherefore holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling,
confider the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus, who was
faithful to him that appointed him, as also Moses was faithful in all his
house. Joh. 6.38, 39, 40, For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will,
but the will of him that sent me. And this is the fathers will which has sent
me, that of all which he has given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise
it up again at the last day. And this is the will of him that sent me, that
every one which sees the Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting life:
and I will raise him up at the last day. A Messenger who kept close to his
instructions. 2. He is an active diligent Messenger, who did never deal with a
slack hand in any matter of the Covenant, whether committed unto him by his
father, or wherein he was employed by his people; his heart did lay so much to
the business, that it is impossible he should not be active and stirring in it;
yea, his Soul-travelled so diligently in that trust, that he could take no rest
until it was done, Isa. 53.11, He shall see the travel of his soul, and shall
be satisfied. Joh. 17.4, I have glorified thee on earth: I have finished the
work which thou gave me to do. Yea, so careful was he of that Message, that
it made him forget his refreshments and his rest, as appears in his unwearied
pains for converting the woman of Samaria, even while he was wearied with his
journey, Joh. 4.6, Yea it was refreshment to him to be about that business,
Joh. 4.34, Jesus says unto them, My meat is to do the will of him that sent
me, and to finish his work. Yea, it made him some way forget his relations here
on earth; Luke 2.49, And he said unto them, how is it that ye sought me? wist
ye not that I must be about my fathers business. Mat. 12.46, 49, 50, While he
yet talked to the people, behold, his mother and his brethren stood without,
desiring to speak with him. Behold, my mother and my brethren, for whosoever
shall do the will of my father which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and
sister, and mother. 3. He is a swift Messenger, who in all the matters of the
Covenant which are committed unto him, loves to make good dispatch: he is
commended for this, Mal. 3.1, And the Lord whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to
his temple, even the messenger of the covenant whom ye delight in. And we may
take notice of it in the word of the Prophet; Isa. 18.2. though spoken in
another sense. O so swift a messenger and speedy as he was, when he was sent to
lay down his life! Luke 19.28, And when he had thus spoken; he went before,
ascending up to Jerusalem, etc. he made haste to die. Joh. 13.27, And after the
sop, Satan entered into him: then said Jesus unto him, That thou do, do
quickly. And he made haste to arise again, Joh. 20.1, 12, The first day of the
week, early, yet when it was dark. He made haste to show himself to his friends
after he rose, Joh. 20, and Luke 24, and he makes haste to come again to his
people, Joh. 14.3, 18, And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come
again. I will not leave you comfortless, I will come to you (...), come unto
you. 4. He is an Accurate reporter of the Message which he bears; a Messenger
who never failed to bring a return of his errant, both upward to God, and
downward to his people, Joh. 13.3, Jesus knowing that the father had given all
things into his hands, and that he was come from God, and went to God. Joh,
14.2, 3, I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare a place for
you, I will come again, and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there ye
may be also. 5. He is a Messenger who was hugely mortified (if I may use that
word) and denied to his own honor and credit; for all the while he traveled
up and down here, about the Message of the Covenant, he did not regard how he
was used, so that his Message were taken off his hand, Heb. 12.2, Who for the
joy that was set before him, endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set
down at the right hand of the throne of God. Mat. 20.28, Even as the Son of man
came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom
for many. Joh. 4.9, 10, Then says the woman of Samaria unto him, how is it
that thou, being a Jew, ask drink of me, which am a woman of Samaria? for
the Jews have no dealings with the Samaritans. Jesus answered, and said unto
her, If thou knew the gift of God, and who it is that says unto thee, give
me to drink; thou would have asked of him, and he would have given thee
living water.

Use 1. Take heed how you receive and entertain the Messenger of the Covenant,
Heb. 12.25, See that ye refuse not him that speaks: for if they escaped not,
who refused him that spoke on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn
away from him that speaks from heaven. Heb. 3.1, Wherefore, holy brethren,
partakers of the heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest of our
profession, Christ Jesus, etc. This is the more of your concernment, 1. Because
the entertainment and usage given unto the Messenger of the Covenant,
redoundeth upon him that sent him, whether you use him honorably or
disrespectively, Joh. 12.26, If any man serve me, let him follow me; and where
I am, there shall also my servant be. If any man serve me, him will my father
honor. Luke 10.16, He that hears you, hears me: and he that despises you,
despises me: and he that despises me, despises him that sent me. 2. Because
great weight is laid upon the unworthy using of the Messenger of the Covenant,
insomuch as no sin nor aggravation of sin carries li^e stress as is laid upon
it, Joh. 3.36, He that believes on the Son, has everlasting life; and he that
believes not the Son, shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides on him.
Joh. 15.22, If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin: but
now they have no cloak for their sin. 3. Because that usage that is given to
the Messenger of the Covenant, is hugely resented, whether it be good or evil,
Joh. 1.11, 12, He came unto his own, and his own received him not. But as many
as received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God, even to them
that believe on his name. Mat. 10.41, He that receives a prophet in the name
of a prophet, shall receive a prophets reward. 4. Because no sin has been more
speedily and severely revenged, than the ill usage of this Messenger, Mat.
21.41, They say unto him, he will miserably destroy those wicked men, and will
let out his vineyard unto other Husbandmen, which shall render him the fruits
in their seasons. Mat. 22.6, 7, And the remnant took his servants, and
entreated them spitefully, and slew them. But when the king heard thereof, he
was wroth, and he sent forth his armies, and destroyed those murderers, and
burnt up their city. Luke 19.14, 27, But his citizens hated him, and sent a
message after him, saying, We will not have this man to reign over us. But
those mine enemies, which would not that I should reign over them, bring
hither, and slay them before me.

But beside these things relating to the danger of slighting the Messenger of
the Covenant, Consider further; 1. It is your own business about which the
Messenger of the Covenant is traveling with you, Luke 19.10, 42, For the Son
of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost. Saying, if thou had
known, even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy
peace! but now they are hid from thine eyes. Joh. 5.40, And ye will not come to
me, that ye might have life. The honor of his Message and travels shall be his
own and his fathers; yet the profit and advantage of it shall be yours, Joh.
17.2, As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal
life to as many as thou have given him. 1 Timothy 1.15, This is a faithful saying,
and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners, of whom I am chief. 2. Consider, there is a limited set-time for the
Message which he carries, Mark. 14.7, But me ye have not always. I mean, there
is not only a time set unto Christ by his father, at which his traveling as
Messenger of the Covenant shall expire, Joh 13.1, Then Jesus knew that his hour
was come that he should depart out of this world unto the father. 1 Cor. 15.24,
25, Then comes the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God,
even the father; when he shall have put down all rule, and all authority and
power. For he must reign till he has put all his enemies under his feet: But
the Messenger of the Covenant has also set a time to you all, until which he
will tarry for your answer, whether ye will take hold of the Covenant or not,
and after which he will tarry no longer for it, Joh. 12.35.36. Then Jesus said
unto them, Yet a little while is the light with you: walk while ye have this
light, lest darkness come upon you: for he that walks in darkness, knows
not whither he goes. While ye have the light, believe in the light, that ye
may be the children of light. Luke 13.7, Then said he unto the dresser of his
vineyard, Behold, these three days I come seeking fruit on this Fig Tree, and
find none; cut it down, why cumbreth it the ground? We have not this Message
settled upon us by inheritance, nor by Life-rent-taxes. 3. Consider, that the
Messenger of the Covenant makes shortest stay and abode, where his Message,
the offer of the Covenant is slighted, and gets not an answer, Act. 13.46, But
seeing ye put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of everlasting life;
Lo, we turn to the Gentiles. Mat. 21.41, They say unto him, he will miserably
destroy those wicked men, and will let out his vineyard unto other husbandmen,
which shall render him the fruits in their seasons. Mat. 10.13, And if the
house be worthy, let your peace come upon it: but if it be unworthy, let your
peace return to you. Rev. 2.5, Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen,
and repent, and do the first works, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and
will remove thy candlestick out of his place, except thou repent. Song. 5.5, 6,
I rose up to open to my beloved, and my hands dropped with myrrh, and my
fingers with sweet smelling myrrh upon the handles of the lock. I opened to my
beloved, but my beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone. 4. Consider, that
there is a time coming, when the Messenger of the Covenant, and his Message
cannot avail you, if you let go the season and opportunity of Grace, 2 Cor.
6.2, For he says, I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of
salvation, I have succored thee: Behold, now is the accepted time: Behold, now
is the day of salvation. Heb. 4.7, Again he limiteth a certain day, saying in
David, To day, after so long a time; as it is said, To day, if ye will hear his
voice, harden not your hearts. Heb. 12.17, For ye know how that afterward, when
he would have inherited the blessing, he was rejected, for he found no place of
repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears. Luke 13.25, 26, When once
the master of the house is risen up, and has shut to the door, and ye begin to
stand without, and to knock at the door, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us; and
he shall answer and say unto you, I know you not whence you are. Then shall ye
begin to say, we have eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou have taught in
our streets. 5. Consider, that the Messenger is to make re-report, to him who
sent him, what success he had for his travel, and who did receive his Message,
Joh. 17.6, 7, 8, 25, I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gave
me out of the world: thine they were, and thou gave them me, and they have
kept thy word: Now they have known that all things whatsoever thou have given
me, are of thee. For I have given unto them the words which thou gave me, and
they have received them, and have known surely that I came out from thee, and
they have believed that thou did send me. O righteous father, the world has
not known thee, but have known thee, and these have known that thou have sent
me. O bethink your selves in time, what shall be reported of your entertaining
the Messenger of the Covenant, and the things which he proposed unto you; shall
that be told of you in Heaven which has been told of many, Joh. 1.11, He came
unto his own, and his own received him not? Joh. 5.40, And ye will not come to
me, that ye might have life. Joh. 12.37, But though he had done so many
miracles before them, yet they believed not on him. Joh. 15.23, 24, He that
hates me, hates my father also: but now have they both seen, and hated both
me and my father. Luke 7.30, But the Pharisees and Lawyers rejected the counsel
of God against themselves, being not baptized of him. Psalm. 81.11, But my
people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me. Mat. 22.5,
6, But they made light of it, and went their ways, one ^o his f^rm, another to
his merchandise: and the rem^unt took his servants, and entreated them
spitefully, and slow them. Mat. 23.37, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that
killest the prophets, and stonest them which a^e sent unto thee, how often
would I have gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathers her
chickens under her wings, and ye would not! Isa. 49.4, Then I said, I have
labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught, and in vain. Mat. 11.17,
And saying, we have piped unto you, and ye have not danced: we have mourned
unto you, and ye have not lamented. Shall the Messenger of the Covenant have no
good report to make of you, like that which he made of his Disciples? Joh.
16.27, For the father himself loves you, because ye have loved me, and
believed that I came out from God. At least, let him have that to say of you,
that he roported of Ephraim, That you have lamented the frowardness of your own
hearts under all his pains and travel, Jer. 31.18, I have surely heard Ephraim
bemoaning himself: thou have chastised me, and I was chastised: as a bullock
unaccustomed to the yoke etc.

Use 2. Suffer me from this Covenant Relation of Christ's, to exhort you, 1. To
employ him in that which is his trust: he is the Messenger of the Covenant; if
there be any thing which you have to do with God, relating to the making,
maintaining, or renewing a Covenant with him, there is a messenger appointed
for negotiating in that matter, and one who is willing to be employed by you,
Mat. 20.28, The Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister. Joh.
6.37, All that the father gives me, shall come to me: and him that comes to
me, I will in no ways cast out. Heb. 2.17, Wherefore in all things it behoved
him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful
High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of
the people. 2. Beware that you usurp not his employment, neither intrude upon
it; take heed that you attempt not to send any Message to God, and not by the
Messenger of the Covenant, Heb. 12.29, For our God is a consuming fire. See
that you go not any errant of the Covenant without him: See that you send not
your prayers and other performances to God, or any Message without him, in
their own strength, or by the hand of another Messenger, beside the Angel of
the Covenant, Rev. 8.3. And another angel came and stood at the altar, having a
golden censer, and there was given unto him much incense, that he should offer
it with the prayers of all saints, upon the golden altar which was before the
throne. Joh. 16.23, Verily, verily, I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the
father in my name, he will give it you.

3. Acknowledge Christ in this Covenant Relation, and in the execution of it:
That ever you heard of the Covenant; that it has been declared, revealed, and
interpreted to you, you are debtors for that to the Messenger of the Covenant:
if he had not traveled in that business, you had never heard of it. Ephesians. 2.17,
And came and preached peace to you which were afar off, and to them that were
nigh. Mat. 13.11, Because it is given unto you to know the mysteries of the
kingdom of heaven, but to them it is not given. Much more you are his Debtors,
if the Covenant be acted upon your hearts, Heb. 8.6, 10, But now has he
obtained a more excellent ministry, by how much also he is the mediator of a
better covenant. For this is the covenant that I will make with the house of
Israel after those days, says the Lord: I will put my laws into their mind,
and write them in their hearts: and I will be to them a God, and they shall be
to me a people. Mat. 16.17, And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art
thou, Simon Bar-Jona: for flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but
my father which is in heaven. Joh. 17.6, 8, I have manifested thy name unto the
men which thou gave me out of the world: thine they were, and thou gave
them me; and they have kept thy word. For I have given unto them the words
which thou gave me, and they have received them, and have known surely that I
came out from thee, and they have believed that thou did send me.

4. Be requested to take notice and to listen what Message the Messenger of the
Covenant brings to you: it is the Message of a Covenant, of a good and sure
bargain, that you would join your selves to the Lord, and take hold of his
covenant, Isa. 56.4, 6. Whereunto, if you would but listen, it should prove a
life-giving motion, Isa. 55.3, Incline your ear, and come unto me: hear, and
your soul shall live: and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even
the sure mercies of David. Joh. 1.38, 39, They said unto him, Rabbi, (which is
to say, being interpreted, Master) where dwell thou? he says unto them,
come and see: they came and saw where he dwelt, and abode with him that day.
It Is a Message of peace; you need not stare at it, nor be afraid of what we
have in commission, 2 Cor. 5, 19, 20, 21, To wit, that God was in Christ,
reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them,
and has committed unto us the word of reconciliation. Now then we are
ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in
Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God: for he has made him to be sin for us,
who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Luke
2.10, 14, And the Angel said unto them, fear not; for behold, I bring you good
tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. -- Glory to God in the
highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men. Isa. 60.17, For brass I
will bring gold, and for iron I will bring silver, and for wood brass, and for
stones iron: I will also make thine officers peace, and thine exactors
righteousness. It Is a Message of love, of the Fathers love, and of the Sons, 1 John 3.1, Behold, what manner of love the father has bestowed upon us, that we
should be called the Sons of God: therefore the world knows us not, because
it knew him not. Joh. 15.13, Greater love has no man then this, that a man lay
down his life for his friends. It Is a Message of Marriage-love, of a match
proposed to your Souls, Psalm. 45. Song. 1, etc. Come and hear Christ, commend
Christ; come and hear the Messenger of the Covenant commend the bargain,
commend the Covenant, commend God, commend Heaven and the lot of Saints; and it
became him well to do so, his praise is savoury even in his own mouth, Joh.
6.48. and 8.14, 23, 24. and 10.11, 29. and 14.2. and 15.1. Song 2.1. Prove. 9.1,
etc. with Song 3. last.

5. Be persuaded to receive the Messenger himself: if it were possible to
receive his Message, and not to receive himself, that could not avail you;
consider with your selves, 1. What huge unkindness it were not to receive such
a Messenger, who has traveled so far, and through so much hardship, and for
this one errant, To make offer of his love to you, Joh. 13.1, Having loved his
own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end. Song 5.2, Saying, open
to me my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled, for my head is filled with
dew, and my locks with the drops of the night. 2. Consider, how unexcusable
before God this one act shall make you, and how much it shall leave upon your
selves, and bind upon your selves your own blood and damnation, Joh. 15.22, If
I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin; but now they have no
cloak for their sin. Joh. 5.40, And ye will not come to me that ye might have
life. Joh. 3.19, And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the
world, and men have loved darkness rather then light, because their deeds were
evil. 3. Consider what high and excellent privileges the receiving of the
Messenger of the Covenant brings with it. See Joh. 1.12, But as many as
received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons of God, even to them
that believe on his name. Rev. 3.20, If any man hear my voice, and open the
door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me. Joh. 14.23,
Jesus answered, and said unto him, if any man love me, he will keep my words;
and my father will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with
him. Isa. 56.7, Even them will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them
joyful in my house of prayer: their burnt-offerings, and their sacrifices shall
be accepted upon mine altar: for mine house shall be called an house of prayer
for all people. 4. Consider how near God has brought Heaven and Salvation unto
you, by the Messenger of the Covenant: it is even come down to meet you, and
brought to your door to knock for entry, Rev. 21.3, 4, And I heard a great
voice out of Heaven, saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men; and he
will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be
with them, and be their God; and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes.
Luke 10.9, And say unto them, the kingdom of God is come nigh unto you. Isa.
46.13, I bring near my righteousness: it shall not be far off, and my salvation
shall not tarry: and I will place salvation in Zion, for Israel my glory. Romans
13.11, And that, knowing the time, that now it is high time to awake out of
sleep: for now is our salvation nearer then when we believed. 5. Consider, that
the Messenger of the Covenant is the jewel and precious stone of that ring; he
himself is the chief thing that is in the Covenant, and much better than
Salvation and Heaven, Mat. 13.44, 45, Again the kingdom of heaven is like unto
treasure hid in a field, the which when a man has found, he hides, and for
joy thereof, goes and sells all that he has, and buyeth that field. Again,
the kingdom of heaven is like unto a merchant-man, seeking goodly pearls, etc.
1 Pet. 2.7. Unto you therefore which believe, he is precious. 6. Consider, that
he desires no more satisfaction for all the travel of his Soul in this
Message, but that he may see some fruit of his travel, through his peoples
receiving his Message, and making the Messenger of the Covenant welcome; and it
is a pity to refuse him so reasonable a desire, Isa. 53.11, He shall see of the
travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied. Luke 19.41, 42, And when he was
come near, he beheld the city and wept over it; saying, If thou had known,
even thou, at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy peace!
but now they are hid from thine eyes. 7. Consider, that if you receive not the
Messenger of the Covenant, you miss the whole bargain, for he is all the
Covenant, Isa. 42.6, And I will give thee for a covenant of the people, for a
light of the Gentiles.

6. By all means take heed how you entertain the Messenger of the Covenant, 1
Cor. 10.9, Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted, and were
destroyed of serpents. If you use him kindly, he will indeed deal well with
you, and be easily entreated, Exodus 23.20, 22, Behold, I send an angel before
thee to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee in the place which I have
prepared. But if thou shall indeed obey his voice, and do all that I speak,
Then I will be an enemy unto thine enemies, and an adversary unto thine
adversaries. Rev. 3.20, Behold, I stand at the door and knock: if any man hear
my voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and sup with him, and he
with me. Joh. 14.23, Jesus answered, and said unto him; If any man love me, he
will keep my words: and my father will love him, and we will come unto him, and
make our abode with him. Luke 24.29, But they constrained him, saying, Abide
with us, for it is toward evening, and the day is far spent; and he went in to
tarry with them. But if you provoke him and slight him, O you had need to
beware of him, he will not bear with it, Exodus 23.21. Isa. 61.2, 3. 1 Cor.
16.22.

CHAP. XIX. Christ a Servant in the Covenant.
THE fifth relation which Christ sustaineth in the Covenant, is, He is a
Servant in the business of the Covenant. Many Scriptures point at Christ under
this Covenant Relation, Isa. 42.1. and 49.3, 5, 6. and 52.13, and 53.11. Ezekiel.
34.23, 24. and 37.24, 25. Zech. 3.8. Mat. 12.18. Luke 22.27. Mark. 10.45. Romans
15.8. For the better understanding whereof, let us a little enquire in these
six Particulars: 1. In what respects this name is given to Christ. 2. How he
came under this Covenant Relation. 3. Whose Servant he is. 4. What kind of
Service this is, which lies upon Christ by this Covenant Relation. 5. What
does pertain to his office, as Servant in the Covenant; and what was the
Service he did in the business of the Covenant. 6. Some things in his Service,
which commend his acting in this Covenant Relation.

And, 1. This Name, which is a name not only of subordination and subjection
(as is the name Messenger), but of the lowest and most abject condition of
subordination. I say, 1. This name is given to Christ, not in regard of his
nature, but in regard of his office as Mediator, as he took upon him a Service;
this name is not a name of nature, for in regard of his Divine nature he has
another style, My Son is his name, not my Servant, Mat. 3.17, This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. And in regard of his Humane nature,
though the man Christ is by nature Gods Servant, yet he is not by nature a
common Servant to both the parties in the Covenant, nor a Servant of the
Covenant, but a Freeman, Mat. 17.26, Jesus says unto him, then are the
children free. Therefore I say, it is not the name of the natural only begotten
Son of God, nor the name of the man Christ (as it imports any thing peculiar,
and not common to the rest of the creatures); but it is the name of Christ
Mediator, God-man, Heb. 12.24. 2. This name is given to Christ mainly and
eminently, in regard of the state and condition of his humiliation, Phil. 2.7,
8, But made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant,
and was made in the likeness of men: and being found in fashion as a man, he
humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross.
For though now, when God has highly exalted him, he be still a Priest upon a
Throne, Heb. 8.1, and consequently promoting the same Trust and Service about
which he was sent to the earth; yet his way of carrying on that Service is so
Princely, as he carries condescendingly to men, Phil. 2.9, 10, Wherefore God
also has highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name:
that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and
things in earrh, and things under the earth. If we should yet name him by this
Covenant Relation, we behoved to look upon him as a kinged and crowned Servant,
who for performing that notable Service that was committed unto him, has been
exalted to a Glorious Throne; and yet for all his preferment, is as humble, and
affable, and easy to be spoke with, as when he was upon the earth; for he
bears the same heart toward his people, Heb. 4.15, 16, For we have not an
High Priest, which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but
was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. Let us therefore
come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace
to help in time of need. 3. The name of Servant in the business of the
Covenant, is given to Christ, in regard of his trust; because the greatest
trust that ever was put upon man, was put upon him by the Covenant of
Redemption: he was entrusted with a rare piece of Service; the saving of
sinners, the carrying through the work of Redemption, the weight of the lost
World being laid upon his shoulders, Isa. 49.6, And he said, it is a light
thing that thou should be my servant, to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to
restore the preserved of Israel: I will also give thee for a light to the
Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation unto the end of the earth. Joh.
17.2, As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal
life to as many as thou have given him. Joh. 5.22, For as the father judges no
man, but has committed all judgment unto the Son. 4. This name is given to
Christ, in regard of his work; for it is a name of work as well as of trust,
because he served a great Service in the business of the Covenant. I have
elsewhere showed, that the whole business of Redemption was his work: therefore
you find he speaks often of his work, and labor, and spending his strength,
and of the travel of his Soul, Isa. 49.4, Then I said, I have labored in vain,
I have spent my strength for naught, and in vain. Isa. 53.10, 11, Yet it
pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief: when thou shall make
his Soul an offering for sin, (...) shall see his seed, he shall prolong his
days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. He shall see of
the travel of his Soul, and shall be satisfied. Joh. 4.34, Jesus says unto
them, My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to finish his work.
Joh. 17.4, I have glorified thee on earth: I have finished the work which thou
gave me to do. Joh. 8.29, And he that sent me is with me: the father has not
left me alone; for I do always those things that please him. 5. This name is
given to Christ, in regard of his wages and reward, which redounded unto him by
this great Service which he performed unto God, by saving the elect world,
which yet must be understood of no servile reward, for his love could not be
hired: but we read of a reward promised and compacted unto him, Isa. 53.11, 12,
He shall see of the travel of his Soul, and shall be satisfied. Therefore will
I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the
strong: because he has poured out his soul unto death: and he was numbered with
the transgressors, and he bare the sin of many, and made intercession for the
transgressors. Psalm. 2.8, Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for
thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. A
reward expected and eyed by him, Isa. 49.4, 5, Yet surely my judgment is with
the Lord, and my work with my God. Though Isreal be not gathered, yet shall I
be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be my strength. A reward
craved by him, Joh. 17.4, 5, I have glorified thee on earth: I have finished
the work which thou gave me to do: And now; O father, glorify thou me with
thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the world was. A
reward paid unto him as the fruit of his labors, Phil. 2.8, 9, And being
found in fashon as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death,
even unto the death of the cross. Wherefore God also has highly exalted him,
and given him a name which is above every name, Heb. 12.2. 6. The name of
Servant is given to him, in regard of the spirit of fear unto which he did
subject himself for a season, while he was here in our nature, in the shape of
a Servant: I say, though there were always in the heart of Christ a design of
love, which made him run and serve in the business of the Covenant; yet there
was something of the spirit of a Servant in the man Christ, made under the law;
and having taken upon him our condition, as well as our nature (which yet must
be understood to be such as did well stand with the heart of a Son, yea, with
the height of that transcendent love, which was the love of God). And in
regard of this he is said to be made under the law, Gal. 4.4. When he put his
name in our bond, he took on our sevile condition, and subjected himself to
threatenings and terrors of the law: and hence it is that he is said to fear,
Heb. 5.7. and to be troubled in spirit, Joh. 12.27. and 13.21.

2. But what engaged him, and brought Christ under this Covenant Relation, to
become a Servant? Answ. Sure it was by no necessity of nature that Christ was
engaged in this Service; for he was not engaged, because he could not choose but
he must be a Servant: But rather I judge these four things did engage him: 1.
The Lords choice and call; the Lord did freely and of mere Grace make choice of
Christ, and send him in this Service, Isa. 42.1, 6, Behold my servant whom I
uphold: mine elect, in whom my soul delights. -- I the Lord have called thee
in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee. Isa. 61.1, The
spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has anointed me to preach
good tidings unto the meek: he has sent me to bind the broken hearted, to
proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them that
are bound. Isa. 49.7, 9, Thus says the Lord, the redeemer of Israel, and his
holy one, to him whom man despises, to him whom the nation abhors, to a
servant of rulers: kings shall see and arise, princes also shall worship,
because of the Lord, that is faithful, and the holy one of Israel, and he shall
choose thee, that thou may say to the prisoners, go forth; to them that are
in darkness, show your selves. 2. His own love engaged him: there was always in
the heart of Christ, a design and aim of love to the elect world, and this
engaged him in the Service of a Covenant, by which he might enjoy them, and
they him, Joh. 13, 1, 3, 4, Now before the feast of the passover, when Jesus
knew that his hour was come, that he should depart out of this world unto the
father, having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the
end. -- And that he was come from God, and went to God. -- And he took a towel,
and girded himself, etc. 3. His own free consent, who was as willing to
undertake this service, as the Lord was to send him: this engaged him, Joh.
10.17, 18, Therefore does my father love me, because I lay down my life that I
might take it again, No man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self: I
have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again, this commandment
have I received of my father. Heb. 10, 7, Then said I, Lo, I come (in the
volume of the book it is written of me) to do thy will, O God. His free consent
and agreement, to be a Servant by voluntary condescension, this engaged him,
and made him a Servant, Phil. 2.6, 7, Who being in the form of God, thought it
not robbery to be equal with God: but made himself of no reputation, and took
upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men. 4. His
compact and Covenant engaged him: for he not only consented to serve in this
business of the Covenant, but he graciously condescended to be hired to perform
such a Service, and undertook for it, Isa. 53.10, 11, 12, Yet it pleased the
Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief: when thou shall make his soul an
offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the
pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. He shall see of the travel of
his soul, and shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant
justify many: for he shall bear their iniquities. Therefore will I divide him
a portion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the strong:
because he has poured out his soul unto death: and he was numbered with the
transgressors, and he bare the sin of many, and made intercession for the
transgressors. These, and nothing but these did conclude and determine Christ
under this Covenant Relation, to serve this great Service of saving the lost
world.

3. Whose Servant was Christ in the business of the Covenant? whether of one of
the parties, or of both? was he his fathers Servant only? or ours also? Answ.
He was a common Servant to both parties, God's Servant, and our Servant: I
shall clear it by the following particulars:

1. He was God's Servant, for so his father frequently styles him, Isa. 42.1,
Behold my servant. Isa. 53.11, My righteous servant. Zech. 3.8, My servant the
branch. So he acknowledged himself to be, Joh. 17.4, I have glorified thee on
the earth: I have finished the work which thou gave me to do. Heb. 10.9, Then
said he, Lo, I come to do thy will (O God). Joh. 6.38, For I came down from
heaven, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent me.

2. He was our Servant also; for so he confesses himself, Mat. 20.28, Even as
the son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his
life a ransom for many, Luke 22.27. And so he behaved himself, and in his
carriage while he was on earth, he gave proof of it, Joh. 13.4, 5, 14, 15, He
rises from supper, and laid aside his garments, and took a towel, and girded
himself. After that, he pours water into a basin, and began to wash the
disciples feet, and to wipe them with the towel, wherewith he was girded. --
And said, if I then your lord and master have washed your feet, ye also ought
to wash one another feet. For I have given you an example, that ye should do
as I have done to you.

3. He was Servant to both parties, but with this observable difference, which
is to be understood and cautioned: 1. Christ was Servant to God, in the
Covenant and work of Redemption, by choice and election, not so to us: God made
choice of him for this work, but we did not make choice of him; he made choice
of us, Isa. 42.1, Behold my servant whom I uphold: mine elect, in whom my soul
delights. Joh. 15.16, Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, and
ordained you, that ye should go and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit
should remain. 2. He was God's Servant, not by condescension only, but by
Covenant and compact with God; he is our Servant by condescension, but by no
compact with us. In all Covenant-relations betwixt him and us, he is our Lord
and Master, he is our Head and Husband, Psalm. 45.11, For he is the Lord, and
worship thou him. Psalm. 110.1, The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right
hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool. And what further stooping is
upon his part, is voluntary humbling of himself, Joh. 13.13, 14, Ye call me
master and Lord, and ye say well: for so I am. If I then your Lord and master
have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one another feet. Phil. 2.7, But
made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was
made in the likeness of men. 3. He is God's Servant, not for love only to the
work wherein he Serves; but for wages, as I have already showed: but he is our
Servant for no wages nor reward which he could expect from us, but purely for
love, Joh. 13.1, Having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them
unto the end. Joh. 15.13, Greater love has no man then this, that a man lay
down his life for his friends. 4. He is God's Servant, as a Son serves his
father, yea as a Servant serves his Master, Mal. 1.6, A son honors his
father, and a servant his master. Phil. 2.7, And took upon him the form of a
servant. Joh. 6.38, For I came down from heaven, not to do mine own will, but
the will of him that sent me. But he is our Servant, as a friend serves his
friend, Joh. 15.14, Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command you. And as
a man Serves one whom he loves and wooeth, which he does neither for fear nor
reward, but being wholly acted and determined to do so, from a principle of
love, and a design of love within himself: Joh. 3.29, He that has the bride,
is the bridegroom: but the friend of the bridegroom, which stands and hears
him, rejoiceth greatly because of the bridegrooms voice. Song 5.2, It is the
voice of my beloved that knocks, saying, open to me, my sister, my love, my
dove, my undefiled:

4. What kind of Service is it which belongs to Christ by this
Covenant Relation? Answ. 1. It was the greatest piece of Service and trust that
ever was put upon man: no less then the whole work of our Redemption and
Salvation, the weight of the lost World, and of all the elect, was upon his
shoulders in this Service, Isa. 22.24, And they shall hang upon him all the
glory of his fathers house, the offspring and the issue, all vessels of small
quantity; from the vessels of cups, even to all the vessels of flaggons. Joh.
17.2, 3, 4, As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give
eternal life to as many as thou have given him. And this is life eternal, that
they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. I
have glorified thee on the earth: I have finished the work which thou gave me
to do, 2. It was the hardest piece of Service that ever was laid upon any
person. O what a hard Service was it to destroy the works of the Devil, to bind
the strong man, and to spoil his house, to fall into his quarters, and to bring
off the prisoners; yea, to go into the prison, and to set open the doors, and
let the prisoners go free; to enter his person in prison for them; to pay the
debt of so many broken men; to bear their transgressions, and the chastisement
of their peace; to endure the stroke of the wakened up sword of Divine Justice
in our stead! Heb. 2.14. Mat. 12.29. Isa. 61.1, 2. Zech. 9.11. Act. 2.24. Col.
2.15. 1 Cor. 15.55. Isa. 53. throughout. It was the hardship of this Service
that made him heavy and grieved, that made him pray, and cry, and weep, and
sweat blood, Joh. 13.21. Joh. 26.22, 42, Heb. 5.7. Luke 22.24. The Service of
no laboring man, of no slave, that serves for hire, as a stranger in another
country, is to be compared with the hardship of his Service. 3. This Service
was an honorable place and Service; he served as a King, Heb. 8.1, Now of the
things which we have spoken, this is the sum; we have such an High Priest, who
is set on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens. Joh.
5.22, 23, For as the father judges no man: but has committed all judgment
unto the Son, that all men should honor the Son, even as they honor the
father. He that honors, not the Son, honors not the father which has
sent him. Isa. 22.23, 24, And he shall be for a glorious throne to his fathers
house. And they shall hang upon him all the glory of his fathers house, the
offspring and the issue. Yea, It Is a greater place than to be a King; for by
it the man Christ is exalted far above all principality, and constituted Judge
and Ruler of the Nations, Prince of the Kings of the Earth, head of the Church,
and King of Saints. Phil. 2.8, 9. Ephesians. 2.20, 21, 22. Col. 1.28. Isa. 9.6. Act.
17.31. Rev. 15.3. and 17.14. 4. It was the most kindly Service that ever was
done by man; for it was the Service of love, the design of love that was in his
heart, made him with good will to serve: Jer. 31.3, The Lord has appeared of
old unto me, saying, yea, I have loved thee with an everlasting love: therefore
with loving kindness have I drawn thee. He Served not only as a hired man and a
stranger in a far Country, and as a King and great Lord Ambassador, whose
Service was a Rule and Government; but he served also as a lover, because of
the design of love, and of eternal enjoyment of his chosen people, which was in
his heart, he wearied not to serve his father, who had promised to give him the
people whom he loved with an everlasting love; and he wearied not to serve his
people, that he might court and woo them to himself; he did serve for the
satisfaction that he promised to himself, in the enjoyment of the people, upon
whom he had set his heart; and as low a price as poor sinners are, yet he
counted them worthy to be compassed with so high a design; he reckoned them a
wager and recompense for all his Service, Isa. 53.11, He shall see of the
travel of of his soul, and shall be satisfied. Heb. 12.2, Who for the joy that
was set before him, endured the cross, despising the shame, and is set down at
the right hand of the throne of God. His Service is not unfitly resembled by
Jacobs, who Served for a Wife whom he loved, Genesis 29.15, 21, 27, And Laban said
unto Jacob, Because thou art my brother should thou therefore serve me for
naught? tell me what shall thy wages be. -- And Jacob said unto Laban, Give me
my wife, (for my days are fulfilled) -- Fulfill her week, and we will give thee
this also for the service which thou shall serve with me, yet seven other years.

5. What was the Service which Christ did in the business of the Covenant?
though this cannot be sufficiently answered by us, who have not yet come to
know and understand half of that which he has done for his people, 1 Cor. 2.9,
But as it is written, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered
into the heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love
him. 1 John ^.1, 2, Behold, what manner of love the father has bestowed upon
us, that we should be called the Sons of God: therefore the world knows us
not, because it knew him not. Beloved, now are we the Sons of God, and it does
not yet appear what we shall be; but we know, that when he shall appear, we
shall be like him: for we shall see him as he is. Yet let us glance at it by
that dim light which we have of the Scriptures. It is in general called by
himself the work which his father gave him to do, Joh. 17.4. By which we
understand, all that Christ had in commission to do in our nature, from the
time of his receiving a commission to be the Mediator of the Covenant, unto the
time of his delivering up the Kingdom to his father; more particularly, this
Service which Christ did in the business of the Covenant, it is called the
restitution of all things, Act. 3.21. When Christ shall bring all things out of
that disordered and ruined condition whereunto they were brought by the fall of
man, and shall restore them to the Primitive integrity; when he shall restore
fore-faulted man into his first estate of innocence and happiness, by taking of
the fore-saulture, and bringing him out of his excommunicated exiled condition,
into the presence and fellowship of God, Ephesians. 2.12, 13, That at that time ye
were without Christ, being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and
strangers from the Covenant of promise, having no hope, and without God in the
world. But now in Christ Jesus, ye who sometimes were afar off, are made nigh
by the blood of Christ. And when the creatures shall be delivered from the
bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God, Romans 8.21.
This Service is called, the bearing the transgressions of many, the making his
soul an offering for sin, Isa. 53.10, 12. It was the putting his Soul in our
Souls stead; that the law might overtake him, that justice might smite him for
us, and might take satisfaction from him, for the broken Covenant; it was the
offering up of himself in a Sacrifice; the putting of his Soul in the flame of
hot burning wrath for us, that the furbushed and wakened-up sword of Divine
Justice might be bathed in his blood, until it was full of blood, and
satisfied, Heb. 9.14, How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the
eternal spirit, offered himself without spot to God, purge your conscience from
dead works to serve the living God. Zech. 13.7, Awake, O sword, against my
shepherd, and against the man that is my fellow, says the Lord of hosts: smite
the shepherd, etc. It Is called, the reconciling of the world to God, 2 Cor.
5.19. By which we understand, all the travel of his Soul, in the propounding,
treating, and concluding of a peace 'twixt God and sinners: for all that
Service was laid upon him, and was performed by him: for he makes the
proposition of peace, he carries on the treaty, until his own hand lead our
hand to sign the articles of peace propounded in the Gospel, Ephesians. 2.17, And
came and preached peace to you which were afar off, and to them that were nigh.
2 Cor. 5.19, 20, To wit, that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them: and has committed unto us
the word of reconciliation. 2 Cor. 9.13, Whiles by the experiment of this
ministration, they glorify God for your professed subjection unto the Gospel
of Christ. This Service is called the saving of the lost world, Luke 19.10. And
the bringing many Sons to glory, Heb. 2.10. That was a great Service indeed, to
have the weight of the lost world upon his shouldiers; to have the keeping and
leading, yea, the bearing in his arms of all that numberless number of the
ransomed and redeemed ones, whom God had appointed unto Glory, Joh. 17.12,
While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name: those that thou
gave me, I have kept, and none of them is lost. Isa. 40.11, He shall feed his
flock like a shepherd: he shall gather the lambs with his arm, and carry them
in his bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young. In a word, the
Service which Christ did in the business of the Covenant, was the the
transacting of the Covenant; he did all that business from beginning to end;
and without him was nothing done of all things pertaining to God, and a new
Covenant betwixt him and us: whereof see more particularly what we have spoken
of the Mediator of the Covenant, Chap. 4.

Use 1. Think with your selves and consider the love that made him come under
this Covenant Relation; that made him a common Servant to both the parties: for
though he had wages and a reward propounded to him; yet it was love that acted
Christ in performing this great piece of Service. His Service of love is much
commended, 1. From the infinite condescension that was in it: O what
condescension was it for a Son to become a Servant! Heb. 5.8, Though he were a
Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered: for the Son, the
only begotten Son and Heir, to become a Servant! Mat. 21.37, 38, But last of
all, he sent unto them his Son, saying, they will reverence my Son. But when
the husbandmen saw the Son, they said among themselves, this is the heir, come,
let us kill him, and let us seize on his inheritance. For the Son of God to
become a Servant to the sons of men! Phil. 2.6, 7, Who being in the form of
God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God: but made himself of no
reputation: And took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the
likeness of men. 2. From the voluntariness of his coming under this
Covenant Relation; when he was not a Servant by any necessity of nature, that
he made himself one; that when nothing else was to do it, his grace, his love
determined him to go and serve his enemies, and make himself of no reputation,
Phil. 2.7. Romans 5.8, But God commended his love toward us, in that while we
were yet sinners, Christ died for us. Heb. 10.9, Then said he, Lo, I come to do
thy will (O God). O what strange love was that, which made Christ so willingly
leave the Throne, and come down to the footstool, and stand and serve! Mat.
20.28, Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister,
and to give his life a ransom for many. Joh. 13.4, 5, He rises from supper,
and laid aside his garments, and took a towel, and girded himself. After that,
he pours water into a basin, and began to wash the disciples feet, and to
wipe them with the towel wherewith he was girded. Gal. 2.20, And the life which
I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me,
and gave himself for me. 3. His Service of love is commended, from the lowness
of the wager and price which he is to have for his Service and love. Was man a
crown and wager for Christ to work and to run for, that he might win it? how
great a disproportion is there betwixt the Service and the Wages? Can poor
polluted nothings, such as we are, be a price for such Love, for such Service,
for such transcendent infinite Love? and yet such was the wager for which he
served, Joh. 13.1, Having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them
unto the end. Joh. 17.19, And for their sakes I sanctify my self, that they
also might be sanctified through the truth. 4. His Service is commended from
the largeness of his design of Love, through which he did drive the serving of
this Service; that God, the Son of God, did drive this piece of Service through
so deep, and broad, and long a design of transcendent love, from everlasting to
everlasting; through so many decrees, which at last could produce nothing in
the result, but this price, To have his poor people engaged to him by a
Covenant; whereas we might think a lower design might compass sinners, and a
less price might buy poor man, Jer. 31.3, The Lord has appeared of old unto
me, saying, Yea, I have loved thee with an everlasting love: therefore with
loving kindness have I drawn thee. 1 John 3.1, Behold what manner of love the
father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the Sons of God:
therefore the world knows us not, because it knew him not. Ephesians. 3.18, 19, --
may be able to comprehend with all saints, what is the breadth, and length, and
depth, and height: and to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge, that
ye might be filled with all the fullness of God. 5. His Service is commended for
his performing of it, and doing his work so long before he was to reap that low
price of all the travel of his Soul, to wit, the enjoyment of his people, Isa.
53.11, He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied: He
served long ago for that wager which is not not yet paid to him; and he knew
when he served that Service, that he should lie so long out of a great part of
his satisfaction, Joh. 17.20, Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also
which shall believe on me through their word.

Use 2. This Covenant Relation speaks sad things to them who will not serve
Christ: 1. Woe to them that will not serve him, who refuse a consent of their
Service to him, who made himself a Servant for our sake, Luke 19.14, But his
citizens hated him, and sent a message after him, saying, We will not have this
man to reign over us. Psalm. 2.3, Let us break their bands asunder, and cast
away their cords from us. We love to be Lords over our own liberty and wills,
and to break his bands. 2. Woe to them that think shame to serve him: there is a
generation that think it is below them to serve Christ; they judge his Service
is not honorable, though he was not ashamed to serve us, Luke 22.27, For
whether is greater, he that sits at meat, or he that serves? is not he that
sits at meat? but I am among you as he that serves. Heb. 2.11, For both he
that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified are all of one; for which cause
he is not ashamed to call them brethren: And though it be no shame, but
honorable to serve him, Psalm. 116.16, O Lord, truly I am thy servant, I am thy
servant, and the Son of thine handmaid: thou have loosed my bonds. Psalm.
84.10, For a day in thy courts is better then a thousand: I had rather be a
dore-keeper in the house of my God, then to dwell in the-tents of wickedness.
Ifa. 58.13, And call the sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, honorable,
and shall honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure,
nor speaking thine own words. 3. Woe to them that pretend to serve him, and do
nothing but Eye-service in his work; though he was real and cordial in serving
our Interest, for his Soul traveled in the business; but the spirits of such
act nothing in his Service, Ephesians. 6.6, Not with Eye-service, as men-pleasers,
but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart. Isa.
29.13, Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch as this people draw near me with
their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but has removed their heart
from me, and their fear toward me is taught by the precepts of men, etc.

O Consider with your selves, 1. What pride there is in refusing to serve him,
whose Service is so honorable an employment, that it is not below the Kings of
the Earth to bring their Glory unto Christ, and to bow before him: Psalm. 2.10,
11, 12, Be wise now therefore, O ye kings: be instructed, ye judges of the
earth. Servo the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son, lest
he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his wrath is kindled but a
little, Psalm. 54. throughout. Who would not bow to him, who shall break them
all that will not bow unto him? Isa. 60.12, For the nation and kingdom that
will not serve thee, shall perish; yea, those nations shall be utterly wasted.
Psalm. 2.9, Thou shall break them with a rod of iron, thou shall dash them in
pieces like a potters vessel. Psalm. 110.5, The Lord at thy right hand shall
strike through kings in the day of his wrath. 2. Consider what huge and
monstrous ingratitude, and unkindness it is, not to serve him who has
voluntarily humbled himself to serve us; who though he was our maker, Heb. 1.2,
3, yet made himself of no reputation for our advancement, Phil. 2.7. Consider
how he has commended his Service unto us, and be ashamed not to be found among
his servants and followers. See more of this, Chap. 18.

Use 3. Exhortation, 1. Consider and know what he has done in this
Covenant Relation, after he has served this Service, and done all that was
incumbent to him in this relation: he may put the question to us, which
sometimes he put to his Disciples, Joh. 13.12, Know ye what I have done to you?
it is a pity that his Service is so little known and taken notice of among his
own people, for whom he has done this Service: it is a pity that it should be
met with doubtings, whether he has done Service for us; or denials of our
interest in it: which occasion diminutive thoughts and expressions of it.

2. Consider how ill Christ was used in this relation, that you may be broken
for it: he was smitten by both the parties, It pleased the Lord to bruise him,
Isa. 53.10. Romans 8.32, He spared not his own Son. Zech. 13.7, Awake, O sword,
against my shepherd, and against the man that is my fellow, says the Lord of
hosts. And his own people smote him, and used him very ill, Mat. 21.38, But
when the husbandmen saw the Son, they said among themselves, This is the heir,
come, let us kill him, and let us seize on his inheritance: Joh. 1.11, He came
unto his own, and his own received him not. Isa. 53.3, He is despised and
rejected of men; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief; and we hid as it
were our faces from him: he was dispifed, and we esteemed him not. Yet his love
did bear him through all this cold encouragement.

3. Consider how you entertain his Service, 2 Cor. 6.1, We then, as workers
together with him, beseech you also, that ye receive not the grace of God in
vain. Do not slight it; do not refuse it upon whatsoever pretext; but if he
will do you Service, and condescend to do you good, suffer him to do it: it is
no presumption to let him take his will of you; he took it ill to be otherwise
dealt with, Joh. 13.6, 8, And Peter says unto him, Lord, do thou wash my
feet? Peter says unto him, Thou shall never wash my feet. Jesus answered him,
If I wash thee not, thou have no part with me. And no wonder he take it very
ill, to have his Service slighted and refused; for his Service is the height
of his love, which he cannot endure to have slighted: his Service offered, is
slighted ^y all those who will not give their consent to let him do unto them
all the good offices which are mentioned in the Gospel by all who do not
subject their consent unto it, Joh. 5.40, And ye will not come to me that ye
might have life. Mat. 22.5, But they made light of it, and went their ways, one
to his farm, another to his merchandise. 4. Consider what advantages we have by
his Service: 1. His condescension was the cause of our exaltation: if he had
not served, we had not reigned: if he had not come down to the footstool, we
should never have come up to the Throne, Heb. 5.8, 9, Though he were a Son, yet
learned he obedience by the things which he suffered: and being made perfect,
he became the Author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him. Romans
8.17, And if children, then heirs, heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ:
if so be that we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together. 2. It
was the hardship of his Service which makes ours so easy; he left us little to
do: when he was made under the law, he did bear away the bondage of our Service
and Duties, Romans 7.4, Wherefore my brethren, ye also are become dead to the law
by the body of Christ, that ye should be married to another, even to him who is
raised from the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God: He did hear
the hard and insupportable yoke, and left us nothing to do, but to serve for
love; he brake the force and power of the adversary, and left us only a broken
party and routed forces to deal with, 1 Cor. 15.55, O death, where is
thy-sting? O grave, where is thy victory? Yea, he has not left us alone to
deal with these. 3. By his Service we have our liberty; and can be no more
Servants, but Friends and Children of the house. See Gal. 4.4, 5, 6, 7, But
when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman,
made under the law, to redeem them that were under the law, that we might
receive the adoption of Sons. And because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the
Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying Abba, father: wherefore thou art no
more a servant but a Son: and if a Son, then an heir of God through Christ.
Joh. 8.36, If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed.
Joh. 15.15, Henceforth I call you not servants, for the servant knows not
what his Lord does; but I have called you friends: for all thin^s that I have
heard of my father, I have made known unto you. Romans 8.2, For the law of the
spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me free from the law of sin and death.
Gal. 4.31, So then, brethren, we are not children of the bondwoman, but of the
free. We were slaves, and condemned under perpetual bondage, married unto an
angry tyrant (so was the law become to transgressors); but by his becoming a
Servant under the law, by his putting on our condition, we became sharers of
his liberty and Sonship. 4. By his Service we have wages and a reward for our
Service, even for our poor worthless endeavors after duty, about which there
are so many questionings in the hearts of believers, whether they shall be
accepted, and but few thoughts of a recompense. I say, our Service could never
have been rewarded but for his Service: this brought with it not acceptance
only, but a reward to ours, upon his account, being done in his name, Luke
17.10, So likewise ye, when ye shall have done all these things which are
commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants; we have done that which was
but our duty to do. Heb. 11.6, And that he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him. Isa. 45.19, I said not unto the seed of Jacob, Seek ye me
in vain. Isa. 56.6, 7, Also the sons of the stranger that join themselves to
the Lord, to serve him, and to love the name of the Lord, to be his servants,
every one that keeps the sabbath from polluting it, and takes hold of my
covenant; even them will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in
my house of prayer: their burnt offerings, and their sacrifices shall be
accepted upon mine altar: for mine house shall be called an house of prayer for
all people. 5. By his Service we have that honorable marriage with him which
was the price of the travel of his Soul, even to have our Souls engaged to him
for the Service of love which he served, that he might have his people for his
reward, as Jacob served for the Wives that were given him in Laban his house,
Genesis 29.20, 28, 29. Isa. 53.11, He shall see of the travel of his soul, and
shall be satisfied.

5. Consider what this relation calls for at our hands: That Christ was a
Servant in the business of the Covenant, this calls us, 1. To yield our
selves to be his Servants upon the terms of that Covenant wherein he served,
even to subject our consent to serve him in ^^ke relations, 2 Cor. 9.13, Whiles
by the experiment of this ministration, they glorified God for your professed
subjection unto the Gospel of Christ. 2 Chronicles. 30.8, Now be ye not
stiff-necked, as your fathers were; but yield your selves unto the Lord, Isa.
56.6. 2. His Service calls us to serve all his interests and relations, his
people, especially the people who are nearly related to him, Mat. 12.40, 50,
And he stretched forth his hand toward his disciples, and said, Behold, my
mother, and my brethren: for whosoever shall do the will of my father which is
in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother. So he himself
argues, Joh. 13.14, 15, If I then your Lord and master have washed your feet,
ye also ought to wash one another feet. For I have given you an example, that
ye should do as I have done to you. 3. To serve him in that Covenant Relation,
in such manner as he served us, or rather our interests; and that was, 1.
Willingly and cheerfully: For so did he undertake and undergo that Service,
Heb. 10.7, Then said I, Lo, I come (in the volume of the book it is written of
me) to do thy will, O God. Luke 22.15, And he said unto them, With desire have
I desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer. Let our Service to him
be such, Psalm. 2.11, Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling.
Deuteronomy. 28.47, 48, Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with joyfulness,
and with gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things; therefore shall
thou serve thine enemies which the Lord shall send against thee, in hunger, and
in thirst, and in nakedness, and in the wane of all things. 2. He served
cordially, his Soul traveled in the business, Joh. 12.27, Now is my soul
troubled, and what shall I say? father, save me from this hour: but for this
cause I came unto this hour. Mat. 26.38, Then says he unto them, My soul is
exceeding sorrowful, even unto death: tarry ye here, and watch with me. Let
your Service to him be such, that your hearts may be yoaked, and your Spirits
may act something in serving him, Deuteronomy. 10.12, And now, Israel, what does the
Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all his
ways, and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, and
with all thy soul? Romans 1.9, For God is my witness, whom I serve with my spirit
in the Gospel of his Son. Phil. 3.3, For we are the circumcision, which worship
God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus. 3. He served with much
submission of his will to his sathers in all things, Heb. 5.8, Though he were a
Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which he suffered. Mat. 26.39, 42,
And he went a little further, and fell on his face, and prayed, saying, O my
father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me: nevertheless, not as I
will, but as thou will. He went out again the second time, and prayed, saying,
O my father, if this cup may not pass away from me, except I drink it, thy will
be done. Joh. 4.34, Jesus says unto them, My meat is to do the will of him
that sent me, and to finish his work. Let us do Service to him with like
submission of Spirit, 2 Samuel 15.26, But if he thus say, I have no delight in
thee: behold, here am I, let him do to me as seems good unto him. Act. 20.22,
24, And now behold, I go bound in the spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing the
things that shall befall me there: but none of these things move me: neither
count I my life dear unto my self, so that I might finish my course with joy,
and the ministry which I have received of the Lord Jesus; to testify the
Gospel of the grace of God. 4. He served faithfully: for in all questions and
debates that occured while he was here in the form of a Servant, he was always
for his father, true to his interest, Heb. 3.2, Who was faithful to him that
appointed him: Joh, 8.28, 38, Then said Jesus unto them, When ye have lift up
the Son of man, then shall ye know that I am he, and that I do nothing of my
self; but as my father has taught me, I speak these things, I speak that which
I have seen with my father: and ye do that which ye have seen with your father.
Let us be sure to serve him so, in all questions and sides in these days, to be
ever for him, and his interests, and upon his side, 1 Kings 22.14, And Micajah
said, As the Lord lives, what the Lord says unto me, that will I speak. Heb.
3.2, As also Moses was faithful in all his house. Act. 13.36, For David after
he had served his own generation, by the will of God fell asleep, and was laid
unto his fathers, and saw corruption. 5. He performed his Service prudently,
Isa. 52.13, Behold, my servant shall deal prudently, he shall be exalted, and
extolled, and be very high. He did all things for promoting the business that
was committed unto him, with admirable wisdom and discretion: so is there also
a wisdom with fidelity to be studied in serving his interests, that we do not
mar the end of our Service, Mat. 24.45, Who then is a faithful and wise
servant, whom his Lord has made ruler over his household, to give them meat in
due season? Mat. 10.16, Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of
wolves: be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves. Mark. 9. last.
Have salt in your selves, and have peace one with another.

CHAP. XX. Christ the Surety of the Covenant.
THE sixth relation which Christ sustaineth in the Covenant of Grace, Beza in
locum.
is, He is Surety of the Covenant: so he is expressly called, Heb. 7.22, Jesus
was made surety of a better testament, or rather Covenant, as Beza reads it:
because a Surety is not used in Testaments, neither is Christ properly to be
considered as Surety in his Testament; but as Testator.

For the opening of this relation, I shall, 1. Enquire a little into the name
and thing, that the nature of this relation may be the better known; especially
what it imports as it is applied to Christ. 2. I shall lay down some assertions
for the better understanding of Christ's Suretiship in the Covenant. 3. How
Christ came under this relation, to be an undertaker for some of the sons of
men. 4. For whom did he become Surety and undertaker. 5. For what is he engaged
by this relation. 6. What does commend his Suretiship, that the excellency of
it may appear. 7. Wherein his Suretiship does differ from undertakings of that
nature among men. 8. What are the advantages that the Lords people have by
Christ's Suretiship. And in the last place I shall show you what use is to be
made of this relation, or of Christ considered as Surety of the Covenant.

The Hebrew word (...) Ghnarab, Vide Mercer. and Buxtor. in voce.
to which the Greek word (...), does answer, is of very large signification, as
any word in that language: I will touch but a few of many, because they are
apposite to express the nature of Suretiship: The first and native
signification of the word, is to mix, and to mingle, see Psalm. 106.35, But were
mingled among the heathen, and learned their works. And to meddle, or to have
dealing and commerce, see Prove. 20.19, Therefore meddle not with him that
flattereth with his lips. Prove. 24.21, And meddle not with them that are given
to change. And indeed Christ's Suretiship, was a mixing and mingling with his
people; it was such a mingling with us, as the like was never heard of, a
mingling of natures (if I may use the word), by a wonderful personal union, two
natures meeting in one person, and yet remaining distinct; and a mystical union
whereby he is in us, and we are in him: a mingling of interests; his interests
are ours, and our interests are his; whereby in some respect he comes in our
place, and we come in his place: See Joh. 17.21, 22, 23, That they all may be
one, as thou father art in me, and I in thee; that they also may be one in us:
that they may be one, even as we are one: I in them, and thou in we, that they
may be made perfect in one. 2 Cor. 5.1^, 21, Therefore if any man be in Christ,
be is a new Creature. -- For he has made him to be sin for as, who knew no
sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Isa. 5.8, For she
was cut off out of the land of the living: for the transgression of my people
was he stricken. Romans 8.1, There is therefore now no condemnation to them that
are in Christ Jesus. And his meddling and dealing in our matters, is such as
has laid the whole weight of them upon him, Isa 9.6, For unto us a child is
born, unto us a Son is given, and the godei^ went shall be upon his shoulder:
And has drawn on an everlasting co^^^erce, eommunion and exchange of
commodities Betwixt him and his people, 2 Cor. 6.16, 18, For ye are the temple
of the living God, as God has said, I will dwell in them, and walk in them;
and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. And will be a father unto
you, and ye shall be by sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty. Again, 2.
This: word signifies to engage. See Jer. 30.21, For who is this that engages
his heart? Arr. Mont. reads it, Dilatavit, alii obligavit, accommodavit,
Hierom, qui applicet cor. And in this sense, Christ's Sureriship is the
enlargement of his heart to a voluntary engagement for his people, unto which
there was no necessity lying upon him. It Is the offering of himself willingly
to undertake for them, Heb. 10.9, Then said he, Lo, I come to do thy will (O
God), Joh. 10.11, 18, The good shepherd gives his life for the sheep. -- No
man takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self: I have power to bay it
down, and I have power to take it again, Joh. 18.8.3. This word signifies also
to be Surety, to undertake, because he that becomes Surety for another, does so
mix with him, that in some respect he is substitute in his place and room; so
it is frequently used, Genesis 43.9, I will be surety for him: of my hand shall
thou require him: if I bring him not unto thee, and set him before thee, then
let me bear the blame for even. Genesis 44.^2, For thy servant became surety for
the lad unto my father, saying, etc. Prove. 6.1. and 11.15. and 22.26. Isa. 38,
14. Bsal. 119.122, which is well rendered by the learned Expositors, spend,
side. jube pro servo t^o, be furety for thy servant. In this sense also Christ
is the Surety; who did undertake for his people, that what should be required
of them, he should answer for it; and what should be wanting of their account,
the burden and blame of it should lie on him; as J^^^lh spoke in the place
dited. See Joh. 17. throughout. 4. This word signified to give pledges, which
is a kind of Suretiship, Isa. 36.8, Now therefore give pledges, I pray thee, to
my master the king of Assyria, and I will give thee two thousand horses, if
thou be able on thy part to set riders upon them, 2 Kings 18.23. Da vadem,
sponsionem fac. Hence comes that word Arrhabo, which is originally an Hebrew
word, and came from Phenica into Greece (as is observed by Grotius), Grotius in
2. ad. cor. c. 1. v. 22.
that which we call the earnest and arles of any bargain, 2 Cor. 1.22, Who has
also sealed us, and given the earnest of the spirit in our hearts. In this
sense also, Christ is made Surety of the Covenant; he who gave himself pledge
and hostage for his people; he who not only did undertake and give bond, but
also put his person in prison, until the Debt of his people should be paid, and
until all things promised in their name were made good; he being the pledge
which lay for the whole price, Isa. 53.8, He was taken from prison, and from
judgment: and who shall declare his generation? for he was cut off out of the
land of the living: for the transgression of my people was he stricken. Romans
8.32, he that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all. 5. This
word signifies to strike hands: for so were Covenants made, and Sureties
engaged, Prove. 22.26, Be not thou among them that strike hands, to wit, side
ju^enad, as Mont. supplieth, and the LXX renders it, by the same Greek word
that is used, Heb. 7.22, give not thy self (...), as a Surety: and in this sense
also was Christ made a Surety of the Covenant, he did strike hands with God; he
did Covenant with us, and for us, by striking hands with God, Psalm. 40.7, Then
said I, Lo, I come. Isa. 59.21, As for me, this is my covenant with them, says
the Lord, My spirit which is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy
mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor
out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and for
ever.

The Greek word used for a Surety, Heb. 7.22, (...) spensor, side jussor, I do
not read elsewhere in the new Testament (though the LXX use it sometimes) for
aneut the Hebrew word that signifies a Surety, Prove. 6.1. and 17.19. and 20.19.
Whether we take it to be from (...), appropinquo: or from (...), prope: or from
(...), spondeo, prom to which comes from (...), in manibus: it seems to
import the nearness of the Surety, and the Debtor, and to answer well the
Hebrew word, Christus nobis conjunctissimus: propinquns ridimens. By natural,
mystical, and voluntary relations. Brinst. of the Mediator, p. 115, etc.
which imports mixing together; it imports that Christ's Suretiship made him
near to us, and did mix him and us by a conjunction of blood; for by it he
plighted his faith and truth, to take on our nature, and our condition in law,
and so became our (...) -- Goal our kinsman, Job. 19.25, our nearest of
kindred, who had the right to redeem us, Lev. 25.25. Ruth. 3.9.

The Latin word sponsor according to the opinion of Divines, Jurists and
Humanists, signifies one who engages for another. Sponsor proprie est, qui
pro alio satisfactionem spondet, vel de ea caver. Pareus Commen. in Heb. 8.6.
Again, sponsor est qui sponte pro alio promittit; sponsores sunt quicunque
spondent maxim pro aliis, sive rogati sive: non rogati, sive solem^i
stipulatione, sive nuda receptione, intercedant, quibus spondentibus, pecuniae
cuipiam creduntur, aut aliquid denique promittitur. Calv. Lexic. Jurid. in voce
sponsor. Cicer. ad attic. Lib. 1. And it comes from spondere quasi sponte
dicere, dare ac promittere; therefore also he is called ad-promissor. Fide
jussor dicitur qui pro alio fidem suam obligat, et fide sua, id est periculo
suo esse Jubet, quod alius debet. Calv. Lex. Jurid. in voce fide jussor. Again,
fide jussor est author credendi alium aliquid daturum facturumve, sua fide,
suoque periculo promittens. Ulpian. in tract. de fide jussore. And in this
sense Christ is Surety of the Covenant, that is, he who willingly engaged, and
undertook for the parties, especially for us; he that put in his faith and
obligation for ours, and had God trust us on his Credit, and reckon our Debt
upon his account; and wherein we fail, let it be on his peril.

But that we may a little more particularly consider the nature of this
relation and Suretiship of Christ: 1. The end and use of Suretiship among men,
was no doubt the establishment of a firm security, to be ground of faith and
trust, as the Jurists tell us, dum curant homines ut diligentius sibi cautum
sit. Justinia^. instit. tit. de fide jussor.
And it is not to be doubted, but in the purpose of God, the Suretiship of
Christ was intended as a ground of trust, confidence and security, betwixt
himself and the people for whom Christ did undertake, that sinners might be
induced to give him credit, and that he might have a responsal party to deal
with; man being a broken unbelieving creature, who could neither trust God, nor
was to be trusted by him. See Heb. 6.17, 18, Wherein God, willing more
abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise, the immutability of his counsel,
confirmed it by an outh, that by two immutable things, in which it was
impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong consolation, who have fled
for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us. Psalm. 89.19, Then thou
spakest in vision to thy holy one, and said, I have laid help upon one that
is mighty: I have exalted one chosen out of the people. And so the Surety of
the Covenant is that person upon whose account, trust and confidence is betwixt
the parties Covenanting, and in whom it stands fast. 2. If we consider the
Suretiship, 1. It imports an obligement for another, and is to be reckoned
among Contracts and Covenants; and therefore the Lawyers say, Fustinian. ib.
Calv. lex. jurid.
fide jussor non fit nisi per stipulationem; and they reckon it among contracts
and stipulations. Prove. 22.26, Be not thou one of them that strike hands, or of
them that are sureties for debts. And indeed Christ's Suretiship is relative to
a Covenant betwixt him and the Creditor; whereby he came under this relation,
whereof we have spoken elsewhere on this subject, Chap. And shall hint
something further ere we pass it over. 2. It imports a voluntary obligation, as
I have showed in expounding the word: The law cannot force and compel any man
to be Surety for another, though it may constrain him for his own Debt. Christ's
Suretiship was a most free voluntary act on his part: for he was not under any
obligation of law, nor under any necessity of nature, to put his name in our
bond, or to satisfy for our Debt, Joh. 10.18, No man takes it (my life) from
me, but I lay it down of my self: I have power to lay it down, and I have power
to take it again: this commandment have I received of my father. Heb. 10.5, 7,
Wherefore when he comes into the world, he says, Sacrifice and offering thou
would not, but a body have thou prepared me: then said I, Lo, I come (in the
volume of the book it is written of me) to do thy will, O God. Phil. 2.7, But
made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was
made in the likeness of men. 3. It imports not only a voluntary obligation for
another person, but also union of parties, and assumption of the condition of
that person in the laws sense, so that the Surety and the Debtor are ^ut one
party in the law; Therefore ^ay the Jurists, fide jussor proprie di^itur
debtor: Christ by his Suretiship, he did not only take our nature upon him,
but he took our condition upon him: it is said of him, that he was made under
the law, Gal. 4.4. He put his name in our bond, that the law might reach him
for our Debt. 4. It imports a communion betwixt the Debtor and the Cautioner,
whereby as the Debt of the principal Debtor becomes the Debt of the Surety,
and affects him; so also the satisfaction and payment of the Surety, and his
discharge and relief, becomes the satisfaction, discharge and relief of the
principal Debtor. Christ's Suretiship imports, not only an union of parties; and
conjunction of interests and condition with his people; but also a communion
with debtful broken man, resulting from his bond of Suretiship, whereby as upon
the one part our Debt became his entirely, as the Jurists say of all Sureties,
Singuli in solidum tenentur; so upon the other part his satisfaction and
discharge becomes ours, 2 Cor. 5. last, For he has made him to be sin for us,
who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Gal.
3.13, Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for
us: for it is written, Cursed is every one that hungeth on a tree. 5. It
imports a commutation, surrogation, or substituting of one in the room of
another; and so Christ was substitute in our stead and room, as Judah was in
Benjamines, 1 Pet. 2.21, Because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an
example, that ye should follow his steps. Romans 4. last, Who was delivered for
our offenses, and was raised again for our justification, Romans 5.8, But God
commended his love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died
for us. Genesis 44.33, Now therefore I pray thee, Let thy servant abide in stead
of the lad, a bondman to my Lord, and let the lad go up with his brethren. 6.
It imports a conjunct obligation, both of the Surety and of the Debtor to the
Creditor. Nam fide jussorum obligatio est accessio principalis obligationis.
Justinian ubi supra.
So Christ's Suretiship is not a binding of himself, and loosing of his people
from all obligation; but still the Debt lies on the sinner, till Christ make
actual satisfaction for it, and till he apply the satisfaction, and report a
relief to the poor creature^ And in other parts of the obligement, Christ and
the believer stand both under a conjunct obligation for the believers duty,
that the broken man who was bought from the hands of Justice, shall serve for
love all his days, Romans ^.31, Do we then make void the law through faith? God
forbid: yea, we establish the law. Luke 1.74, That he would grant unto us, that
we being delivered out of the hands of our ^^em^^^, ^ight se^^e him without
fear^ 7. Suretiship in the nature of it imports either irresponsalness in the
Debtor, or distrustfulness betwixt the Creditor and Debtor: or it imports both.
Sure however it be in other cases, there is in this case where Christ's
Suretiship intervenes, both an irresponsalness on the one part, broken man not
being solvend^, able to pay his Debt^ and there is a distrustfulness betwixt
the parties. God deservedly distrusting impotent perfidious man, (...)
creature, who had deboshed his stock, and (...) his Covenant. And man causlesly
distrusting God, till Christ's Suretiship intervened, to take away both these
evils, which kept the parties at distance, Heb. 8.7, For if that first covenant
had been faultless, then should no place^ have been sought for the second.
Psalm. 89.19, I have laid help upon one that is mighty: I have exalted one
chosen ou^ of the people. 2 Cor. 1.20, For all the promises of God in him are,
yea^ and in him, Amen, unto the glory of God by us.

3. It is to be remembered, that Suretiship among men is of diverse kinds, all
which can be but an imperfect resemblance of Christ's Suretiship. 1. Suretiship
is (...) according to the time of the Sureties intervening and it is either
before or after the obligation of the principal Debtor. Fide jussor and
pracedire obligatione^ and sequi pot^st. Justinian ib.
There is something of both these in Christ^ Suretiship; for his Suretiship
being a deed (...) grace concluded in the counsel of God, before the beginning
of the world, in that respect it was before our obligation, yea^ and before our
being^ 2 Timothy 1.9, Who has saved us, (...) us with an ^o^y ^alling, not
according to our works bu^ according to his own purpose and grace, which was
given (...) in Christ J^s^^, before the world began. Prove. 8.2^, I (...) set up
from (...), from the (...), or ever the (...). But in another respect, he being
Surety of this never and (...) Covenant^ and so man being considered in this
Covenant as a broken irresponsal creature, who could not fulfill his obligation
to God; in this respect Christ's Suretiship may be considered as subsequent to
man's obligation (understand it in order of nature, not of time): for his
Suretiship and the Covenant wherein he was made Surety, presupposes the first
Covenant broken, and man thereby became a bankrupt creature, Heb. 8.9, 10,
Because they continued not in my covenant, and I regarded them not, says the
Lord. For this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, after
those days, says the Lord. 2. Suretiship is distinguished according to its
extent: and here is a double distinction of Suretiship: 1. A Surety is either
more particular, when he does not undertake for all that may follow upon the
obligation of the principal Debtor, but has his Suretiship restricted it may
be to a particular bond, and not to all the persons Debt; or to the principal
sum, and not to all the penalties and interests thereof: or he is a more
universal Surety, Calv. ubi. supra.
called by the Jurists, Fide jussor in omnem causam, qui in id omne, quod ex ea
obligatione, cui accedit, n^stri p^test, s^ obligat. And this kind of
Suretiship extends as far as the obligation of the principal Debtor. Our Lord
Jesus was a Surety, both for a particular debt and obligation, to satisfy the
violated Law and Covenant of works, Romans 10.4, For Christ is the end of the law
for righteousness, to every one that believes. Such a particular Surety was
Judah, Genesis 43.9. and 44.32. Christ was also such a Surety as this last sort,
who took upon him the Debt, and all that could follow upon the broken man's
obligation; who said unto God, that he did become good for his people, for all
the Debt which they owed, and for all the penalties which they had incurred;
let all that might follow them, by virtue of their obligation, be upon him,
Heb. 10.5, 10. 2. In respect of the extent, Suretiship is either for one of the
parties Covenanting, or for both; which is a rare case among men: yet Christ's
Suretiship was of this last sort: for he was such a Surety, as was Umpire and
Mediator, and is nearly related to both the parties, and has power with them
both, and therefore he is an undertaker for God to man, 2 Cor. 1.20, For all
the promises of God in him are, yea, and in him Amen, unto the glory of God by
us. And for man to God, Luke 22.32, But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith
^ail not. Whereof more particularly, when we come to speak of what he is
engaged unto by this Covenant Relation.

Suretiship is distinguished according to the manner of assurance granted by
the Surety, or according to the way of his making faith for his undertaking. He
that interposeth and undertaketh for another, is properly a Surety, quocunque
modo intercesserit, which way soever he does interpose for another, whether it
be by stipulation; explicit, by promise or by bond; or if it be by a person,
acting himself in the books of any court for another person; or if it be by
giving any pledge, pawn, or hostage for the thing undertaken: Our Lord Jesus had
something of all these ways in his Suretiship for his people. He acted himself
in the court of Heaven, and book of God, Heb. 10.7, Then said I, Lo, I come (in
the volume of the book it is written of me) to do thy will, O God. He did
expressly give his promise and bond for his people unto all effects (whereof
afterward), Ezekiel. 36.27, 31, And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you
to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them. -- Then
shall ye remember your own evil ways, and your doings that were not good, and
shall loath your selves in your own sight for your iniquities, and for your
abominations. Which is ascribed to Christ, Heb. 8. He did give himself, his own
blessed person, to the prison and to justice, as a pledge and hostage to God,
for the fulfilling of this Covenant; a precious and worthy pledge to lie Surety
for the Debt of all his broken people, Isa. 53.8, 12, He was taken from prison,
and from judgment: and who shall declare his generation? for he was cut off out
of the land of the living, for the transgression of my people was he stricken.
Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall divide the
spoil with the strong: because he has poured out his soul unto death. Genesis
44.33, Now therefore I pray thee, let thy servant abide in stead of the lad, a
bondman to my Lord, and let the lad go up with his brethren. 1 Chronicles. 21.17,
Let thine hand, I pray thee, O Lord my God, be on me, and on my fathers house:
but not on thy people, that they should be plagued. He verily acted that which
Judah and David said in these Scriptures: We have an evidence of this spirit in
him, Joh. 18.8, Jesus answered, I have told you that I am be: if therefore ye
seek me, let these go their way. 4. Suretiship is distinguished according to
the subject matter, and things undertaken. A Surety is either, 1. A Surety for
Debt, Prove. 22.26, Be not thou one of them that strike hands, or of them that
are sureties for Debts. Or, 2. A Surety for persons, to wit, for their safety
and indemnity, Genesis 44.32, For thy servant became surety for the lad unto my
father, saying, If I bring him not unto thee, then I shall bear the blame unto
my father for ever. Or for their good behavior, or for their appearing. Or. 3.
A Surety for performance, to wit, of conditions and stipulations, such are
commonly hostages in war, Isa. 36.8, Now therefore give pledges, I pray thee,
to my master the king of Assyria. The first is Suretiship in the way of
satisfaction, and it is sponsio de praeterito, or de presenti: The latter two
is Suretiship by way of caution, and is sponsio de futuro: Christ's Suretiship
has something of all these. 1. He He was Surety for your Debt, to satisfy for
that, for all your Debts and Trespasses, Isa. 53.6, And the Lord has laid on
him the iniquity of us all. 2. He became Surety for your persons, for your
indemnity, that none of you should be lost; and not for the indemnity of your
persons only, but for the appearing of your persons, that he should present you
to God at the time appointed, Joh. 17.12, While I was with them in the world, I
kept them in thy name: those that thou gave me, I have kept, and none of them
is lost, but the son of perdition: that the scriptures might be fulfilled. He
was bail for his people. 3. He became Surety, for performance of the
stipulation, and all the conditions of the Covenant upon both sides, Job. 6.37,
39, 40, All that the father gives me, shall come to me: and him that comes to
me, I will in no wise cast out. -- And this is the fathers will which has sent
me, that of all which he has given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise
it up again at the last day. And this is the will of him that sent me, that
every one which sees the Son, and believes on him, may have everlasting life:
and I will raise him up at the last day. Joh. 17.4, 6, I have glorified thee on
the earth: I have finished the work which thou gave me to do. I have
manifested thy name unto the men which thou gave me out of (...) they were,
and ^^ou gave them me; and they (...) kep^ thy word.

In the second pla^e I shall lay down some Assertions, bresly for clearing of
this Covenant Relation.

Assert. 1. Man as he is considered in the second Covenant, has as much need
of a Surety as of a Savior; has equal need of one to beget a confidence
betwixt God and him, as of one to help him, Heb. 8.7, For if that first
covenant had been faultless, then should no place have been sought for the
second. He being not only a broken creature, and irresponsal; who having
banquered out, with the stock which his Lord committed to him, did merit to be
no more trusted by him; and who had also with the loss of his stock of Grace,
put himself in a desperate condition, having sinned away all power and
possibility of paying his Debt, and satisfying his Lord; who also had begotten
a mutual diffidence and distrust betwixt his Lord and him, that there could
henceforth be no more dealing with expectation of trust and performance, until
a Surety intervened to make up this breach by his undertaking, Psalm. 80.19, 28,
33, I have laid help upon one that is mighty: I have exalted one chosen out of
the people. -- My mercy will I keep for him for evermore, and my covenant shall
stand fast with him. -- Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly
take from him: nor suffer my faithfulness to fail.

Assert. 2. Christ's Suretiship was not only a voluntary act, it was also an act
of absolute Sovereignty: He being an absolute Lord, this was his privilege,
that he had power over himself and over his own life, to lay it down at his
pleasure, (which others may not do); take this Assention from his own mouth,
Joh. 10.18, I have power to lay down my life, not only (...), ability, but
(...), -- Authority and right. This Christ had by concession and grant from God
his father who had given him power over all flesh, Joh. 17.2. And this he had
in and from himself; being God^ he had power over himself as man, to dispose of
his manhood as pleased him; and these two concurring Christ's consent, and his
power over his own life, did make it lawful and just that he should be
punished, being innocent, 1 Pet. 3.18, For Christ also has once suffered for
sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God.

Assert. 3. When man was in this (...) unrequested, did undertake for the
broken (...), to pay his Debt, and to satisfy the Creditor, Romans 5.8, But God
commended his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died
for us. And this he did not by any request of ours, or any Covenant with us, to
undertake for us, whereby we did solicit him or compact with him to be Surety
for us, (for his Suretiship gave the rise to the Covenant made with us; our
Covenant with him gave not the rise to his Suretiship); but because the Lord
the Creditor, and Christ the Cautioner, had long before stricken hands
together, that he should both undertake and discharge the Debt of these broken
men: Therefore its said, that God laid our iniquities upon him, Isa. 53.5, 6.
And he was made a Surety, Heb. 7.22.

Assert. 4. Catech. Ra^rov. c. 8. Socin. de sirvatere. l. 2. c. 5. and 8.
Christ the Surety of the new Testament died, not only nostro bono for our good
and profit, as Socinians say; but he died also in our stead and room, nostra
vice: For, 1. Sure he died for us, as no other person can be said to die for
us, 1 Cor. 1.13, Is Christ divided? was Paul crucified for you? But for the
good of the Church other persons may suffer and die, Col. 1.24, Who now rejoice
in my sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind of the afflictions
of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake, which is the Church. 2 Timothy 2.10,
Therefore I endure all things for the elects sake, that they may also obtain
the salvation which is in Christ Jesus, with eternal glory. 2. Sure he died
otherwise for elect men, than for Angels, than for the whole Creation; and yet
he died for their good, that he might be head of Angels, and to restore all the
creatures to their perfection, Col. 2.10, And ye are complete in him, which is
the head of all principality and power. Whereof also, see Romans 8.20, to 24. 3.
The force of the particle (...), and of the phrase, to die for another, does
enforce no less then in the room and stead of another, Mat. 20.28, And to give
his life a ransom for many. Gal. 3.13, Christ has redeemed us from the curse
of the law, being made a curse for us. Luke 11.11, Or if he ask a fish, will he
for a fish give him a serpent? Mat. 2.22, But when he heard that Archelaus did
reign in Judea, in the room of his father Herod, he was afraid to go thither.
Mat. 5.38, An eye (...). Where without question (...) see at length the learned
treatises of Gr^tius de s^^^^fact: Christ^ and (...) ejus defenserem, and Mr.
Rutherf. his treatise of the Covenant. part 2. chapter 3. and Mr. Brinsley his
treatises of the Mediator. page 72, etc.

Assert. 5. Christ the Surety, and broken man the Debtor, are one in law, but
not intrinsecally one, Isa. 1. they are legally one, or in the laws sense one;
because by a legal substitution and surrogation, Christ having put his name in
the believers bond, by the law he is in his place, and the believer is put in
Christ's law-place: so that by a legal act the Surety is the broken man;
therefore Christ being made Surety, says, I am the broken man; all my friends
Debts be upon me, my life for their life, my Soul for their Souls, Gal. 4.4, 5,
But when the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a
woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were under the law, that we
might receive the adoption of sons. Joh. 18.8, Jesus answered, I have told you
I am he: if therefore ye seek me, let these go their way. Genesis 44.33, Now
therefore, I pray thee, let thy servant abide instead of the lad, a bondman to
my Lord, and let the lad go up with his brethren. And God commands the
wakenedup sword of Justice, to smite him for his brethren, since he will stand
in their room, and take their Debt upon him, Zech. 13.7, Awake, O sword,
against my shepherd, and against the man that is my fellow, says the Lord of
hosts: Smite the shepherd. 2. I say, The Surety and the Debtor are not
intrinsecally, physically and formally one (though they be one in law; so that
there is not two Debts, nor two Bonds, nor two Debtors in law); for though the
Lord laid on Christ the punishment of our iniquity, yet he did not lay on
Christ iniquity it self (as Antinonin us tells us), for the broken Debtor is a
sinful creature, and continues such even after the punishment due to him, is
removed by a satisfying-Surety: I say, he continues such till by
sanctification the evil of sin be wholly removed, Romans 7. throughout: but
Christ the Surety was in this respect separate from sinners, Heb. 7.26, And was
not one with them. 1 Pet. 3.18, For Christ also has once suffered for sins,
the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God: (...) wicked and with
the ric^ (...) his (...) violence, neither (...) in his mo^^^. (...) that
five-fold oneness and sameness, or law-identity betwixt Christ the Surety,
Ruthe^f. treatise of the Covenant. par. 2. page 251.
and us the Debtors (mentioned by Mr. Rutherford); though physically the Surety
and Debtor be two different men: yet, 1. They are one and the same legal party,
and the same object of justice: whosoever in law pursues the Surety, pursues the
Debtor. 2. The Debt and sum is one: not two Debts, not two punishments, not two
lives to lose, but one. 3. It Is one and the same satisfaction: there cannot in
justice and law, another reckoning and satisfaction come after the Surety has
paid. 4. There is one and the same acceptance, upon the Creditors part: if he
accept of satisfaction from the Surety, he cannot pursue the Debtor, but must
look upon him as no Debtor, for satisfaction to justice. 5. It is one and the
same legal effect, Christ risen and justified in the spirit, 1 Timothy 3.16. and
we in him, as the meritorious cause of our justification, are legally
justified, Romans 4. last, Who was delivered for our offenses, and was raised
again for our justification.

Assert. 6. (which follows upon the former), neither the Creditor nor the Law
can exact satisfaction from both the Surety and the Debtor; but the Surety
having paid all, and satisfied; the broken Debtor can say, I have paid all, I
am free: he may plead, My friend and Surety has done all for me; and that is
as good in foro, in the court of Justice, as if I had paid all in mine own
person, Gal. 3.13, Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being
made a curse for us. Romans 4. last, Who was delivered for our offenses, and was
raised again for our justification. 1 Pet. 2.24, Who his own self bare our sins
in his own body on the tree, that we being dead to sins, should live unto
righteousness: by whose stripes ye were healed. The Debt that Christ paid, is
our very Debt; and the believer can say, When Christ my Surety was judged and
crucified for my sins, then was I judged: and what would you have more of a
man, than his life? Isa. 53.6, 7, 8, And the Lord has laid on him the iniquity
of us all. He was appressed, he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth: he
was taken from prison, and from judgment: and who shall declare (...) off out
of the land of the living: for (...) transgression of my people was he stricken.

Assert. 7. See Brins. of the Mediator page 137.
Christ's Suretiship was a mixture of justice and grace: for thereby there was a
satisfaction made to justice for the violation of the law; yet so as God was
pleased to dispense with his own law which was peremptory, Genesis 2.17. For
though it was just that the law should have a satisfaction, yet it was of Grace
that God was content to accept that satisfaction which the law required, from
the person of another, than the same soul that sinned: God being no ways bound
to admit of such a satisfaction by a Surety, which the rigor of the law
exacted from the person of the offender; and therefore there can be no ground
for the Socinians charge against us, that while we assert the satisfaction of
Christ, we derogate and detract from the Grace of God; the Grace of God and the
satisfaction of Christ being no ways repugnant, but rather Grace is advanced
and exalted by the satisfaction of Christ, by the finding out of that way, by
his undertaking and his performing of that satisfaction, and by Gods accepting
thereof, Romans 5.7, 8, For scarcely for a righteous man will one die: yet
peradventure for a good man some would even dare to die. But God commended his
love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners Christ died for us.

Assert. 8. Christ's Suretiship was not ptivate; for the Debt of one or some few
persons, but of public concernment: for his engagement was for the safety of
many; yea, it was for the elect world, whose Debt he paid, whose punishment he
did bear, Mat. 20.28, And to give his life a ransom for many. Isa. 53.6, 8,
And the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. -- For he was cut off out
of the land of the living: for the transgression of my people was he stricken.
2 Cor. 5.19, To wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto
himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them. It was a noble act of Grace
and favor on his part: it was like a man's laying down his life for the safety
of his kindred, and of his Country: he was given as an hostage, who did engage
his life for the performance of the conditions agreed upon, for saving the lost
world.

Assert. 9. Christ in his undertaking and engagement as Surety of the Covenant,
had his fathers (...) of relief and (...) I say, he had no relief nor
warran^^ie from the broken creatures whose Debt he paid; neither could the
restitution of his losses be expected from broken men: but he had as it were a
back-bond, or a bond of relief from God his father, that when he went into the
prison, his Soul should not be left in the grave, but that he should come out
with honor: see Psalm. 16.10, For thou will not leave my Soul in hell; neither
will thou suffer thine holy one to see corruption. Isa. 53.10, 11, 12, Yet it
pleased the Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief: when thou shall make
his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days,
and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand. He shall see of the
travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous
servant justify many: for he shall bear their iniquities. Therefore will I
divide him a po^tion with the great, and he shall divide the spoil with the
strong: because he has poured out his soul unto death. Psalm. 2.7, 8, 9, I will
declare the decree: the Lord has said unto me, Thou art my Son, this day have
I begotten thee. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. Thou
shall break them with a rod of iron, thou shall dash them in pieces like a
potters vessel.

Assert. 10. All Christ's offices are founded upon his Suretiship: for by that
Covenant of Suretiship that is betwixt Jehovah and the Son, he is King, Priest,
and Prophet: whatsoever he did by office, and by compact and agreement with
God; he did because he had put his name in our bond, having become Surety for
his people. As a King he suffers for his subjects and saves them, because he
was engaged to do so; as a Priest he dies for them, because by his Suretiship
he was engaged to bear their punishment; he performs also a Prophets office
toward them, because he was engaged to God to do so, etc. Joh. 17.4, 6, I have
glorified thee on the earth: I have finished the work which thou gave me to
do. I have ^anifested thy name unto the men which thou gave me out of the
world. Heb. 9.28, So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many. 1 John
3.5, And ye know that he was manifested to take away our sins, and in him is no
sin. And if that had not been for his engagement as a Surety, we should never
had the fruit of any of his offices.

The third thing to be considered, is, See Mr. Ruth. treatise of the Covenant.
p. 2. c. 7.
how Christ came under this Covenant Relation, to be Surety of the better
Testament. To this the Apostle gives an answer, Heb. 7.22, (...), He was made
the Surety of a better Testament, or Covenant. If Jesus was made the Surety,
then, 1. He was not Surety by nature, nor by any natural necessity: Then, 2. He
was not Surety by any necessity, or constraint of Law: he was not so made
Surety, because there was no Law that could exact upon him, anteceding his bond
of Suretiship; neither could there be any necessity upon him, there being no
conjunction betwixt him and us (antecedently to his act of Suretiship), by any
relations, whether natural, legal, foederal, or mystical, until this voluntary
conjunction and Covenant Relation of Suretiship was brought about, upon which
all his offices, and all other relations 'twixt Christ and his people are
founded. I take therefore the making of him Surety, spoken of by the Apostle,
to relate mainly to that eternal free transaction and Covenant of Suretiship
that was betwixt God and Christ, whereby he came under a judicial and Law act
to satisfy for the sins of his people.

And this imports, 1. Something on Gods part, Heb. 7.21, He was made Surety by
him, that said unto him, The Lord swear, and will not repent, etc. God made him
the Surety of the better Testament. I say on Gods part, the making of him
Surety, imports three things: 1. His eternal decree, whereby he was designed,
ordained, and chosen in the counsel of God for this Suretiship: he was made the
Surety, that is, designed and ordained to this by an everlasting decree, Heb.
5.4, 5, 6, 10, And no man takes this honor unto himself, but he that is
called of God, as was Aaron. So also Christ glorified not himself to be made an
High Priest; but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten
thee. As he says also in another place, Thou art a priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedec. -- Called of God an High Priest, after the order of
Melchisedec. Psalm. 2.7, I will declare the decree, the Lord has said unto me,
Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. Isa. 42.1, Behold, my servant
whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delights. 2. His anointing,
furnishing, and fitting of Christ for this business: he was made the Surety, i.
e. He was anointed and qualified for that work: so the father says of him,
Isa. 42.1, 4, 6, I have put my spirit upon him, he shall bring forth judgment
to the Gentiles. -- He shall not fail, nor be discouraged, till he have set
judgment in the earth, and the Isles shall wait for his law. -- I the Lord have
called thee in righteousness, and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and
give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles. And so
Jesus says of himself, Heb. 10.5, A body have thou prepared or fitted me: to
the same purpose, also the Apostle tells us, Gal. 4.4, That he was not only
made of a woman, but made under the law, i. e. ordained and fitted for taking
on our condition in Law, or our Law-place and room, as well as our nature. 3.
The investing of him in this relation; he was ma^e the Surety, i. e. He was
invested, constitute and set ind that Covenant Relation unto which he was
ordained, and for which he was fitted; therefore he was made with an oath, And
the Lord swear unto him, Heb. 7.21. and Joh. 6.27. Him has the father sealed,
i. e. invested him, and constituted him under his commission and seal.

2. This imports some things upon Christ's part: He was made Surety; God made
him Surety, his father made him, and he made himself the Surety: he was
willingly made Surety by his own free consent and Covenant: the Scriptures
speak frequently of his consent, and of the making of himself, whatsoever his
father made him, Phil. 2.7, 8, He made himself of no reputation. etc. and he
humbled himself. Joh. 10.18, No man takes my life from me, but I lay it down
my self. I say, on Christ's part this does import, 1. His eternal condeseending
to empty himself, and to take on him our nature, and our room, and place, under
the Law; he was made Surety, he condescended, and agreed to take upon him both
our nature and our condition, Heb. 2.14, 16, Forasmuch then as the children are
partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same,
that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death. that is
the devil. -- For verily he took not on him the nature of Angels; but he took
on him the seed of Abraham. Phil. 2.6, 7, Who being in the form of God, thought
it not robbery to be equal with God: but made himself of no reputation, and
took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men. 2.
His engaging and plighting his faith and truth to perform whatsoever he did
condesceud and agree unto by his act of Suretiship, so that whatsoever the law
could exact of us, he plighted his faith to fulfill that: he was made Surety,
i.e. He did promise and strike hands to satisfy all that the Law could demand
of his people (for so the word Surety signifies, as I have already showed you,
Prove. 22.26.) to make satisfaction for the sins done against or under the first
Covenant and Testament, Heb. 9.15, And for this cause he is the mediator of the
new Testament, that by means of death, for the redemption of the transgressions
that were under the first Testament, they which are called might receive the
promise of eternal inheritance. Romans 3.25, Whom God had set forth to be a
propitiation, through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the
remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God. Heb. 10.5, 7,
Wherefore when he comes into the world, he says, Sacrifice and offering thou
would not, but a body have thou prepared me: then said I, Lo I come (in the
volume of the book, it written of me) to do thy will, O God. 3. His performance
of all these things unto which he did agree, and for which he plighted his
faith, by his act of Suretiship: he was made the Surety, i. e. He paid the
debt, he satisfied the Law, he stood in the place of the broken men, till
Justice said, It is enough: and till he himself said, It is finished, Isa. 53,
throughout. 2 Cor. 5.21, For he has made him to be sin for us, who knew no
sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Gal. 3.13, Christ
has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us. Thus did
Jesus the Surety of the better Testament, 1. By an eternal transaction agree
and condescend to put his name in the bond and writ of the Law that stood over
our head, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Gal. 3.10. 2. Thus did he engage for us, and act himself
to answer at the demands of Law and Justice, Heb. 10.7. Gal. 4.4. 3. Thus did
Jesus in due time discharge and perform, and actually was made a curse for us,
Gal. 3.13.

From this voluntary relation of Christ's Suretiship for his people arises a
fourfold relation, which is founded on this, which relations betwixt Christ and
his people import a nearness of conjunction and union with them, and do
contribute to the clearing the justice of God, in smiting Christ for our sin,
and in our place and room. 1. From Christ's Suretiship arises a natural
relation betwixt him and us, that he is our kinsman, and our brother, of the
same nature, of the same flesh and blood with us: this resulteth from his
Suretiship, whereby he condescended and agreed to take our nature upon him: for
otherwise he and we had never been of the same lump, Heb. 2.11, 14, 16, For
both he that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are all of one: for
which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren. -- Forasmuch then as the
children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part
of the same. -- For verily he took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took
on him the seed of Abraham. 2. From his Suretiship flows a Legal relation
betwixt Christ and us, that he and we are one party in the Law: that his
satisfaction and payment is ours, and that our debt is his: that what he did
and suffered, we did it Legally in him: this proceeds from his Suretiship,
because when he was made Surety of the Covenant, he put himself in the bond and
writ of the Law, and put in our names in the (...) writ, Gal. 2.20, I am
crucified with Christ. Nevertheless, I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in
me. Romans 6.5, For if we have been planted together in the likeness of his
death, we ^^all be also in the likeness of his resurrection. 3. From Christ's
Suretiship, proceeds a foedenal relation betwixt him and his people, whereby
they are his, and he is theirs by Covenant; whereby he and his people have one
God and Father by Covenant, Psalm. 89.26, He shall cry unto me, thou art my
father, my God, and the rock of my Salvation. Joh. 20.17, But go to my
brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my father, and your father: and to
my God, and your God. Heb. 1.5, For unto which of the Angels said be at any
time, Thou art my son, this day have I begotten thee? and again, I will be to
him a father, and he shall be to me a son? This also flows from his
Suretiship, for thereby he plighted his promise and faith to God, that he would
undertake the bringing about of this conjunction: and God plighted his faith to
him, that he should do the business, and that this work should prosper in his
hand, Joh. 17.4, I have glorified thee on the earth: I have finished the work
which thou gave me to do. Isa. 53.10, And the pleasure of the Lord shall
prosper in his hand. 4. From his Suretiship proceeds a mystical relation
betwixt him and his people, whereby he is the head, and they are the members:
he is the vine, and they the branches: he is the king, and they are his
subjects: he is the husband, and they are his bride and wife: 1 Cor. 12.12, For
as the body is one, and has many members, and all the members of that one
body, being many, are one body, so also is Christ. Col. 1.18, And he is the
head of the body, the Church, who is the beginning, the first born from the
dead, that in all things he might have the pre-eminence. Joh. 15.5, I am the
vine, ye are the branches: he that abides in me, and I in him, the same
brings forth much fruit. Rev. 19.7, For the marriage of the lamb is come, and
his wife has made her self ready. Psalm. 45.10, Forget also thine own people,
and thy fathers house, etc. Yea, if any relation can be more near and mystical,
that also is the result of his Suretiship. See Gal. 2.20, I am crucified with
Christ: nevertheless, I live; yet not I, but Christ lives in me. 1 Cor. 6.17,
But he that is joined unto the Lord, is one spirit. Joh. 6.57, As the living
father has sent me, and I live by the father: so he that eats me, even he
shall live by me. Joh. 17.23, I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made
perfect in one. Think it not strange then that Justice should smite Christ for
the transgressions of his people, there being such nearness of relations, and
conjunction betwixt the person offending and the person suffering: Grot. de
satisfact. cap. 4. and va^^^. max. lib. 6. c. 5. See Mr. R^^^ on the Covenant.
page 2. c. 9.
for even among men we find one man suffering for another, upon the account of
these and the like relations: 1. Upon natural relations: do not parents, and
children, and kinsmen, often justly suffer with and for one another? Exodus
20.5, For I the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the
fathers upon the children, unto the third and fourth generation of them that
hate me. Josh. 7.24. And Joshua, and all Israel with him, took Achan the son
(...), and the silver, and the garment, and the wedg of gold, and his sons, and
his daughters, and his oxen, and his asses, and his sheep, and his tent, and
all that he had: and they brought them unto the valley of Achor, etc. 2. Upon
Legal relations: does not the husband pay the wives debt? does not the heir
suffer for his predecessor, and the person to whom he is heir? does not the
hostage and pledges given, suffer for them who gave them? does not the Surety
suffer for the Debtor, because these are but one party in law? Prove. 6.1, 2, My
Son, if thou be Surety for thy friend, if thou have stricken thy hand with a
stranger, thou art snared with the words of thy mouth, thou art taken with the
words of thy mouth. Prove. 11.^5, He that is Surety for a stranger, shall smart
for it: and he that hates Suretiship, is sure. 3. Upon foederal relations: do
not people suffer for and in their confederates? Ezekiel 16.37, Behold therefore,
I will gather all thy lovers, with whom thou have taken pleasure, and all them
that thou have loved, with all them that thou have hated: I will even gather
them round about against thee, and will discover thy nakedness unto them, that
they may see all thy nakedness. Ezekiel. 30.8, And they shall know that I am the
Lord, when I have set a fire in Egypt, and when all her helpers shall be
destroyed. 4. Upon mystical relations, whether in the body natural, does not
one member suffer for another? does not the head pay for what the hand acted?
or in the body politic, and civil: do not princes and people often suffer for
one another, 1 Samuel 12. last, But if ye shall still do wickedly, ye shall be
consumed, both ye and your king. 1 Chronicles. 21.17, And David said unto God, Is it
not I that commanded the people to be numbered? even I it is that have sinned,
and done evil indeed: but as for these sheep, what have they done? let thine
hand, I pray thee, O Lord my God, be on me, and on my fathers house, but not on
thy people, that they should be plagued. Or in the Church and body politic and
Ecclesiastical: do not pastors and people often suffer for one another? Ezekiel.
3.26, And I will make thy tongue cleave to the roof of thy mouth, that thou
shall be dumb, and shall not be to them a reprover: for they are a rebellious
house. Rev. 2.5, Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen, and repent,
and do the first works: or else I will come unto thee quickly, and remove my
candlestick out of his place, except thou repent. How much more may it stand
with justice to smite Christ, and to put him to suffer for his people, having
in him a complication of all these relations toward them, and of all kind of
relations that can import and express nearness, conjunction, union, and oneness
with them; he also being willing to suffer for his people, and absolute Lord of
his own life, Joh. 10.17, 18, Therefore does my father love me, because I lay
down my life that I might take it again. No man takes it from me, but I lay it
down of my self: I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it
again, this commandment have I receieved of my father.

Now the consideration of this point, how Christ came under an act of
Suretiship for his people, to wit, Brinst. of the Mediator, page 123, etc.
by a free consent and agreement betwixt God and Christ in a Covenant, whereby
God willingly made him the Surety, and he willingly made himself the Surety;
this I say, does exceedingly commend this grace of God in the satisfaction made
by Christ the Surety of the Covenant, especially in these things. 1. It was
grace and favor in God, that he was pleased to dispense so far with his own
Law, as to admit of satisfaction by a Surety, and not to stand upon the rigor
thereof, which requires that the same soul that sinned might suffer and die,
and no other for him, Genesis 2.17, But of the tree of the knowledge of good and
evil, thou shall not eat of it: for in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou
shall surely die. Gal. 3.10, Cursed is every one that continues not in all
things which are written in the book of the law, to do them. It is grace, that
the same soul that sinned dies not, but another: and yet more grace, that
every soul that sins, dies not, but one for many, one for all the Elect
world, Mat. 20.28, And to give his life a ransom for many. 2 Cor. 5.15, And
that he died for all, that they which live, should not henceforth live unto
themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again. 2. This was grace
in God, that he did not only admit this way of satisfaction, but himself did
find it out. The finding out of a way of satisfaction to justice, without the
eternal punishment of the sinner, this was Gods act, and this was one act of
special grace: for it was not only above the reach of men and Angels, but also
before their being, 1 Cor. 2.7, 8, But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery,
even the hidden wisdom which God ordained before the world, unto our glory:
Which none of the princes of this world knew. Prove. 8.23, 30, I was set up from
everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was. Then I was by him, as
one brought up with him: and I was daily his delight: rejoicing always before
him. 3. This was pure grace in God, that he did design, provide, and foresee a
Surety and sactisfaction for us, before we became broken men, and needed one;
that he designed a Physician before we were sick, 2 Timothy 1.9, Who has saved
us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works, but
according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus,
before the world began. 4. This was grace, even singular grace in God, that he
neither did admit of this way of satisfaction for the sin of Angels, nor did he
find it out for them, but unto men only did he indulge this dispensation, Heb.
2.14, 16, Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he
also himself likewise took part of the same, that through death he might
destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the Devil. -- For verily he
took not on him the nature of Angels: but he took on him the seed of Abraham. 2
Pet. 2.4, For if God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to
hell, and delivered them into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment.
Jude verse. 6, And the Angels which kept not their first estate, but left their
own habitation, he has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the
judgment of the great day. There was no relaxation of the rigor of the law
toward them; but a strict execution of justice upon them. 5. It was unspeakable
grace in God, that having admitted of such a way of satisfaction, he should put
his own Son upon the work, and make him the Surety, who should make
satisfaction unto the justice of God, by giving his life a ransom for us: such
an act of grace as this has not been heard of: Joh. 3.16, For God so loved the
world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him
should not perish, but have everlasting life. Romans 5.8, But God commended his
love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. 1 John
2.2, And he is the propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only, but also
for the sins of the whole world. 1 John 4.10, Herein is love, not that we loved
God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our
sins. 6. It is grace in God, that when he has found out this way of
satisfaction, and is content to admit of it, and has put his Son upon the
work, that he should be at the pains to reveal to us Christ's Surety
righteousness, and to apply it unto us, without which the satisfaction of the
Surety could not avail us: and what else can it be but grace in God, that
makes the satisfaction of Christ effectual to one, and not to another, who
has also heard of this way of satisfying-justice? Job 33.23, 24, If there be a
messenger with him, an interpreter, one among a thousand, to show unto man his
uprightness. Then he is gracious unto him, and says, Deliver him from going
down to the pit, I have found a ransom. Joh. 6.44, No man can come to me,
except the father which has sent me, draw him: and I will raise him up at the
last day. Ephesians. 2.8, For by grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of
your selves, it is the gift of God. And upon this account it is, that
justification and remission of sins are called free, notwithstanding the
satisfaction of Christ; that the wonderful riches of Gods free grace might
shine in the Suretiship of Christ, Isa. 43.25, I, even I am he that blotteth
out thy transgressions for my own sake, and will not remember thy sins. Romans
3.24, Being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in
Christ Jesus.

4. For whom is Christ engaged as Surety of the Covenant? (I speak now of his
Suretiship, only as it relates to his act of cautionry for his people;
remitting the consideration of it, in a larger extent, unto the next thing to
be handled upon this Subject) Before I answer this Question, I shall premit
some distinctions which make way for an answer to it. 1. See Mr. Ruth. treatise
of the Covenant. p. 2. c. 10.
It is a necessary distinction of the Covenant of grace, that it is considered,
either, 1. As it is preached according to the commanding-will of God: or, 2. As
it is fulfilled in the Elect, according to the Lords will of purpose: the
Covenant in the first consideration, stands of promises, commands, threatenings,
etc. And so it holds forth what is the command of God concerning our duty, and
the things which we may conditionally expect; and puts nothing absolutely,
whether we perform it or not. See Act. 2.38.39, Then Peter said unto them,
Repent, and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the
remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost. For the
promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even
as many as the Lord our God shall call. Act. 16.31, And they said, Believe on
the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, and thine house. In the second
consideration, the Covenant stands wholly in promises, and those absolute
promises, and does not hold forth our duty and obligation, and what is morally
good or evil, because God commands it, or forbids it: but what is Gods will of
purpose and decree, and what is his pleasure, to act effectually upon the
hearts of the Elect, he overruling their corrupt wills: so the Covenant is to
be understood, Jer. 31.31, etc. Ezekiel. 11.16, etc. and 36.25, etc.

2. We must distinguish the parties of the Covenant, according to this twofold
consideration thereof: for the parties contracting with God in the Covenant,
under the first consideration, are all those who are within the visible Church,
whether Elect or Reprobate (and their seed) professing obedience to the
Gospel Ordinances, under which they are (as I have at length proved
elsewhere), Psalm. 147.19, 20, He shows his word unto Jacob: his statutes and
his Judgments unto Israel. He has not dealt so with any nation: and as for his
judgments, they have not known them. But the parties contracters with God in
the Covenant, considered in the second respect, are only the Elect of Christ;
to whom the spirit is given, as well as the ordinances; to whom the promise of
the new heart is made, and in whom it is fulfilled, Isa. 59.21, As for me, this
is my covenant with them, says the Lord, My spirit that is upon thee, and my
words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out
of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says the
Lord, from henceforth, and for ever.

3. We are to distinguish betwixt Christ's act of Suretiship and undertaking;
and some benefits which by concomitancy redound to them, for whom he never was
made Surety: for many hypocrites and reprobates that have the Gospel preached
by concomitancy, because they are mixed with the Elect, in the habitable parts
of the earth, and Societies of men, where these have their abode; yet Christ
was never undertaker for them, nor does the preaching of the Covenant come to
them from Christ, as their Surety: but this benefit they have by Christ's
undertaking and Suretiship for the elect that are among them, and for the
Elects sake, concerning whom Christ undertook to preach the Covenant to them,
and to fulfill it in them; therefore he is a light to the Gentiles, Isa. 49.6.
with Act. 13.26, Men and brethren, children of the stock of Abraham, and
whosoever among you fears God, to you is the word of this salvation sent. 2
Cor. 4.15, For all things are for your sakes, that the abundant grace might,
through the thanksgiving of many, redound to the glory of God. Joh. 17.19, And
for their sakes I sanctify my self, that they also might be sanctified through
the truth.

These things premised, we answer to the question; 1. Negatively. 1. Sure he
was not made Surety, Cat. Racov. de Prophet. Chapter munere.
Christ did not undertake for all Mankind, in whom was ever the breath of life,
the Reprobate as well as the Elect, Cain as well as Abel, Judas as well as
Paul, (as Socinians and Arminians tell us) for the Apostle's [all], 1 Timothy 2.6,
Jac. Arm. Orat. sacdotio Christi, page 16, 17.
Who gave himself a ransom for [all], to be testified in due time: can be no
more than Christ's many. Mat. 20.21, And to give his life a ransom for many,
Heb. 9.28, So Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many; and unto them
that look for him, shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation.
2. Davenant. dissect. de morte Christi, cap. 4. p. 48.
Sure he was not Surety, nor did undertake for all these who are within the
visible Church, or within the Covenant externally: for many of these were
neither given to him by the father, nor undertaken for by him, 1 John 2.19,
They went out from us, but they were not of us: for if they had been of us,
they would no doubt have continued with us: but they went out, that they might
be made manifest, that they were not all of us. Mat. 22.14, For many are
called, but few are chosen. 3. He was not made Surety for all men
conditionally, to wit, if they should believe: for, 1. His Suretiship was an
absolute act of his own will and grace, and does not depend upon our will, over
which Christ has the dominion, Joh. 6.37, All that the father gives me, shall
come to me: and him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. Zech. 10.8,
I will hiss for them, and gather them, for I have redeemed them. 2. It was part
of his undertaking, to purchase by the meirt of his death, grace to bow our
will, and to heal our nature, Heb. 10.10, By the which will we are sanctified
through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ, once for all. Isa. 42.4, He
shall not fail, nor be discouraged, till he have set judgment in the earth, and
the Isles shall wait for his law. 3. God knew them all particularly, whom he
gave to Christ, to be ransomed by him; and Christ knew them all by name, for
whom he did undertake: therefore we read of names written in the lambs book of
life, Rev. 21.27.

2. We answer affirmatively, That Christ undertakes in his bargain of
Suretiship, only for the Elect, Christ from eternity came under an act of
cautionry for all these and no other.

For, 1. No other were given to him by the Father: but these were given unto
him, and without question he became Surety for none but these who were given to
him by his father, Joh. 17.2, 19, That he should give eternal life to as many
as thou have given him. -- And for their sakes I sanctify my self. Joh. 6.37,
All that the father gives me, shall come to me: and him that comes to me, I
will in no wise cast out. Joh. 10.28, 29, And I give unto them eternal life,
and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand.
My father which gave them me, is greater then all: and no man is able to pluck
them out of my fathers hand.

2. He became Surety for none but for those for whom he died, and in whose
stead he answered the demands of the Law, and satisfied the Justice of God; now
he died only for the Elect, Romans 8.33, 34, Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods elect? it is God that justifies. Who is he that condemns? it
is Christ that died; yea rather, that is risen again, who is even at the right
hand of God, who also makes intercession for us. Joh. 10.11, I am the good
shepherd: the good shepherd gives his life for the sheep. 3. He did undertake
for these only for whom he does pray and intercede with God, and these were
only the Elect, Joh. 17.9, I pray for them, I pray not for the world: but for
them which thou have given me, for they are thine. 4. He did undertake for
these only, for whose believing his father did undertake to him, and these were
only the Elect, Isa. 53.10, 11, And the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in
his hand. He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied: by
his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many: for he shall bear their
iniquities. 5. He did undertake for these only, in whom the Covenant is
fulfilled, upon whose hearts it is really acted, so that a new heart is given
to them, and life eternal, and these were only the Elect, Jer. 31.32, 33, Not
according to the covenant that I made with their fathers, in the day that I
took them by the hand, to hring them out of the land of Egypt, which my
covenant they break, although I was an husband to them, says the Lord. But
this shall be my covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, after
these days, says the Lord, I will put my law in their inwards parts, and write
it in their hearts, and will be their God, and they shall be my people. Joh.
17.6, I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gave me out of the
world: thine they were, and thou gave them me; and they have kept thy word.

And this is as sad news to many of you who heard this Gospel, as it is glad
news to these who receive it, and believe in Christ: woe to them who have not
this undertaker for them, for the Law must have a satisfaction by the eternal
undoing of all these.

5. Let us consider for what Christ is engaged by his Suretiship: That this may
appear, we shall take notice of some distinctions, which speak the extent of
his undertaking for his people. He was a Surety and undertaker, 1. In his
state, and in his actions. 2. In Earth, and in Heaven. 3. In our stead, and in
our behalf. 4. To usward, and to Godward.

1. I say, Christ is a Surety for his people, in his state, and in his actions:
that is, 1. In whatsoever state and condition Christ was, in that state and
condition he does sustain our persons, and is surrogate in our place and
condition, (for so much his Suretiship does import, as I have already showed)
when he was in a state of humiliation here, upon the earth, in that low
condition, he did sustain the persons, and bear and represent the state and
condition of his poor broken people: he was surrogated a Surety to sustain
their Legal state, or the state wherein they are by the violation of the Law
and Covenant of works, Heb. 2.14, Forasmuch then as the children are partakers
of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same, that
through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the
devil. Gal. 4.4, But when the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his
Son made of a woman, made under the law. Romans 8.3, For what the law could not
do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the
likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh. Again, in his
exaltation, Christ does sustain the persons, and represent the condition of the
Elect, unto the which they are advanced by the Covenant through him: and
therefore the Scripture holds him forth in his resurrection and ascension, etc.
as representing the state of the Elect: He is in heaven this day, says the
Scripture, for us, sustaining our state, and glorified condition, till we come
there; taking possession of our inheritance, unto which he has acquired for us
a right, Heb. 6.20, Whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus. Heb.
9.24, For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are
the figures of the true: but into heaven it self, now to appear in the presence
of God for us. 2. In his actions, he acted our parts; especially in what he
did, or in what befell him here upon the earth: for it was his end of coming
down into this world to act our parts; and to have acted upon him, what should
have been done to us: he died as our Surety, and he arose as our Surety;
Justice smote him as our Surety, he was taken into prison, and to judgment, and
was condemned as our Surety, being numbered among transgressors; and again, he
was taken from the prison and judgment, as our Surety, being justified when he
paid the Debt; and by virtue of that communion which we had with him in all
these actions of his, he being our Surety, and sustaining our Law-place and
room, by a just law, these things are reckoned unto our account, whose persons
he sustained, and whose parts he acted, Isa. 53, throughout. Romans 4. last, Who
was delivered for our offenses, and was raised again for our justification. 1
Pet. 3.18, For Christ also has once suffered for sins, the just for the
unjust, that he might bring us to God.

And to this purpose is that instance and parallel of Adams sustaining the
condition of all men, Christ set forth. Sect. 3. cap. 4.
and therein being a type of Christ, 1 Cor. 15.22, 48. and Romans 5.14, Fitly,
and at large applied, by Mr. Thomas Goodwin.

2. Christ was a Surety on Earth, and he is a Surety still in Heaven: Christ is
as well a Surety in his intercession, as he was in his death; for beside all
that Christ did upon earth for discharging his undertaking unto God for his
people, he stands yet engaged in Heaven as an undertaker for them, and shall
not be acquitted of all his engagements, until he have brought all the Elect
company, as safe there as he came himself, Joh. 17.24, Father, I will that they
also whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my
glory which thou have given me: for thou lovedst me before the foundation of
the world. Therefore the Apostle, Heb. 7.22, By so much was Jesus made Surety
of a better Testament. After he has made mention of the Suretiship of Christ,
he instanceth in his intercession and continuing a Priest for ever, verse. 23,
24, 25. Showing, that because he is engaged as a Surety, therefore he
intercedes to save to the utmost.

That this may be yet more plain; consider, 1. That the Suretiship of Christ,
as it was acted in a free Covenant and transaction betwixt Jehovah and Christ,
does not only relate unto the justification of the Elect, but also to their
Salvation, Isa. 53.11, He shall see of the travel of his Soul, and shall be
satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; for he
shall bear their iniquities. Romans 5.9, 10, Much more then, being now justified
by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him. For if when we were
enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son: much more being
reconciled, we shall be shall be saved by his his life. And therefore as long
as the persons of any for whom he died, remain still unsaved, he is not
acquitted of this Suretiship and engagement, but after that he has paid a
price to justice for them, there remains an obligation upon him, to bring these
for whom he died to glory, Heb. 2.10, For it became him, for whom are all
things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make
the captain of their salvation perfect through sufferings. 2. Consider that the
being part of his Covenant of Suretiship to be performed, as long as the
persons of any of the Elect are yet unsaved to the utmost, the performance of
that which is behind of his engagements is ascribed to his intercession, which
he is now performing in heaven, and therefore he must intercede in Heaven, as
Surety of the better Testament, Heb. 7.22, to 25. with Romans 5.10. and Romans
8.34, Who is he that condemns? it is Christ that died, yea rather, that is
risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession
for us. 3. Consider, that unless he were a Surety in Heaven, and acted therein
that Covenant Relation by his intercession, all his other actings as Surety of
the Covenant would be to little purpose for our behoof: for it is this part of
his Suretiship that makes his satisfaction to the Law effectual for the good
of the Elect; this is it which puts life in the death of him who died in our
stead and room; and without this, the blood of the Surety had been shed in
vain. For this is the very application of it, and sprinkling the blood of the
Covenant upon us, Heb. 9.19, 20, 24, For when Moses had spoken every precept to
all the people according to the law, he took the blood of Calves and Goats,
with water and scarlet wool, and Hysop, and sprinkled both the book and all the
people, saying, this is the blood of the Teestament which God has enjoined
unto you. -- For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands,
which are the figures of the true: but into heaven it self, now to appear in
the presence of God for us, Heb. 7.22, 25. By so much was Jesus made Surety of
a better Testament. -- Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost
that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them.
1 John 2.1, 2, My little children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin
not: and if any man sin, we have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the
righteous; and he is the propitiation for our sins, 4. Consider, that as his
soul and his life was at the stake, and was pawned for that part of his
Suretiship that was to be performed on earth, to wit, the paying of a price to
Justice: so his honor lies yet at the stake and in pawn for that part of his
engagement which is to be performed in heaven by his intercession: so that as
it behoved him to have lien in prison for ever, and the soul to have been left
in the grave, unless he had paid his Debt, and made satisfaction to Justice,
his Soul being in our souls stead as a Surety, so his honor (I say) lies
still at the stake for all his peoples complete Salvation: insomuch that Heaven
cannot hold him if he bring not them there, he shall not have the glory of a
perfected Savior and Surety, if he perform not his engagement to save them to
the utmost; yea, he must quit heaven if he bring not his people thither, for
whom he undertook, See Joh. 6.57, As the living father has sent me, and I live
by the father: so he that eats me, even he shall live by me. Joh. 17.1, 4,
12, 24, Glorify thy son, that thy son also may glorify thee. -- I have
glorified thee on the earth: I have finished the work which thou gave me to
do. -- While I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name: those that
thou gave me, I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the son of
perdition, that the scripture might be fulfilled. Father, I will that they also
whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory
which thou have given me: for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the
world, Heb. 2.10, For it became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are
all things, in bringing many sons unto glory, to make the captain of their
salvation perfect through sufferings. He speaks for his brethren as Judah did
for little Benjamin, Genesis 43.9. 3. Christ is a Surety in our stead, and in our
behalf. 1. I say, in most things which Christ did as a Surety of the Covenant,
he did them in our stead and room; he did them as a person representing us; and
we did them in him by virtue of that communion that is betwixt the Surety and
the Debtor: when he died, he died in our stead, and we died in him; there we
paid the Debt: when he arose and ascended, he rose in our stead, and we rose
and ascended in him; there we had a discharge and liberation when he had it,
etc. Romans 6.6, 8, Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that
the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. --
Now if we be dead with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with him. 1
Cor. 15.22, For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.
Ephesians. 2.5, 6, Even when we were dead in sins, he has quickened us together with
Christ (by grace ye are saved); and has raised us up together, and made us sit
together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. 2. Yet there are some things which
Christ the Surety performed wholly for us indeed, and on our behalf; but he
cannot be said to perform them in our stead, or to act our part in them, that
is, to act these things as that which we should have done: such was his
incarnation and taking of our nature upon him, and the taking of our Law-place
upon him, which were acts of Christ the Surety of the Covenant, and unto which
he had voluntarily engaged himself by his Covenant of Suretiship with God, See
Mr. Tho. Goodwin, Christ set forth. Sect. 5. c. 4. page 149.
Gal. 4.4, But when the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son,
made of a woman, made under the law. Heb. 10.5, 7, Wherefore when he comes
into the world, he says, Sacrifice and offering thou would not, but a body
have thou prepared me: then said I, Lo, I come (in the volume of the book it is
written of me) to do thy will, O God. Yet he cannot be said properly to have
done these things in our stead, though he did them on our behalf, and wholly
for us; for these were the very foundation of all that he acted in our stead,
and opened the way to his acting as our Surety, in our stead; by these acts he
put himself in our stead, that he might act our part, being found in our
nature, state and condition, Romans 8.3, For what the law could not do, in that
it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of
sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh, Phil. 2.6, 7, Who being
in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God. But made
himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made
in the likeness of men. Such also is his intercession in heaven: for though he
intercede as a Surety in Heaven, and on our behalf; yet he does it not in our
stead: for it cannot be said that we intercede in him: for this is the
accomplishment of all the work, and so proper to himself only as Mediator,
being the Crown of all his works of Mediation.

4. Christ is a Surety on Gods part to man, and on man's part to God.

1. I say, Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant, is a Surety for God to man:
that is, he who made faith upon the Covenant on Gods behalf, who is engaged to
make good all the promises thereof to us: De Lushington comment. ad Heb. 7.22.
Grotius ad. Heb. 7.22.
and upon this head the Socinians and we differ not; for in this sense the
Apostle calls Jesus the Surety of a better Testament (though not only in this
sense as they affirm), Heb. 7.22. And in this sense Jesus may be called Surety
of the Covenant, for four reasons, or in four respects: 1. As he is a party
contracting on Gods behalf with his people, because Christ is he who makes the
Covenant and all the promises; he who contracteth a Covenant with us in his
fathers name. He is the Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3.1. who said to Moses, I
am the God of thy fathers, Act. 7.32, 38. 2. As he is undertaker and engager
for God, to make his promises good to us; because he undertaketh on Gods part,
that all his promises shall be made good and effectual to usward. Therefore we
find that these Scriptures of the old Testament, which promise the fulfilling
of the Covenant in the Elect, and the acting of it upon their hearts, the
promises of a new heart, and of forgiveness and perseverance, etc. Jer. 31.34.
and 32.39, 40. The making of these promises, and undertaking for Gods making
them good, is ascribed to Christ by the Apostle, Heb. 8.6, 8, 10, 11, 12, 3. As
he is performer of what God has promised: because Christ does not only
undertake for God, but he discharges his undertaking for him, by fulfilling
these promises; for Christ is he who performs and fulfilleth the promises of
God unto his people, even he who appeared to Moses in the Bush, and had an
active hand in the delivery of his Church out of Egypt, whereby he fulfilled
the promise made to Abram, Genesis 15.14. This was he that saw their affliction,
and came down to deliver, Act. 7.34. And was with them all the way in the
Wilderness, 1 Cor. 10.9. Exodus 23.21. This is he who is advanced above Moses,
as a more spiritual and effectual Minister and Priest, who acts the Covenant
on his peoples hearts, Heb. 8.6, 10. 4. As he is confirmer of the Covenant,
because he ratified it on Gods part: for in him all the promises thereof are
yea, and in him they are Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. For as they are made to him
eminently as the chief heir of the promises; and for him, as he by whose merit
the grace promised is given to us, and so also the promises are made firm and
stable to us in him and through him, who did ratify the Covenant, Gal. 3.15,
17, 19, Brethren, I speak after the manner of men: though it be but a man's
covenant, yet if it be confirmed, no man disannulleth, or adds thereto. And
this I say, that the covenant that was confirmed before of God in Christ, till
the seed should come to whom the promise was made. Heb. 9.16, 17, For where a
Testament is, there must also of necessity be the death of the Testator. For a
Testament is of force after men are dead: otherwise it is of no strength at
all, whilst the Testator lives. And who did make faith for confirming all
things whatsoever are promised in it, Joh. 5.24, Verily, verily I say unto you,
he that hears my word, and believes on him that sent me, has everlasting
life, and shall not come into condemnation, but is passed from death unto life.
Pareus ad locum. Diod. annot. ad Heb. 7.22.
And in this respect mainly some learned expositors understand, Heb. 7.22,
Christ to be called Surety of a better Testament, because he did confirm it.
Unto this part of Christ's Suretiship does Mr. Brinsley refer the assurance
given unto us by Christ's word, Joh. 5.24. by his works, Joh. 5.36. Mark 16.17,
20. by his blood, Heb. 9.12, 17. Zech. 9.11. and by his spirit, Romans 8.16. 1 John 5.8. Which you may read at more length in his treatise of the Mediator,
page 145, etc.

2. Cat. Racov. c. 8. p 183, 184. Socin. de servat. lib. 2. c. 8.

Jo. Crell. advers. Grot. p. 1. c. 5.

Ja. Arm. exam. Perkins. edit. Bertianae. p. 676.

Jo. Schlichting ad Heb. c. 7. v. 22.


Christ is Surety of the Covenant for man's part to God: this is denied by the
Socinians, who will have him Surety of the Covenant only in the sense before
mentioned: and upon the matter the same is denied by Arminians also. Let us
endeavor to clear and establish the truth.

We may sum up Christ's Suretiship for man to God in these three parts: The
first relates unto the violation of the Law, and broken Covenant of works. The
second unto the performance of the Condition of the new Covenant; yea, even of
the preceptive part of the Law and Covenant, in so far as it stands in force
toward believers. The third relates unto the persons of those for whom he
has undertaken what the Law did threaten, Cautions.
and what the Gospel does command. In all these three parts of his Suretiship,
1. We are still to distinguish his undertaking from his discharging of that
which he undertook: for in all thing appertaining to his Suretiship, he did
first undertake (as I have showed) by an eternal agreement with his father, and
afterward he did fulfill and discharge his undertaking. 2. We are to consider,
that though his undertaking in all these parts of his Suretiship for man, was
at once by one eternal act and Covenant of Suretiship with God; yet his
discharging of that undertaking, is brought about in different periods of time,
so as at one time he satisfies for the breach of the first Covenant: at another
time he fulfilleth the condition of the new Covenant in his people, and at
another time he fulfilleth what he undertook concerning their persons, to save
them completely, which may remain unperformed when the former two are
discharged. For it was not the intent of God, that by Christ's Suretiship the
sinner should be immediately delivered from the whole curse of the Law, and
invested in the whole blessing of the new Covenant. 3. There is an order of
Christ's discharging his entire Suretiship for the Elect: for Christ's
satisfaction to the Law goes before the new Covenant, and treating of new
conditions for the sinner: there can be no treating on new terms till the old
be satisfied; and again, both these go before the performance of some things
which Christ the Surety has undertaken concerning the persons of the Elect:
for a person loosed from the law, and married to another husband, may yet
remain without a performance of some things which Christ has undertaken for
him: whereof read, Romans 7.3, to 24. Heb. 2.14, 15. Gal. 4.4, 5, 6. and 3.21,
25. Ephesians. 1.13.

And, 1. Of Christ's Suretiship for man to God, as it relates to the violated
Covenant of works: this comprehends two things: 1. Christ's surrogation in our
place, whereby he put himself in our room, and took upon him our Law-place and
Condition, Gal. 4.4, He was made under the law; he put his Soul in our Souls
stead, so that he might be in that condition Legally, wherein we had put our
selves through our nonperformance of the Covenant of works, 2 Cor. 5.21, He
was made sin for us. He stood in the sinners Law-place: for having by his
Suretiship put his name in our bond, then he was in our stead as the Scripture
speaks of Sureties, Genesis 44.23. 2. This comprehends Christ's satisfaction, who
being substitute in our stead and place, did undergo the penalty and curse of
the violated Law, and so did perfectly satisfy the Justice of God for our
nonperformance of the Condition of the Covenant of works. In regard of this
satisfaction, it is, that the Scripture says, Isa. 53.6, The Lord laid upon
him the iniquities of us all: that is, not the evil and pollution of them (for
Christ was not intrinsecally and physically the sinner), but the guilt and
penalty belonging to them (for he was Legally the sinner); and God charged it
upon him as the Creditor charge a Debt upon the Surety, requiring a
satisfaction of him. The like equivalent expressions, we find, v. 7, 8, 10, 11,
12, He was oppressed, and he was afflicted; or as the words may be rendered, it
was exacted: and he answered: that is, God required satisfaction for our sins,
and his Son (as our Surety) answered for us, Lo, I come, Heb. 10.5, 7. Their
curse be upon me; let the law exact, and I will answer; S^b. lib^rtus ^o^tra
Socin. lib. 2. c. 7. Grot. de satis. c. 9.
let Justice smite, and I will bear the punishment for them: and unto this
satisfaction do these Scriptures relate, which so often mentions Christ's dying
for us, suffering for us, being made a curse for us, a ransom for us, a
Sacrifice and propitiation for our sins, etc. 1 Pet. 2.21. and 3.18. 2 Cor.
5.14, 15. Heb. 2.9. Romans 5.8. Mat. 20.28. Gal. 3.13. 1 John 2.2. Mr. Ruther^.
treatise of the Covenant, page 2. c. 3. Bri^s^. of the Mediator, page 72, etc.
Dr. Owen.
Now to die (...). for us, is to die in our stead, vice nostra: which is so
abundantly proved in the learned treatises of other men more worthy to hold
forth light in this point, that I Judge needless to insist upon it, but rather
do refer you to them. Only ere I leave this, let me leave with you these three
advertisements concerning Christ's satisfaction for our violation of the
Covenant of works.

1. Though our punishment and suffering should have been eternal, because we
could never out-satisfie; yet the sufferings of Christ, because of the dignity
of the person, God-man, were perfectly satisfactory in a short time.

2. Christ paid not the idem, but the tantundem; not the same that was due,
but the value: for he suffered not the same pain, numero in number, but specie
in kind.

3. Yet its one and the same satisfaction in the Laws sense, which Christ
paid, and which we owed, in respect that the Law does not require of the
Surety to pay the same sum in number, which the Debtor borrowed: it is
satisfaction, if the same in specie, in kind, or in value be paid.

2. Another part of Christ's Suretiship for man to God, relates to the
condition and commands of the new Covenant: for Christ is not only Surety for
satisfying the violated Law, and broken Covenant of works for us, that is, in
our stead; but he is also Surety for performing of the Condition and Commands
of the Gospel and new Covenant in us, that is, for our performing of them
through his grace working in us, (for the act is ours though we be acted by
grace) and for our obedience to the preceptive part of the Law, which is not
annulled, nor repealed, but stands yet in force toward believers.

1. I say, he is Surety to God for our performance of the condition and
commands of the Gospel or new Covenant: and this reaches unto all things
whatsoever, which are commanded in the Gospel as conditions of righteousness
and life; all which he undertaketh to work in us, and so far to enable us to
endeavor these things, that in the performance thereof we shall be accepted,
Phil. 2.13, For it is God which works in you, both to will and to do of his
good pleasure. Phil. 4.1^, I can do all things through Christ which
strengthens me. 2 Cor. 9.8, And God is able to make all grace abound toward
you, that ye always having all sufficiency in all things, may abound to every
good work. And this is his undertaking, for grace to be given unto us out of
the storehouse and treasury of his fullness, Joh. 1.16, And of his fullness have
all we received, and grace for grace. Col. 2.9, 10, For in him dwells all the
fullness of the Godhead bodily. And ye are complete in him, which is the head of
all principality and power.

More particularly: by this part of Christ's Suretiship for man to God, he is
engaged, and he is undertaker: 1. For our believing, that we shall come and
subject our consent unto the Gospel of Jesus Christ, Joh. 6.37, All that the
father gives me, shall come to me: and him that comes to me, I will in no
wise cast out. Joh. 12.32, And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw
all men unto me. 2 Cor. 9.13, Whiles by the experiment of this ministration,
they glorify God for your professed subjection unto the Gospel of Christ. 2.
For our obedience, that we shall bring forth the fruits of holiness and new
obedience, that we shall serve him from a principle of Love, who was made
Surety for us, Ezekiel. 36.27, And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you
to walk in my statutes: and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them. Heb. 8.6,
7, 10, 11. Joh. 17.6, Thine they were, and thou gave them me; and they have
kept thy word. 2 Cor. 5.14, 15, For the love of Christ constrains us, because
we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead. And that he died
for all, that they which live, should not henceforth live unto themselves, but
unto him which died for them, and rose again. 3. For our perseverance: Christ
as Surety stands engaged for the perseverance of the weak believer, that his
faith shall not fail, but that he shall endure unto the end, Luke 22.32, But I
have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. John 17.12, While I was with
them in the world, I kept them in thy name: those that thou gave me I have
kept, and none of them is lost.

2. Again, by this part of Christ's Suretiship, he is undertaker and engager, to
make all these things which are required of us, both possible and certain in
the performance. 1. To reveal and manifest the way of righteousness and life,
through the new Covenant, Joh. 17.6, I have manifested thy name unto the men,
which thou gave me out of the world. 2. To make the condition of the new
Covenant, possible and practicable, which considered with relation to our own
strength, are as impossible to man now, as the conditions of the first Covenant
are, Joh. 6.44, No man can come to me, except the father which has sent me,
draw him. 2 Cor. 3.5, Not that we are sufficient of our selves to think any
thing as of our selves: but our sufficiency is of God. Joh. 15.5, For without
me ye can do nothing. And this part of Christ's Suretiship does put his people
in such condition, by the power which they shall receive from the grace of
Christ, as Adam was in, by the power which he received from God by nature; and
this is done by healing our nature, and creating and infusing new habitual
grace, whereby he makes the conditions of the new Covenant practicable and
possible to man through the power of grace received from Christ; as it was
possible for Adam to have performed the conditions of the first Covenant, by
the power which he received by nature, Phil. 4.13, I can do all things through
Christ which strengthens me. But this is not all.

3. Christ as Surety for man to God, engages not only to make the conditions
of this Covenant possible (as the conditions of the first Covenant were to
Adam); but also to make them Sure; he undertaketh to ensure his peoples
performance of the things required of them by the Covenant of grace, whether
they be such things as are required of them by mere commands which hold forth
the Duties of the confederates; or if they be required of them by commands
which are also conditions of the Covenant, by the obedience or disobedience
whereof they must live or die; such as the command of believing, Joh. 3.36, He
that believes on the Son has everlasting life; and he that believes not the
Son, shall not see life: but the wrath of God abides on him. Act. 16.31, And
they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved, and thine
house. 1 John 3.23, And this is his commandment, that we should believe in the
name of his Son Jesus Christ, and love one another, as he gave us commandment.

And this which Christ engages that his people shall receive of him through
grace, is much more than Adam received by nature; for he had not his
performance of the conditions of that Covenant, and his standing ensured to
him: he had but a possibility to have performed conditions that were commanded
him, but no certainty. Now we know that things may be possible, both considered
in themselves, and considered with relation to the Agent; which notwithstanding
from some other cause and defect, may resolve in a non-futurition; yea, for all
that, it may be certain that they shall never be, and come to pass, as was
Adams standing and performing the conditions of the Covenant of works. But now
by Christ's Suretiship for his people, he is engaged for their standing, and for
their actual performance of the conditions of that Covenant of grace, they are
not only put into a possibility of standing, but they are put into such a
certainty by the Suretiship of Christ, that they are exempted from the
possibility of nonperformance of the conditions of this Covenant, Luke 22.32,
But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. Mat. 16.18, And upon this
rock will I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against
it. 1 Pet. 1.5, Who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation,
ready to be revealed in the last time. Jer. 32.39, 40, And I will give them one
heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, of
their children after them. And I will make an everlasting covenant with them,
that I will not turn away from them, to do them good: but I will put my fear in
their hearts, that they shall not depart from me.

3. By this part of Christ's Suretiship for man to God, and in order to the
making the conditions and commands of the new Covenant possible and certain in
the issue, he is engaged for giving habitual grace, and for giving actual
influences. 1. Habitual grace, Christ as Surety of the Covenant did undertake
to give to his people the immortal seed of God, to repair that defaced Image of
God in man, by a new creation of the habits of grace in him: he is engaged to
give a new stock of grace to man, who had once before banquered out; a stock
that shall thrive in his hand; and wherewith he shall never henceforth play the
bankrupt: this is the new heart, and the new spirit promised by Christ who made
the Covenant, and engaged to fulfill, and to act it upon the hearts of his
people, Ezekiel. 36.26, A new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will
(...) put within you: and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh,
and I will give you an heart of flesh. Jer. 31.33, But this shall be the
covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days, says the
Lord, I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts,
and I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Heb. 8.6, 10, 11, 12. 2.
Christ is engaged, and has undertaken for actual influences, Ezekiel. 36, 27, And
I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye
shall keep my judgments, and do them. Isa. 44.3, For I will pour water upon
them that are thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my spirit
upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring. Because God has
contrived the business so, that no created thing should act independently of
him, without the spirit, without influences; not Adam in his integrity, not the
Angels, not the holy humane nature of Christ, Isa. 42.1, 2, Behold my servant
whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delights: I have put my spirit upon
him, he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles. He shall not cry, nor lift
up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the street. And since habitual created
grace can neither preserve it self, nor act it self, nor increase it self
without influences, therefore Christ as Surety for man to God, did engage for
actual influences, whereby habitual grace might be acted, unto a performance
and fulfilling of these things which are conditions or commands in the Covenant
upon our part: and by this he stands engaged, 1. For actual bowing of our
wills, and determining our hearts to believe, and to believe to the end; to
draw forth these habits to act lively, sound faith, the first act whereof is a
performance of the condition of the new Covenant, Joh. 6.37, All that the
father gives me, shall come to me. Joh. 12.32, And I, if I be lifted up from
the earth, will draw all men unto me, 2. He stands engaged for the preservation
of these habits of grace, that howsoever they may be weakened, and it may be
also dimnished through our ill using of that stock, yet they shall never be
lost, neither shall the stock of habitual grace come to nothing, Luke 22.32,
But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. 1 John 3.9, Whosoever is
born of God, does not commit sin, for his seed remains in him: and he cannot
sin, because he is born of God. 3. He stands engaged for our using and
exercising habitual grace, after that he has freely given it, that he shall by
actual influences make us trade with those talents, and not suffer them to lie
by us, without making use of them. Ezekiel. 36.27, And I will put my spirit within
you, and cause you to walk in my statutes; and ye shall keep my Judgments, and
do them. Psalm. 119.32, 35, I will run the way of thy commandments, when thou
shall enlarge my heart. -- Make me to go in the path of thy commandments: for
therein do I delight.

4. Christ is engaged for the liveliness of our graces: that he shall not only
keep them from dying, but shall keep them in good condition, fresh and green,
Psalm. 1.3, And he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that
brings forth his fruit in his season: his leaf also shall not wither, and
whatsoever he does shall prosper, Joh. 4.19, Yet a little while, and the world
sees me no more: but ye see me: because I live, ye shall live also. Psalm.
92.12, 13, 14, The righteous shall flourish like the Palm Tree: he shall grow
like a Cedar in Lebanon. Those that be planted in the house of the Lord, shall
flourish in the courts of our God. They shall still bring forth fruit in old
age: they shall be fat and flourishing.

5. Christ is engaged for the increase and growth of these habits of grace, to
make our stock to grow among our hands, to make our faith, love, diligence in
duty; delight in God, knowledge of himself, etc. to grow, and our fruit to
abound and to grow in quantity and quality, in bigness and ripeness, more
fruit, and sweeter fruit, more savory to his taste, 2 Cor. 9.8, And God is able
to make all grace abound toward you, that ye always having all sufficiency in
all things, may abound to every good work. Joh. 15.4, 5, Abide in me, and I in
you: as the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine:
no more can ye, except ye abide in me. I am the vine, ye are the branches: he
that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit: for
without me ye can do nothing. 2 Thessalonians. 1.3, We are bound to thank God always
for you, brethren, as it is meet, because that your faith grows exceedingly,
and the charity of every one of you all toward each other abundantly.

6. Christ stands engaged for our up stirring; when we have given his work in
us a back-set, and brought grace to a low ebb: when we have contracted
laziness, and a numness of spirit upon our selves, so that we either drive
heavily, or cannot stir at all in his ways; he is engaged to oil our wheels,
that we may recover a sweet facility and easiness in his ways: and to blow upon
us, when we are calmed, and cannot fetch the wind to our selves, Song. 4.16,
Awake, O North wind, and come thou south, and blow upon my garden, that the
spices thereof may flow out: let my beloved come into his garden, and eat his
pleasant fruits. Song. 5.4, My beloved put in his hand by the hole of the door,
and my bowels were moved for him. Song. 6.12, Or ever I was aware, my soul made
me like the charrets of Aminidab. Isa. 64.5, Thou mettest him that rejoiceth
and works righteousness, those that remember thee in thy ways. Behold, thou
art wroth, for we have sinned: in those is continuance, and we shall be saved.
I say, that Christ stands engaged, not only for our performance of
Gospel-conditions and commands, but also for our obeying and performing the
preceptive part of the Law: for clearing of this, I shall lay down these five
assertions.

1. The Law, as it commands and directs obedience according to the will of
the Lawgiver, is not repealed, annulled, or abrogated by Christ and by the
Gospel: though the Law considered as a Covenant, holding forth obedience to the
commands thereof, as a possible way of Life, be annulled and abrogated: See
Romans 3.20, 23, 28, Therefore by the deeds of the Law there shall no flesh be
justified in his sight: for by the law is the knowledge of sin. -- For all have
sinned, and come short of the glory of God. -- Therefore we conclude, that a
man is justified by faith, without the deeds of the law. Romans 8.3, For what the
law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, etc.

2. The Law which first commanded perfect obedience as a possible way of life,
may be, and is continued for other uses and ends than for that: such as to
direct, command, prohibit, promise, threaten, and to prove the loyalty even of
Christ's Subjects, Romans 3.27, 31, Where is boasting then? it is excluded: by
what law? of works? nay: but by the law of faith. -- Do we then make void the
law through faith? God forbid: yea, we establish the law. Romans 7.7, 9, 12, Nay,
I had not known sin, but by the law: for I had not known lust, except the law
had said, Thou shall not covet. -- For I was alive without the law once: but
when the commandment came, sin revived, and I died. -- Wherefore the Law is
holy, and the commandment holy, and just, and good.

3. The Law as it is continued, and in force toward believers, is reduceable
to the new Covenant, and does more properly appertain to it, than to the
Covenant of works: For, 1. It is the law, as it is delivered up and put into the
hands of Christ to be managed and used by him, for the advantage of his
Subjects and Kingdom, by the new Covenant; and that is for other uses and ends
than those for which it was first given, Gal. 3.19, 21, 24, 25, Wherefore then
serves the law? it was added because of transgressions, till the (...) should
come, to whom the promise was made; and it was (...) by Angels, in the hand of
a Mediator. -- Is the law (...) against the promises of God? God forbid: for if
there h^^^een a law given, which could have given life, verily righteousness
should have been by the law. -- Wherefore the law was our Schoolmaster to
bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith. But after that faith
is come, we are no longer under a Schoolmaster. Romans 10.4, For Christ is the
end of the law for righteousness, to every one that believes. 2. It Is the Law
as its qualified by Christ, who gave out a new edition of the commands thereof
(without detracting from the old) as his Law in the new Covenant, whereby his
Subjects might know his will, which they must endeavor to obey, Joh. 13.34, A
new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another, as I have loved you,
that ye also love one another. Mat. 5.17, 21, 22, 27, 28, Think not that I am
come to destroy the law or the prophets: I am not come to destroy, but to
fulfill. -- Ye have heard, that it was said by them of old time, thou shall not
kill: and whosoever shall kill, shall be in danger of the Judgment. But I say
unto you, That whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in
danger of the Judgment: and whosoever shall say to his brother, Racha, shall be
in danger of the Counsel: but whosoever shall fay, Thou fool, shall be in
danger of Hellfire. -- Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time,
thou shall not commit adultery. But I say unto you, that whosoever looks on a
woman to lust after her, be has committed adultery with her already in his
heart, etc. And this new giving out of the commands and preceptive part of the
Law and Covenant of works, did neither derogate from the substance of the Law,
nor from the authority and binding force thereof, by virtue of the first
Covenant, to which it did appertain; but did rather super add a new and
persuasive obligation, 2 Cor. 5.14, 15, For the love of Christ constrains us,
because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead. And that he
died for all, that they which live, should not henceforth live unto themselves,
but unto him which died for them, and rose again. Romans 6.1, 2, What shall we
say then? shall we continue in sin, that grace may abound? God forbid: how
shall we that are dead to sin, live any longer therein?

4. Though the Law and preceptive part of the Covenant of works does appertain
to the new Covenant, yet are not the commands and conditions thereby required,
and the obedience given thereunto, conditions of the new Covenant, which
stands only of faith, Romans 4.5, 16, But to him that works not, but
believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for
righteousness. -- Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace, to the
end the promise might be sure to all the seed; not to that only which is of the
law, but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham, who is the father of us
all. Act. 16.31, And they said, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou
shall be saved, and thine house. For, 1. This were upon the matter to confound
the conditions of the two Covenants, which are stated as so
contra-distinguished in terms, that there is no mixture nor semblance of
mixture to be admitted, Romans 9.31, 32, But Israel which followed after the law
of righteousness, has not attained to the law of righteousness. Wherefore?
because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the works of the law:
for they stumbled at that stumbling stone. Romans 10.3, 4, 6, 8, For they being
ignorant of Gods righteousness, and going about to establish their own
righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God. For
Christ is the end of the law for righteousness, to every one that believes,
etc. 2. If this obedience to the preceptive part of the Law, which is yet of
force to believers, and required by the Gospel, were the condition of the new
Covenant, then perfect obedience to the Law should still be the condition of
the new Covenant, forasmuch as the Law does still command that to believers,
and it is their sin that they do not come up to the obedience thereof, Gal.
2.21, I do not frustrate the grace of God: for if righteousness came by the
law, then Christ is dead in vain. Romans 7, throughout.

5. Christ's undertaking to God for our subjection and obedience to the Law, is
not so to be understood, as if he had undertaken that the Law should have
perfect obedience from us, and in us, in this life: for if he had been Surety
for that, it should also have been performed. But by his Suretiship for our
obedience to the law, we mean, 1. That he has undertaken for our subjection to
it as a rule, unto which his people shall submit, and whereof they shall
accept, Luke 1.74, 75, That he would grant unto us, that we being delivered out
of the hands of our enemies, might serve him with out fear, in holiness and
righteousness, etc. Romans 7.12, Wherefore the law is holy, and the commandment
holy, and just, and good. Psalm. 119.97, O how love I thy law: it is my
meditation all the day. 2. For the universality of our obedience to it, that
our obedience shall be equable and uniform, and that there shall not one
command of it be slighted by his people, Ezekiel. 36.27, And I will put my spirit
within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my
judgments, and do them. Psalm. 119.6, 128, Then shall I not be ashamed: when I
have respect unto all thy commandments. -- Therefore I esteem all thy precepts
concerning all things to be right: and I hate every false way. 3. For the
sincerity of our obedience, that shall sincerely obey and fulfill the commands
of the Law, Romans 6.17, But God be thanked, that ye were the servants of sin:
but ye have obeyed from the heart that form of Doctrine which was delivered
you. 4. For the reality and seriousness in the obedience thereof, that we shall
labor and work as hard at obedience to the Law, as if we had not another
righteousness, nor possible way of life; and that our love to him shall put us
on to carry thus, Col. 1.29, Whereunto I also labor, striving according to his
working which works in me mightily. 5. For our deadness to the Law, and to
our own obeying the commands thereof, that when we work hardest, and sweat
most, that then we shall claim nothing upon that account, Gal. 2.21, I do not
frustrate the grace of God: for if righteousness come by the law, then Christ
is dead in vain. 6. Christ has undertaken that what satisfaction the Law
wants in us, it shall have in him, who is the end of the Law: that he shall
satisfy for our short coming, 1 Cor. 1.30, But of him are ye in Christ Jesus,
who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption, Romans 10.4, For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness, to
every one that believes. 7. Christ has undertaken that he shall in all these
performances make us so far to endeavor duty through his strength, and be
forth coming in obedience, that therein we shall be accepted, 2 Cor. 9.8, And
God is able to make all grace abound toward you, that ye always having all
sufficiency in all things, may abound to every good work. Joh. 15.5, I am the
vine, ye are the branches: he that abides in me, and I in him, the same
brings forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing.

Object. Since the Law and Covenant of works is alternative, and requires but
that a man should obey and perform the commands thereof, or else undergo the
punishment and curse threatened against the transgressors: how can it be
required of us to perform the obedience to the Law, since Christ our Surety
has satisfied the Law, and endured the curse and punishment thereof in our
stead? how can it stand with Justice to exact both? In this Objection the
Antinomian, the Arminian, and the, Socinan concur, though for different ends,
and upon different accounts. The Antinomian to establish Christ's dying in our
stead, so as he performed all active obedience to the Law that God can require
of us. The Arminian, to establish faith and conversion on man's part, as part of
satisfaction to offended Justice: and so to derogate from free grace, and
Christ's Surety-righteousness, and to axalt free will. The Socinian to impugn
Christ's dying in our stead, and satisfying offended Justice in our room.

In answer to this, we shall offer these considerations: 1. Christ did not
fulfill the preceptive part of the Law in our stead, Romans 3.31, Do we then make
void the law through faith? God forbid: yea, we establish the law. Ezekiel. 36.27,
And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and
ye snall keep my judgments, and do them. And then also did Christ die and
suffer in vain: for if we did perfectly fulfill the Law in Christ, then there is
no need nor use of his suffering for disobedience, Gal. 2.21, For if
righteousness come by the Law, then Christ is dead in vain. Then also Christ's
Surety-righteousness should be ours, though we should never believe: for what
need we believe, if he did it for us, and if we did it in him, which is also
contrary to the Scripture, Romans 4.5, But to him that works not, but believes
on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness.
Romans 10.9, 10, That if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and
shall believe in thine heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall
be saved. For with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the
mouth confession is made unto Salvation.

2. Consider the obedience required of us unto the preceptive part of the Law
(for whom Christ did bear the punishment thereof): and in several respects it
may appear to be consistent with Justice, that even they for whom Christ died,
should be bound to obey the Law. 1. The believers obe dience which is required
in his own person, is not that obedience which the Law required as a possible
way of life, I mean a perfect obedience of a righteous person who had never
sinned, but an obedience of sincerity that may be in a sinner. 2. Our obedience
is not for the same end that Christ's sufferings were (to wit, for a
satisfaction to offended Justice), for its no part of our ransom: but for
other ends; and so it is not inconsistent with Justice to demand satisfaction
of Christ for one use and end, and obedience of us for other uses and ends. 3.
Since the Law is not changed nor repealed, though our relation to it be
changed, it is just that we should obey Christ our head and husband, whose will
this Law is: Notwithstanding, that he has divorced us by his sufferings from
the Law, as a husband commanding obedience, as the marriage-condition of life.
4. The Lord may justly require obedience to his Law from them, even in their
own persons, for the time to come, for whose transgressions he has accepted of
a satisfaction in the person of another; especially when that obedience is
nothing that can lie in the balance, as the just alternative of the Law,
fornent the satisfaction given by Christ. 5. The Law and Justice may require
both satisfaction and obedience in different respects, or in regard of
different actions: for it is not the same thing which we obey, and for which
Christ makes satisfaction: for he satisfied for our disobedience, not for our
obedience; beside, Christ's satisfaction is for disobedience to the Covenant of
works: our obedience even to the Law, is the obedience to the Gospel Covenant,
to which the Law is reduced by Christ who has made it his Law in this
Covenant. 6. It cannot be supposed that Christ's sufferings for our disobedience
to the Law, should put us thereafter in another condition, in respect of
obedience to the Law, than Adam should have been in, if he had never sinned,
and if his life and happiness had not depended on his obedience; in both which
cases he had been bound to obey the Law and will of the Lawgiver.

The third part of Christ's Suretiship for man to God, relates to his
undertaking for the persons of the Elect, the former two parts being his
undertakings for what the Law did threaten, and what the Gospel and Law both do
command: for he is not only a Surety for Debt and for Duty, for penalty of the
Law, and for performance of the commands of the Law and Gospel, but also a
Surety for the persons of the Elect: a Surety by way of caution, who did give
bail for them all: and in relation to this part of his Suretiship, Christ is
Surety.

1. For the indemnity of all the Elect, that since the sather has given them
into his hands, he has engaged to lose none of them: he is acted a cautioner
to make a good account of all that company; that however he set them a warfare,
and although he lead them on, and engage them against strong adversaries, and
through manifold tentations, although he show his people hard things; yet he
shall bring them off safe, and bear them through, so that he may say he has
lost none of them, Joh. 17.12. But is a captain of salvation to them all, Heb.
2.10. Psalm. 66.12, Thou have caused men to ride over our heads: we went through
fire, and through water; but thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place. Such
a Surety was Judah for little Benjamin, Genesis 43.9.

2. He is Surety for the good behavior of all those whom he has reconciled
unto God: for having made our peace with God, he is Surety that we shall keep
the peace: that howsoever we may fail in many things, yet his people being once
reconciled to God, and pardoned their disloyalty, they shall never break forth
in open rebellion again: they shall never take up the arms again of enmity
against God, which once they laid down, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5, 6, For the weapons of
our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling down of
strong holds: casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it
self against the knowledge of God; and bringing into captivity every thought
into the obedience of Christ: and having in a readiness to avenge all
disobedience, when your obedience is fulfilled. Psalm. 45.5, Thine arrows are
sharp in the heart of the kings enemies, whereby the people fall under thee.
Christ is Surety for his peoples loyalty, and keeping their peace, treaties,
and Covenant with God inviolable, Isa. 54.9, 10.

3. Christ is Surety for the appearing of his people before God, that he shall
present them all at the day appointed, and not one of them shall be missing,
who shall not give his appearance at that day, Ephesians. 5.27, That he might present
it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot nor wrinkle, nor any such
thing: but that it should be holy, and without blemish. Col. 3.4, When Christ,
who is our life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory.

4. Christ is Surety for completing whatsoever concerns the Salvation of his
people, and their redemption from those evils which remain with them, after
that he has fulfilled and satisfied the Law for them, and has also procured
obedience to the Gospel in them, 1 Cor. 1.30, But of him are ye in Christ
Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption.

5. Because there are many things remaining with them, from which they need a
delivery, for completing the discharge of his undertakings for them, Romans
7.24, 25, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this
death? I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord: so then, with the mind I my
self serve the law of our God: but with the flesh, the law of sin, 1 Cor.
15.53, to 57.

6. We shall take a view of some things which do commend Christ's Suretiship,
that the excellency thereof, and the matchless love which shines forth in it,
may the more appear.

1. This commends Christ's Suretiship, that he rendered himself Surety, and
came under an act of cautionry for his people, before they needed a cautioner;
that upon the fore-knowledg of this, that it was to come to pass that man
should become a broken creature, and needing one to undertake for him, he by an
eternal transaction and agreement with his father, did so early provide this
remedy, before man was broken and stood in need of a Surety, Prove. 8.23, I was
set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was. 2 Timothy 1.9,
Who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our
works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ
Jesus before the world began.

2. This commends Christ's Suretiship, that he came under this relation so
freely, unrequested, and undesired, according to his own heart: he acted
himself cautioner for us, when there was none of the creatures once to hint
such a motion: that in the day when there was none found to help, nor so much
as to think of laying help on him, then he freely offered himself, and said, Lo
I come: take me Surety for these poor broken men. Heb. 10.7, Then said I, Lo, I
come (in the volume of the book it is written of me) to do thy will, O God.
Isa. 63.5, And I looked, and there was none to help: and I wondered that there
was none to uphold: therefore mine own arm brought salvation unto me: and my
fury it upheld me. Isa. 59.16, And he saw that there was no man, and wondered
that there was no intercessor: therefore his arm brought salvation unto him,
and his righteousness it sustained him.

3. The exceeding great reach and danger of his undertaking taking does commend
his Suretiship, that he put his name in such a bond as he knew well should
bring upon him the Debt of so many broken men, and should oblige him to make
satisfaction for the sins of all the Elect world, Isa. 53.5, 6, 11, 12, But he
was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. All
we like sheep have gone astray; we have turned every one to his own way, and
the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. -- By his knowledge shall my
righteous servant justify many: for he shall bear their iniquities. -- Because
he has poured out his soul unto death: and he was numbered with the
transgressors. That he did knowingly put his soul in their souls stead, that
Justice might smite him, and that the same eternal punishment of sin, for kind,
that was due to us, should be upon him, Col. 3.13, Christ has redeemed us from
the curse of the law, being made a curse for us: for it is written, Cursed is
every one that hangs on a tree. Zech. 13.7, Awake, O sword, against my
shepherd, and against the man that is my fellow, says the Lord of hosts. The
same sword of Divine Justice that should have smitten us, did smite him.

4. This commends Christ's Suretiship, that he engaged for a party which
deserved no pity, for man who had willingly forfeited a fair inheritance, when
it was possible for him, and in his power to have performed the commands and
conditions of life laid upon him; who would pity and undertake for such a
person, who being put into a fair and free inheritance, with power to perform
the conditions upon which he holds it, should notwithstanding forfeit his good
estate, and run himself under debt irrecoverably? yet in this condition Christ
pitied us, and undertook for us, Romans 5.6, 7, 8, For when we were yet without
strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly. For scarcely for a righteous
man will one die: yet peradventure for a good man some will even dare to die.
But God commended his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners Christ
died for us.

5. This commends Christ's Suretiship, that he engaged for the debt of a
people from whom he could expect no satisfaction nor relief of all the debt
which he paid for them, that so potent and responsal a party joined interests,
with such impotent and unresponsal, broken creatures: how wonderfully does this
commend his Suretiship, that he came under an act of cautionry for such as we
are, knowing us to be what we are, a people that shall never requite his
kindness? yea, doing all this for us the rather, that we shall be eternally in
his debt, and never able to recompense the satisfaction which he made for us,
Luke 17.10, So likewise ye, when ye shall have done all these things which are
commanded you, say, We are unprofitable servants; we have done that which was
our duty to do. 2 San. 7.18, Then went king David in, and sat before the Lord,
and he said, Who am I, O Lord God, and what is my house, that thou have brought
me hitherto, etc!

7. Let us consider wherein Christ's Suretiship differs from bonds and acts of
cautionry usual among men, whereby the excellency thereof may yet further
appear.

1. Mr. Tho. Good. Christ set forth, page 52.
Among men, usually, Sureties and Debrors enter into one and the same bond with
the Creditor (as Mr. Goodwin has well observed): but here Christ's single bond
lies for all, our bond being of no value, Psalm. 89.19, I have laid help upon
one that is mighty. Here Christ our Surety has changed bonds and obligations
with us, and puts out our name, and puts in his own name in the bloody
bond of the Law, that the debt, satisfaction and curse may be upon him alone,
Gal. 3.13, Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a
curse for us. Isa. 53.5, But he was wounded for our transgressions, he was
bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and
with his stripes we are healed. He said of his people, as Jacobs mother said to
him, Genesis 27.13, Upon me be thy curse, my son: only obey my voice.

2. Justin. instit. l. 3. tit. 21. de side jussor librium est creditori; a quo
velit solidum petere.
Among men, the Creditor has it in his choice which of the two he will seize
upon, the Surety or the Debtor, as he sees it best for his fatisfaction: but
it is not so here; for the Lord the Creditor has declared that he will take
him to Christ for all: and has determined that all the satisfaction shall be
made by him: and Christ the Surety is content that it shall be so, and that the
poor broken creature shall go free, and no execution of the bloody bond of the
Law shall pass against him, he being a bankrupt creature, who has obtained a
liberation, as where there is cessio bonorum. See Psalm. 89.19, I have laid
help upon one that is mighty. Heb. 10.7, Then said I, Lo, I come, (in the
volume of the book it is written of me) to do thy will, O God. Romans 8.1, There
is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. Isa. 53.6,
And the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. You see how the Lord does
astrict himself to the satisfaction of the Surety for all the debt.

3. Among men usually, the principal Debtor (as we call him) is first convened
for the Debt, before the Surety be pursued; and it may seem just it should be
so: there were some ancient Laws among the Romans to this effect. Justin. ib.
fide jussor non conveaitur aute quam reus, etc. Jo. Calv. Lexic. Jurid, p 361,
362. Flde jussor non potest convenirl ante principalem. Fide jussor sive
intercessor non est conveniendus nisi prius debitore principali convento.
But it is not so here; the curse of the Law, and the execution of the bond
thereof, does not first stick upon us, and then afterward upon Christ, to seek
from him what it cannot find in us: but the Lord the Creditor having astricted
himself to the cautioner (as I said before), the Law strikes first upon him,
and can never come to strike against the believer, unless it should not find
complete satisfaction in our Surety, which is impossible, Isa. 53.8, He was
taken from prison, and from judgment: and who shall declare his generation? for
he was cut off out of the land of the living: for the transgression of his
people was he stricken. Gal. 3.13, Christ has redeemed us from the curse of
the law, being made a curse for us: for it is written, cursed is every one that
hangs on a tree.

4. Among men, the Debtor is the principal Bondsman, Justin. ib. Fide jussoris
obligatio accessio est principalis obligationes quo circa etiam dicitur ad
promissor.
and his obligation and bond is the principal obligation, and the Sureties
obligation is but an accession to it, for strengthening the Security: but here
the Surety is the principal Debtor, and by his bond of Suretiship he has
changed the nature of the believers bond and obligation, and put his own name
in it, so as he is become the principal Debtor: his Suretiship has swallowed
up the Debtors obligation to satisfy Justice; the Surety being the head and
husband of the poor broken Debtor, Romans 7.4, Wherefore my brethren, ye also are
become dead to the law by the body of Christ, that ye should be married to
another, even to him who is raised from the dead, that we should bring forth
fruit unto God. And having changed the bond of satisfaction, and put out our
name, and put in his own, whereby he has tranferred the Debt upon himself, as
principal Debtor. Heb. 10.7, Then said I, Lo, I come: (in the volume of the
book it is written of me) to do thy will, O God.

5. Justin. ib. si is pro quo fide jussit solvendo non sit. -- Si quis ex side
jussoribus solvendo non sit li is contestatio tempora, etc.
Among men, there may be a misgiving of satisfaction to the Creditor, and of
relief to the Debtor, through the contingent, emergent, possible
unresponsalness of the Surety, as the doctors of the Law do sometimes put the
case, and provide against it: so it was in Judah his case, when he became
Surety for Benjamins return, and could not perform it, Genesis 43.9. But here it
is impossible that there can be a misgiving in the satisfaction of the
Creditor, or in the relief of the poor Debtor, the Surety being a potent
person, and exempted from all possibility of unresponsalness, and incapacity to
satisfy the Law, and to answer the charge thereof to the utmost. Being one who
is mighty and able to save to the utmost, Psalm. 89.19. Heb. 7.22, 25, By so
much was Jesus made Surety of a better Testament. Wherefore he is able to save
them to the uttermost, that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them. Col. 2.9, 10, For in him dwells all the fullness of the
Godhead bodily. And ye are complete in him, which is the head of all
principality and power.

6. Christus propriissime dicitur fide jussor in omnem causam, qui in id omne
quod exea obligatione, cui accedit, nasei potest, se obligat.
Among men, usually the Sureties bond and engagement is for Debt already
contracted at or before the time of the Sureties giving bond, and usually for
particular sums specified: but Christ became Surety for his peoples Debt before
ever it was contracted and drawn on by them; yea, he gave bond to satisfy the
Law for all the Debt that should be at any time of all their days contracted
and drawn on by them: so universal is his Suretiship, that it reaches all
possible, emergent transgressions of his people upon whatsoever occasion, Jer.
3.5, Will he reserve his anger for ever? will he keep it to the end? behold,
thou have spoken and done evil things as thou could. Jer. 31.37, Thus says
the Lord, if heaven above can be measured, and the foundations of the earth
searched out beneath, I will also cast off all the seed of Israel, for all that
they have done, says the Lord. Heb. 7.25, Wherefore he is able to save them to
the uttermost.

7. Among men, the Surety being by a Legal substitution, the Debtor, the broken
man; he pays the Debt, Jo. Calv. lex. jurid, p. 362. Fide jussores a pretis ita
disserint, quod hi sue and proprio morbe laborant, illi vero alieno tenentur,
etc.
but does not, yea, cannot take away the blot, evil, sin and unjustice of the
Debtors breach of Covenant, of his borrowing, and not paying again: but still
the Debtor, when the Law is satisfied, and the Debt paid, he remains the
unjust man, carrying the blot of a person who violated his Covenant, in
borrowing, and not paying again: but Christ is a Surety who does not only by
paying the Debt remove the punishment due unto the Debtor for his unjustice;
but he removes also the blot and the evil of sin, by infusing inherent
righteousness and holiness, by expelling of sin out of its subject, and
introducing the contrary form; to wit, the habit of grace, which no other
Surety but he can do, Tit. 2.14, Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem
us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of
good works. 1 Cor. 6.11, And such were some of you: but ye are washed, but ye
are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
spirit of our God. 1 Cor. 1.30, But of him are ye in Christ Jesus; who of God
is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.

8. Among men, Justin. ubi supra si quid autem fide jussor pro reo solverit
ejusrecuperandi causa, habet cum to mandati judicium.
the Surety has repetition of the Debt paid; and whatsoever satisfaction he
has made to the Creditor, he is allowed repetition of that from the Debtor;
but Jesus the Surety of this Covenant, has no repetition of the satisfaction
made by him for his people; nay, he never intended nor demanded any such
satisfaction to be made to him, by us, as he made to God for us: all the
satisfaction desired by him from us, is to accept of his free discharge, and to
thank him for it: Isa. 53.11, He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall
be satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justific many: for he
shall bear their iniquities. Who ever heard of such a Surety, who pays Debt,
and seeks no repetition of it, no restitution of his losses; but to thank him
for it, and not to frustrate the grace of God which he intends to make
conspicuous in his free gift of his own satisfaction? 2 Cor. 5.14, 15, For the
love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one died for all,
then were all dead. Add that he died for all, that they which live, should not
henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and arose
again. Gal. 2.20, 21, And the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the
faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me. I do not
frustrate the grace of God: for if righteousness come by the law, then Christ
is dead in vain.

9. Among men, usually the broken Debtors name stands still in the bond, even
after the responsal Surety has intervened: but here Jesus the Surety of the
new Covenant, when he put in his own name, he puts out our names, that the Law
might reach him, and might not at all reach us (except in fo far as it is
annexed to the new Covenant, and established in the hands of a Mediator, which
has no likeness to the old bloody bond): he wrote himself the sinner Legally,
and wrote us the righteous persons: 2 Cor. 5.21, For he has made him to be sin
for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.
Jer. 50.20, In those days, and in that time, says the Lord, the iniquity of
Israel shall be sought for, and there shall be none: and the sins of Judah, and
they shall not be found: for I will pardon them whom I reserve.

10. Among men, the Surety has a bond of relief from the Debtor, to keep him
harmless of all that may follow upon his obligation and undertaking as Surety;
but it is far otherwise in this Covenant: for here the Surety has no bond of
relief from the Debtor; but he has a bond of relief from the Creditor. Christ
had his fathers bond of relief to keep him harmless in that undertaking: he
had, as it were, a backbond, that he should not succumb in his undertaking, but
that when he went into the prison, he should come out again with honor and
victory, and so should be kept harmless from the hurt of the broken man's Debt.
Read it at length, Isa. 53.10, 11, 12, Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him,
he has put him to grief: when thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, he
shall see his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord
shall prosper in his hand. He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall be
satisfied: by his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many: for he
shall bear their iniquities. Therefore will I divide him a portion with the
great; and he shall divide the spoil with the strong: because he has poured
out his soul unto death: and he was numbered with the transgressors, and he bare
the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors. Isa. 42.1, 4,
Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delights: I have
put my spirit upon him, he shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles. -- He
shall not fail, nor be discouraged, till he have set judgment in the earth: and
the Isles shall wait for his law. Psalm. 16.10, For thou will not leave my soul
in hell; neither will thou suffer thine holy one to see corruption, Psalm. 110,
throughout.

11. Among men, usually the discharging and performance of the Sureties
undertaking (how willing soever), is a burden: Sureties after striking hands
with the Creditor, could willingly desire to be freed from the engagement,
Prove. 6.1, 2, My Son, if thou be Surety for thy friend, if thou have stricken
hands with a stranger, thou art snared with the words of thy mouth, thou art
taken with the words of thy mouth. But it is not so in Christ's undertaking, who
discharges his Suretiship as willingly and cheerfully as he undertook it, Heb.
10.7, Then said I, Lo, I come (in the volume of the book it is written of me)
to do thy will, O God. Luke 22.15, And he said unto them, With desire have I
desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer. Joh. 10.18, No man
takes it from me, but I lay it down of my self: I have power to lay it down,
and I have power to take it again: this commandment have I received of my
father. He did voluntanly fulfill his act of cautionry, and not through
constraint of Law and Justice; yea, it was not accounted grievous to him, but
was rather his satisfaction and delight thus to make the glory of his grace
conspicuous, Isa. 53.11, He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall be
satisfied, Psalm. 40.8, I delight to do thy will, O my God: yea, thy law is
within my heart.

In the last place, let us consider the advantages which believers have by
Christ's Suretiship: which are so many, that they cannot be reckoned: we shall
instance upon some few.

1. By Christ's Suretiship we have our exemption and liberation from the Law,
and the hand of Justice: our divorcement from the Law and Covenant of works as
a husband, in which respect it is now dead and extinct (though it live for
other ends and uses), Romans 7.4, Wherefore my brethren, ye also are become dead
to the law by the body of Christ, that ye should be married to another, even to
him who is raised from the dead; that we should bring forth fruit unto God. So
that now the believer cannot be pursued at Law: or if pursued, cannot be made
to undergo the sentence of the Law, Justice being satisfied by a Surety, Gal.
3.13, Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for
us. Heb. 2.14, 15, That through death he might destroy him that had the power
of death, that is, the devil: and deliver them, who through fear of death, were
all their lifetime subject to bondage. In a word, we owe to Christ's Suretiship
our delivery from the sentence, from the pursuit, from the Covenant, from the
terror, from the rigor, from the irritation of the Law; yea, from the perfect
obedience of the Law, it will now accept less; and from all obedience to it, as
a possible way of life, Romans 8.3, For what the law could not do, in that it was
weak through the flesh, God sending his own son, in the likeness of sinful
flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the flesh. Heb. 12.18, 22, 24, For ye are
not come unto the mount that might be touched, and that burned with fire: nor
unto blackness, and darkness, and tempest. -- But ye are come unto mount Sion,
and unto the city of the Living God, the heavenly Jerusalem. -- And to Jesus
the Mediator of the new covevant.

2. By his Suretiship we have this new and better Covenant-state, wherein we
stand: we owe our being in Christ, and in the Covenant of Grace, unto his
Suretiship, who did undertake to bring about that bond of engagement betwixt
God and us: for if Christ had not acted himself to do this, it had never been
done: Joh. 17.2, 6, As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should
give eternal life to as many as thou have given him. -- I have manifested thy
name unto the men which thou gave me out of the world: thine they were; and
thou gave them me; and they have kept thy word. Joh. 6.37, All that the
father gives me, shall come to me: and him that comes to me, I will in no
wise cast out.

3. By Christ's Suretiship we have our perseverance and stability in this
Covenant-state; I say, not our being only, but our continuing in this blessed
state, that we do not depart from God, and utterly forsake him, in a
divorcement, even when we go a whoring from him: and that he does not cast us
off, and discovenant us for all that we have done: this advantage we have by
Christ's Suretiship, that there can be no reversing, annulling, or repealing of
Gods Covenant with his people: and if it were not for that, a divorce should
follow upon the whorings and treacherous dealings of our hearts every day,
Psalm. 89.30, 33, 34, 35, If his children forsake my law, and walk not in my
judgments, etc. -- Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly take
from him: nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. My covenant will I not break, nor
alter the thing that is gone out of my lips. Once have I sworn by my holiness,
that I will not lie unto David. Jer. 3.1, 14, 22, They say, If a man put away
his wife, and she go from him, and become another man's, shall he return unto
her again? shall not that land be greatly polluted? but thou have played the
harlot with many lovers, yet return again to me, says the Lord. -- Turn, O
backsliding children, says the Lord, for I am married unto you: and I will
take you, one of a city, and two of a family, and I will bring you to Zion. --
Return ye backsliding children, and I will heal your backslidings: behold, we
come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God. Jer. 31.37, Thus says the Lord,
If heaven above can be measured, and the foundations of the earth searched out
beneath, I will also cast off all the seed of Israel, for all that they have
done, says the Lord. Jer. 32.39, 40, And I will give them one heart, and one
way, that they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and of their
children after them. And I will make an everlasting covenant with them, that I
will not turn away from them, to do them good: but I will put my fear in their
hearts, that they shall not depart from me.

4. We owe to Christ's Suretiship very much upon the head of the conditions of
the new Covenant; as namely, 1. The possibility of Gospel-conditions and
commands, that they are not as unprofitable to us, as the keeping of the whole
Law, Deuteronomy. 30.11, 14, For this commandment which I command thee this day, it is
not hidden from thee, neither is it far off. But the word is very nigh unto
thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou may do it. Romans 10.6, 8, But
the righteousness which is of faith, speaks on this wise: say not in thine
heart, who shall ascend into heaven? that is to bring Christ down from above.
-- But what says it? the word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy
heart, that is, the word of faith which we preach. 2. The certainty of a
performance of these conditions; that believers have any ground to expect that
there shall not be a misgiving in them, as was in the (...) ands of the first
Covenant. Joh. 6.37, All that the father goveth me shall come to me: and him
that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. Ezekiel. 36.27, And I will put my
spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and ye shall keep my
judgments and do them. 3. The sweet facility and easiness which is found in all
Gospel commands and obedience, when endeavored in the strength of Christ's
grace. Mat. 11.30, For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light. Phil. 4.13, I
can do all things through Christ which strengthens me. 1 John 5.3; And his
commandments are not grievous. This is the sweet fruit of Christ's Suretiship,
who did undertake to work all these things in us, and to give his spirit and
influences toward the effecting of these things.

5. By Christ's Suretiship we have our holdness in all distresses, to lay our
weight upon him, Isa. 38.14, Like a crane or swallow, so did I chatter; I did
mourn as a dove: mine eyes fail with looking upward: O Lord, I am oppressed,
undertake for me. Whenever any duty or tentation is above our strength, when
any difficulty prevails against us, then to come to Christ, as unto one who
is engaged with us and for us, Isa. 45.24, Surely, shall one say, in the Lord
have I righteousness and strength: even to him shall men come, and all that are
incensed against him shall be ashamed. 2 Cor. 3.5, Not that we are sufficient
of our selves to think any thing as of our selves: but our sufficiency is of
God. Psalm. 37.5, Commit thy way unto the Lord: trust also in him, and he shall
bring it to pass. When the Law comes with any hard commandment, then to offer
to God Christ the end of the law, Romans 10.4. Heb. 12.24.

6. We owe to Christ's Suretiship many things upon the head of tentations; as
namely, 1. Our being prevented, that many a tentation comes not to our door,
before which we should prove weak: that we enter not into all tentations fit^^^
for our humors, Math. 26.41, Watch and pray, that ye enter not into tempeation:
the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak. 2. Our standing it out,
when tentation comes, that it does not carry us quite away before it, with a
full consent, Luke 22.32, But I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not.
3. Our escaping and delivery from tentations, 1 Cor. 10.13, There has no
temptation taken you, but such as is common to man: but God is faithful, that
will not suffer you to be tempted above that you are able: but will with the
temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it. All these
things we have by Christ's Suretiship, and undertaking for us, Joh. 17.12, While
I was with them in the world, I kept them in thy name: those that thou gave
me I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the son of perdition, that the
scripture might be fulfilled. Rev. 3.10, Because thou have kept the word of my
patience, I also will keep thee from the hour of temptation, which shall come
upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon the earth.

Use 1. Behold, we bring you glad tidings of great joy, Luke 2.10. Good news to
broken sinners, who have made themselves irresponsal, who cannot fulfill the
Covenant of works, who cannot answer the charge of the Law themselves: behold,
there is a better Covenant which has a cautioner in it, who has stricken
hands with God, who has undertaken the Debt, and has discharged it, Isa.
53.6, And the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. Col. 2.14, Blotting
out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to
us: and took it out of the way, nayling it to his cross. Here is, in one word,
manifold grounds of comfort to believers, and of encouragement to believe in
Christ, to come and thank him for his undertaking, and to say, Amen to that
which he did without our request: here is one ground to answer many objections
and doubtings, if you be by nature under a Covenant which has no cautioner,
Christ does tender a Covenant which has a cautioner in it, Heb. 7.22, By so
much was Jesus made Surety of a better Testament, Heb. 8.6, But now has he
obtained a more excellent ministry, by how much also he is the Mediator of a
better covenant, which was established upon better promises. If the conditions
of that be hard, the conditions of this are easy, Heb. 12.20, For they could
not endure that which was commanded. Romans 10.6, 8. But the righteousness which
is of faith speaks on this wise. -- That is the word of faith which we
preach: if thou shall believe with thine heart, thou shall be saved. If you
stand alone in that Covenant, you do not so here, Heb. 2.13, Behold, I and the
children which God has given me. Isa. 59.21, As for me, this is my covenant
with them, says the Lord, My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I
have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth
of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says the Lord, from
henceforth, and for ever. If the charge of the Law be hard, such as you cannot
satisfy, you have a Surety who has both undertaken and made sufficient
satisfaction to the Law, Isa. 53.8, He was taken from prison, and from
judgment: and who shall declare his generation? for he was cut off out of the
land of the living, for the transgression of my people was he stricken. Dan.
9.26, And after threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be cut off, but not for
himself: and the people of the prince that shall come, etc. If you be
unresponsal creatures, who have not only broken Covenant, but disabled your
selves to perform any thing that the Law, even the new Law does require of you,
your Surety is a responsal person, one that is mighty, Psalm. 89.19, Then thou
spakest in vision to thy holy one, and said, I have laid help upon one that
is mighty: I have exalted one chosen out of the people. Heb. 7.25, Wherefore he
is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him.

Use 2. Here is a matter of expostulation with believers, and with unbelievers,
and that upon diverse grounds: 1. Why do any of you think or say, that the
Gospel-conditions and commands are hard and heavy? that they are unprofitable
or impossible? Romans 10.6, 7, 8, But the righteousness which is of faith,
speaks on this wise: say not in thine heart, who shall ascend into heaven?
that is to bring Christ down from above. Or who shall descend into the deep?
that is, to bring up Christ again from the dead. But what says it? the word is
nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that is the word of faith which
we preach. Is there any cause to think so of a Covenant that has a Surety in
it? nay, it is groundless to think so, Deuteronomy. 30.11, 14, For this commandment
which I command thee this day, it is not hidden from thee, neither is it far
off. -- But the word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart,
that thou mayost do it, 1 John 5.3, And his commandments are not grievous. Mat.
11.30, For my yoke is easy, and my burden is light. 2. Why should broken men,
and diver Debtors think to pay this Debt, or to perform their duty, without the
help of their cautioner? do you not often attempt this? to make amends to God
for your faults, and to be more forthcoming in your performances, even you
alone, without Christ your Surety? Joh. 15.4, 5, Abide in me, and I in you: as
the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the vine: no more
can ye, except ye abide in me. I am the vine, ye are the branches: he that
abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit: for without me
ye can do nothing. 2 Cor. 3.5, Not that we are sufficient of our selves, to
think any thing as of our selves; but our sufficiency is of God, Romans 10.3. and
9.31. But these did better, who would do nothing without their Surety, Isa.
38.14, Mine eyes fail with looking upward: O Lord, I am oppressed, undertake
for me. Psalm. 110.32, 122, I will run the way of thy commandments, when thou
shall enlarge mine heart. Be surety for thy servant for good: let not the proud
oppress me. Phil. 4.13, I can do all things through Christ which strengthens
me. 3. Why do you question and suspect the Covenant of God, and the grounds of
faith and assurance granted therein? is there not a Surety in the Covenant,
which shall make it stand fast, and in whom it shall stand fast with you? so
that there is no ground left for doubting and fears, that it may be shaken,
Psalm. 89.28, 35, My mercy will I keep for him for evermore: and my covenant
shall stand fast with him. Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not
lie unto David. Heb. 6.17, 18, Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto
the heirs of promise, the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath:
that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we
might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the
hope set before us. 4. Why do you lean upon any thing, and seek relief from
that which God has not made the Surety of the Covenant? why do you take
caution from your own hearts for any thing commanded in the Covenant? can your
resolutions be caution and Surety to God for you? can your stock of gifts or
grace be Surety for your performance of any thing commanded, or set as a
condition in the Gospel? Nay, sure they cannot, 1 Cor. 1.13, as the Apostle
says, These were not crucified for you, these never became Surety to God for
you: and if so, wherefore do you trust in them, and lean upon them?

Use 3. For trial, whether Christ has undertaken, and come under an act of
Suretiship for you. This being among Gods eternal secrets and immutable
counsels, it is to be found out by the effects thereof, whereby God has showed
to the heirs of the promise, the immutability of his counsel, Heb. 6.17. Then,
1. If you be in the Covenant of grace, or if you be reached by any of these
qualifications by which he describes those persons who are comprehended in his
Testament, then has Christ undertaken for you: for he is Surety of the new
Covenant, and better Testament, Heb. 7.22. and 8.6. And consequently has
undertaken for all those who are comprehended in it, Isa. 56.6, Also the sons
of the stranger that join themselves to the Lord, to serve him, and to love the
name of the Lord, to be his servants, every one that keeps the sabbath from
polluting it, and takes hold of my covenant. Joh. 13.8, Jesus answered him, If
I wash thee not, thou have no part with me, Joh. 15.2, 15, 16, And every branch
that bears fruit, he purges it, that it may bring forth more fruit. --
Henceforth I call you not servants; for the servant knows not what his Lord
does: but I have called you friends; for all things that I have heard of my
father, I have made known unto you. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen
you, and ordained you, that you should go and bring forth fruit, and that your
fruit should remain: that whatsoever ye shall ask of the father in my name, he
may give it you, Joh. 17.6, 7, 8, 2. If he has acted the Covenant upon your
hearts, according as it is commanded in the Gospel, and according as its
foretold, that he will fulfill it effectually in his people, then has he
undertaken for you, and hereby you may know it for a certainty: Jer. 31.33, I
will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts: and I will
be their God, and they shall be my people. Ezekiel. 11.19, And I will give them
one heart, and I will put a new spirit within you: and I will take the stony
heart out of their flesh, and will give them an heart of flesh. Ezekiel. 36.26, A
new heart also will I give you, and a new spirit will I put within you: and I
will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an heart
of flesh: Joh. 6.37, All that the father gives me, shall come to me: and him
that comes to me, I will no wise cast out. 3. If Christ has taken your name
out of the Law-writ and curse, and has put your name in the Gospel-writ, and
written you blessed in that little book, or pronounced you such by any thing
contained in it, then has he undertaken for you: Romans 4.7, 8, Saying, Blessed
are they whose iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is
the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin. Gal. 3.9, 13, 29, So then, they
which be of faith, are blessed with faithful Abraham. Christ has redeemed us
from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us: and if ye be Christ's,
then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise. 4. If you can go
out of your selves, and find in your heart to engage him for you, and to lay
the weight of your eternal interests upon him, your righteousness and
salvation, and of all things commanded in the Gospel, in order to these, then
has he undertaken for you; for he does not give such a heart to any, but to
them for whom he came under an act of Suretiship: Phil. 3.3, For we are the
circumcision, which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and
have no confidence in the flesh. Isa. 38.14, O Lord, I am oppressed, undertake
for me. Psalm. 119.32, 35, 122, I will run the way of thy commandments, when
thou shall enlarge my heart. Make me to go in the path of thy commandments: for
there in do I delight: be surety for thy servant for good.

Use 4. The Doctrine of Christ's Suretiship does confirm many articles of our
faith.

As, 1. The particularity and freeness of election: for if Christ had the Elect
given to him by a Covenant, and did from eternity undertake for them, sure he
knew for whom he did undertake; he knew their number, and names, how many was
in that company, and who they were, Joh. 17.6, 12, I have manifested thy name
unto the men which thou gave me out of the world -- Those that thou gave
me, I have kept, and none of them is lost. 2 Timothy 2.19, Nevertheless, the
foundation of God stands sure, having this seal, The Lord knows them that
are his. And if the matter of our Salvation stand upon Gods giving to Christ,
and his undertaking, then sure there were none given by the father to the Son
from eternity, upon respect of faith or holiness: for that should destroy
Christ's Suretiship and undertaking, and lay the weight of that which is
principal in the issue upon the creatures will, that should make the creature a
Surety for himself, Romans 9.11, 16, For the children being yet not born, neither
having done any good or evil, that the purpose of God according to election
might stand, not of works, but of him that calls, etc. -- So then, it is not
of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy.

2. Christ's Suretiship is a confirmation of the dominion and Sovereignty of his
grace, and of the reality, efficacy, and irresistableness of the working of his
spirit, and the physical influences thereof; for if Christ had not the power
and dominion of our wills, how could he undertake for us? and if Salvation were
not taken off the slippery yea and nay of free will; how could our Lord be
Surety for his people? were it possible that he should undertake, and discharge
his undertaking for those, over whose hearts and wills he has not an absolute
power and dominion? Joh. 6.37, All that the father gives me, shall come to me:
and him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out. Jer. 30.21, And their
nobles shall be of themselves, and their governor shall proceed from the midst
of them: and I will cause him to draw near, and he shall approach unto me: for
who is this that engaged his heart to approach unto me, says the Lord? Ezekiel.
36.27, And I will put my spirit within you, and cause you to walk in my
statutes, and ye shall keep my judgments, and do them.

3. Christ's Suretiship is a confirmation of the perseverance of the saints, and
of the certainty of the the Salvation of all the Elect: for if their
perseverance and believing to the end be undertaken for by him, how can it be
uncertain? if our heaven and happiness be in a surer hand than our own, even in
the keeping of Christ, how can it be but well kept? 1 Pet. 1.4, 5, ^o an
inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in
heaven for you, who are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation,
ready to be revealed in the last time. Jer. 32.39, 40, And I will give them one
heart, and one way, that they may fear me for ever, for the good of them, and
of their children after them. And I will make an everlasting covenant with
them, that I will not turn away from them, to do them good: but I will put my
fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. Luke 22, 32, But I
have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. It is the Suretiship of Christ
which holds the Covenant fast with us, and makes firm our Covenant-state, that
upon no breaches on our part it can be disannulled, Psalm. 89.30, 34, 35, If his
children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments: my covenant will I not
break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips: Once have I sworn by my
holiness, that I will not lie unto David. Jer. 31.37, Thus says the Lord, if
heaven above can be measured, and the foundations of the earth searched out
beneath, I will also cast off all the seed of Israel, for all that they have
done, says the Lord.

Use 5. The Doctrine of Christ, Suretiship serves to answer all tentations,
discouragements, and doubtings that arise in the hearts of believers,
concerning their Covenant-interests. If there be any doubt with you, about the
performance of the precious promises, Christ's Suretiship answers it, and
assures that there shall be a performance of all these things which are spoken
by the Lord, Luke 1.45. 2 Cor. 1.20, For all the promises of God in him are,
yea, and in him, Amen, unto the glory of God by us. If there be any thing too
hard for you among all the commands and conditions of the new Covenant, his
Suretiship answers that, Romans 10.6, 7, 8. But the righteousness which is of
faith, speaks on this wise: say not in thine heart, who shall ascend into
Heaven? that is to bring Christ down from above. Or who shall descend into the
deep? that is, to bring up Christ again from the dead. But what says it? the
word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that is the word of
faith which we preach. Phil. 4.13, I can do all things through Christ which
strengthens me. If your standing be doubtful since Adam and the Angels have
fallen, Christ's Suretiship answers, that he was never an undertaker for them;
but he is engaged for every believers standing, Joh. 17.12, Those that thou
gave me, I have kept: and none of them is lost, but the son of perdition.
Luke 22.32, But I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not. Heb. 7.22, By
so much was Jesus made a surety of a better Testament. If you fear your our own
frailty and sinfulness, lest it should make void the Covenant with you, his
Suretiship answers that, it must stand with him, and if with him, then with you
also, Psalm. 89.30, 33, 35, If his children forsake my law, and walk not in my
judgments. -- Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly take from
him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. Once have I sworn by my holiness, that
I will not lie unto David. Jer. 31.37, Thus says the Lord, If Heaven above can
be measured, and the foundations of the earth searched out beneath, I will also
cast off the seed of Israel, for all that they have done, says the Lord. If
you fear your own backsliding, some decay and withering of grace in you; his
Suretiship answers that: for he is engaged for influences to you, Isa. 44.3, 4,
For I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry grouud:
I will pour my spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring: and
they shall spring up as among the grass, as willows by the watercourse. Isa.
27.3, I the Lord do keep it; I will water it every moment: lest any hurt it, I
will keep it night and day. If your strength fail and decay, his Suretiship
shall renew strength unto you, Isa, 40.31, But they that wait upon the Lord,
shall renew their strength: they shall mount up with wings as eagles: they
shall run, and not be weary; and they shall walk, and not faint. If your legs
fail, and your warmness decay, the undertakers arms and bosom shall supply
that, Isa. 40.11, 29, He shall feed his flock like a shepherd: he shall gather
the lambs with his arm, and carry them in his bosom, and shall gently lead
those that are with young. He gives power to the faint: and to them that have
no might, he increases strength. Deuteronomy. 33.27, The eternal God is thy refuge,
and underneath are the everlastings arms. If you want a ransom to present to
offended Justice, if you be anxious about a satisfaction to God at any time,
Christ's Suretiship answers that; for thereby a satisfaction was found, and is
performed, Job 33.24, Then he is gracious unto him, and says, Deliver him from
going down to the pit, I have found a ransom. 1 John 2.2, And he is the
propitiation for our sins. If you want comfort or assurance, his Suretiship is
the ground of that, you need not want it, but through your own default, Heb.
6.17, 18, Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise
the immutability of his counsel, confirmed it by an oath: that by two immutable
things, in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong
consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us.

Use 6. Believers, for whom Christ has become Surety, let me exhort you, 1. To
admire the love which made Christ undertake for you, and come under an act of
cautionry for you: in every piece of his Suretiship you may clearly read that
which was read upon a lighter occasion, Joh. 11.36, Behold how he loved him.
Read a demonstration of his love in every thing which he acted as your Surety,
in every state wherein he carried your condition, and in every act wherein he
acted your part; in his humbling himself, in his sufferings, in his actings for
you and in you. Gal. 2.20, I am crucified with Christ: nevertheless I live, yet
not I, but Christ lives in me: and the life which I now live in the flesh, I
live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me.
Gal. 4.4, 5, But when the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son,
made of a woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the law,
that we might receive the adoption of sons. Its strange that you who seek for
demonstrations and proofs of his love, should slight so great a proof of it,
and that you will not read it, where he has most legibly written it, Joh.
15.13, Greater love has no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his
friend. Consider more of the person who was made Surety, and the parties for
whom he became Surety; and of the motive and principle that acted him in this
undertaking, and of the special respect which he carried toward each of his
people in this, and the sweet spirit which waited on his discharging of so
great undertakings, that your hearts may be raised to admiration: consider the
extent of his Suretiship, how it reaches unto the whole Covenant, and to every
condition and command in it; to every promise in it: take it in the largest
sense; to fulfill all the promises to us, to pay all our Debt, and to perform
all our Duty, to work all our work, and to undergo all our punishment.

2. Consider how you are in Christ's Debt, and for what, because of his
Suretiship: Believers, you are in Christ's Debt beyond all reckening that can be
made of it. 1. You are infinitely in his Debt, you shall not be able while you
live in this world once to reckon your obligations, it shall be work throughout
eternity, to cast up the sum of this Debt of Grace, Psalm. 40.5. Many, O Lord my
God, are thy wonderful works which thou have done, and thy thoughts which are
to usward: they cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee: if I would declare
and speak of them, they are more than can be numbered. 2 Samuel 7.18, to the end.
Ephesians. 3.18, 19, That ye may be able to comprehend with all saints, what is the
breadth, and length, and depth, and height: and to know the love of Christ
which passes knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fullness of God.
Rev. 7.10, Salvation to our God, which sits upon the throne, and unto the
lamb. 2. You are eternally in his Debt: you shall never be able to requite him:
nay, though it be your duty to study thankfulness, yet it would not become you
once to think of recompencing him, Psalm. 116.12, What shall I render unto the
Lord for all his benefits toward me! Rev. 5.9, 12, And they sang a new song,
saying, Thou art worthy to take the book, and to open the seals thereof: for
thou wast slain, and have redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred,
and tongue, and people, and nation. -- Saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the
lamb that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength,
and honor, and glory, and blessing. You shall through all eternity remain his
Debtors, for his undertaking and engaging for you, for his paying that which he
undertook, and for his discharging of the Debt to you; yea, and for reporting
his fathers discharge of it: all which come to us by Christ's Suretiship.

1. You are in Christ's Debt for his undertaking that, unrequested, when there
was none to solicit him, and when there was no necessity of nature upon him
to answer for our Debt, that then he did consent and agree to put his name in
our bond, and to subscribe a satisfaction to the violated Law, Gal. 4.4, 5, But
when the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son made of a woman,
made under the law, to redeem them that were under the law, that we might
receive the adoption of sons. Heb. 10.5, 7, Wherefore when he comes into the
world, he says, Sacrifice and offering thou would not, but a body have thou
prepared me: then said I, Lo, I come, (in the volume of the book it is written
of me) to do thy will, O God. 2. You are in his Debt for paying so great a sum
for you, so great a ransom, as you can neither count the Debt which was paid,
nor the price which was told down in satisfaction of the penalty which we had
incurred, Psalm. 40.12, For innumerable evils has compassed me about: mine
iniquities have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to look up: they are
more then the hairs of my head: therefore my heart fails me. Luke 7.47,
Wherefore I say unto thee, Her sins which are many, are forgiven, for she loved
much: but to whom little is forgiven, the same loves little. 1 Pet. 1.18, 19,
Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as
silver and gold, but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without
blemish, and without spot. Isa. 53.5, But he was wounded for our
transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities: the chastisement of our
peace was upon him, and with his stripes we are healed. 3. You are in his Debt
for the fair acquittance and discharge which he has obtained and received for
you, when he was justified in the spirit, 1 Timothy 3.16. Romans 4.25. And for his
reporting of that unto you, Luke 7.48, And he said unto her, Thy sins are
forgiven. And giving you an extract of it in your bosom to bear about with
you, and helping you to read it, Ephesians. 1.13, In whom also after that ye
believed, ye were sealed with that holy spirit of promise. Isa. 50.8, He is
near that justifies me: who will contend with me? let us stand together: who
is mine adversary? let him come near to me. Romans 8.33, 34, Who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods elect? it is God that justifies: who is he that
condemns? it is Christ that died, yea, rather that is risen again, who is
even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us. 4. You are
in his Debt for all that he has wrought in you, from the time that first he
bowed your will to believe, unto this day; for every piece of your obedience,
for all you fruit, for every duty performed by you, for all the influences of
his spirit upon you, etc. you owed all these to Christ's Suretiship, Phil. 2.13,
For it is God which works in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure.
Romans 9.16, So then, it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but
of God that shows mercy. Hos. 14.8, I am like a green fir tree, from me is
thy fruit found. Phil. 1.11, Being filled with the fruits of righteousness,
which are by Christ Jesus unto the glory and praise of God. Joh. 15.4, 5, Abide
in me, and I in you: as the branch cannot bear fruit of it self, except it
abide in the vine, no more can ye, except ye abide in me. I am the vine, ye are
the branches: he that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth much
fruit: for without me ye can do nothing. 1 Cor. 15.10, But by the grace of God,
I am what I am; and his grace which was bestowed upon me, was not in vain; but
I labored more abundantly then they all: yet not I, but the grace of God which
was with me. Jer. 30.21, And I will cause him to draw near, and he shall
approach unto me: for who is this, that engaged his heart to approach unto me,
says the Lord?

3. Believers learn to deal with God in all things pertaining to his Covenant,
as having a cautioner, whether you be under any doubtsulness about the
promises, or in any difficulty and perplexity about the commands and duties of
the Covenant. Let your dealing in these things declare that there is a Surety:
and this does call for, 1. More confidence and boldness, 1. In your dealings
with God, and applications to him; you need not flee from his face and
presence, as from a hard master, since there is a Surety in the Covenant, and
he is content to take of his hand, what you cannot afford: when you are ashamed
to be seen in his presence, and cannot be seen where God is, do but present
Christ in your place and room, present a Surety, and he is satisfied, Heb.
9.24, For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are
the figures of the true: but into heaven it self, now to appear in the presence
of God for us. Present him to God, and come to God through him, and command
him, in a manner ask and have all your will, Isa. 45.11, Thus says the Lord,
the holy one of Israel, and his maker, Ask me of things to come, concerning my
sons, and concerning the work of my hands command ye me. 2. In your dealings
with Christ, come unto him as unto a person already engaged for you, as unto a
Surety who has already come under an act of cautionry for his people; and
consequently as unto one whose honor lies at the stake, for a performance of
all things whatsoever are contained in the Covenant; and do not come unto him,
and make use of him with doubtsulness, whether he will do for you, and work in
you these things for which he stands already engaged by his Suretiship, Heb.
10.19, 22, Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest by
the blood of Jesus: Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of
faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies
washed with pure water. Heb. 4.14, 16, Seeing then that we have a great
High Priest, that is passed into the heavens, let us therefore come boldly unto
the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time
of need. 3. In your dealings with your duty, and with the Law which commands
it, you are not to flee the command as the divour Debtor flees the face of his
Creditor, as these which are not Law-biding; but you are now through the
Suretiship of Christ, to welcome every command and charge of the Law, as being
in some near capacity to speak with it, and to give it some satisfying answer,
Psalm. 119.97, O how love I thy law. Isa. 60.17, I will also make thine officers
peace, and thine exactors righteousness.

2. This does also call for more quietness of mind in you: you are often
disquietted anxiously, that you do not reap the fruit of Covenant-promises, and
that Gospel-commands do not find that obedience in you, which is acknowledged
to be due unto them; you have covenanted obedience to the Gospel, and you are
as an unjust Debtor through the nonperformance of your Covenant and promises;
and this is your affliction, and makes you walk in heaviness every day. I say,
that Christ's Suretiship does call for quieting your minds, and to lay more
weight upon his free undertakings, and less upon your own slippery performances
(be it spoken without giving any color to slack your hand in the best and
utmost endeavors after duty): 1. Because what obedience the Gospel has not
yet had in you, it shall have, since he is engaged for it, Psalm. 138. last, The
Lord will perfect that which concerns me: thy mercy, O Lord, endures for
ever: forsake not the works of thine own hands. Isa. 26.12, Lord, thou will
ordain peace for us, for thou also have wrought all our works in us. 2. What
the Law and Gospel cannot find in you, they shall have in him; and it is enough
if it be sound either in the Surety or the Debtor, Romans 10.4, For Christ is the
end of the law for righteousness to every one that believes. Romans 8.3, For
what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending
his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin condemned sin in the
flesh Gal. 4.4, 5, But when the fullness of the time was come, God sent forth
his Some made of a woman, made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the
law, that we might receive the adoption of sons. 3. The Surety has already
satisfied for your disobedience: it is not a thing to be done, but past
already, Heb. 9.15, And for this cause is the Mediator of the new Testament,
that by means of death, for the redemption of the transgressions that were
under the first testament, they which are called, might receive the promise of
eternal inheritance.

Use 7. Learn hence a necessary cautiousness (the neglect whereof is one chief
cause of the misgiving of our hearts in duties every day): do not put any thing
in Christ's place as Surety and undertaker for you. Sometimes we take our gifts
and graces to be Surety for us, and we reckon that these may engage for us, and
make us forthcoming in Duty; sometimes we take our own hearts, and our
resolution, Surety for us; and we trust to them as the people did, Josh. 24.16,
And the people answered, and said, God forbid that we should forsake the Lord,
to serve other gods. Deuteronomy. 5.27, 29, Go thou near and hear all that the Lord
our God shall say, and speak thou unto us all that the Lord our God shall speak
unto thee, and we will hear it, and do it. Sometimes we take our own good frame
Surety for us: if we have at any time some warmness and life under present
influences, we reckon these may be Surety for us, and that is but to put
something in the Sureties place, which God has not made cautioner in this
Covenant, 1 Cor. 1.30, 31, But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is
made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption:
that according as it is written, He that glories, let him glory in the Lord.

CHAP. XXI. Christ the Testator of the new Covenant or Testament.
THE seventh relation which Christ sustains in the Covenant of Grace, he is
Testator, or he that makes the will and testament, Heb. 9.16, 17.

Now because Testator and Testament are so nearly related, that the one is not
understood without the other; I must here refer you to that which I have
already spoken of Christ's Testament, which being largely handled before, we
shall not need to be large in speaking of the Testator; but briefly of these
particulars: 1. What this Name and Covenant Relation imports. 2. What was the
design of this Covenant Relation. 3. How the thing designed in Christ's being
Testator in the new Testament or Covenant, is rendered effectual by his
sustaining this relation.

And, 1. Of the name and relation, (...) signifies a Disposer or Testator, one
that makes his latter will and Testament; one who according to his own will
and pleasure disposes of his estate and goods, in contemplation of his death,
and the leaving his possession to be enjoyed by others after his death.

This Covenant Relation, that Jesus Christ is Testator, imports, 1. A person
dying, or doing a deed in contemplation of the necessity of his own death, as
being thereunto appointed: this relation speaks Christ, under not only the
common appointment unto death with all men, Heb. 9.27, but under a special
appointment unto death, for that end for which he made his Testament, which he
well understood, and did often contemplate and remember, when he acted in this
Covenant Relation, Heb. 9.15, 16, Where a testament is, there must also of
necessity be the death of the testator. And Joh. 13.1, Jesus knew that his hour
was come that he should depart out of this world unto the father. 2. This
relation imports a person vested with possession and right unto some estate or
goods, whereof he makes a Disposal and Will: for he that has nothing in
possession nor in title, can dispose of nothing to another person. Christ the
Testator, is a person fully vested with right unto, and possession of all good
things: for God has made him both Lord and Christ, Act. 2.36. and 10.36, And
him God has appointed heir of all things. Heb. 1.2, It pleased the father,
that in him all fullness should dwell, Col. 1.19. 3. This relation imports a
power in the Testator, to dispose of the things possessed by him; a power of
conveying his estate to others, else it were in vain to bequeath his estate
real or personal; this relation speaks Christ the Testator in power and
authority, to convey all Covenant-blessings, which are his own, unto his
people: for the father has given all things unto his hands, and has committed
all judgment to the Son. Not a possession only, but a power and authority, Joh.
3.35. and 5.22. And has given him power (...) authority over all flesh, that
he should give eternal life to as many as thou have given him, Joh. 17.2. 4.
This relation imports a Deed which is the sole will, and mere pleasure of the
Testator, not only a power to dispose of that which he possesses or has right
unto, but to do according to his mere pleasure, and the Testators will to be
the devising and conveying of whatsoever is his own; and therefore inasmuch as
Christ is Testator in the Covenant, it is declared that his will in his
Testament, his grace and pleasure, makes the title and conveyance of what we
have from and by him, Joh. 17.24, Father, I will that these whom thou have
given unto me, be with me, etc. Joh. 14.27, My peace I give unto you. Joh.
16.7, I will send the comforter unto you, 5. This relation imports the actual
declaring of his will, and disposing of his goods: for a Testator is not a
Testator, but in relation to the instrument, or evidence by which he declares
his will; to wit, his Testament. And therefore this relation holds forth Christ
in the Covenant, as having actually already made his will by an authentic
instrument and evidence; to wit, the old and new Testament: for Christ died not
untested, and without a declaration of his will, and a disposal of his house,
and of his goods, but has ordered and disposed all of things, and left us this
authentic evidence of his will, Luke 22.29, And I appoint unto you a kingdom,
as my father has appointed unto me. The same word that is used, Heb. 9.16,
(...), I dispose or appoint by my will and Testament; and Heb. 10.16, I will
make with you a covenant, (...); to wit, this testamentary Covenant: I declare
my will of grace to you in it. 2. What was the design of Christ's sustaining the
relation of Testator in the new Covenant? 1. That by this relation our Lord
Jesus might super-add a new title to believers, unto the new
Covenant-blessings, which he would have his people to hold of him, after all
manner of the best security used among men; and therefore will not only convey
these mercies to them by Covenant and promise, but by Testament and Legacy:
therefore he sustained the relation of a Testator, Joh. 14.27, Peace I leave
with you: to wit, by Legacy. 2. He sustained this relat on, to declare the
absolute freeness of his grace, in the conveyance of Covenant-blessings, which
howsoever covenanted and promised to us condition-ways, yet are purely deeds of
Grace, and of the pleasure and will of God, as all testamentary deeds are,
which are the sole will and mere pleasure of the Testator, Joh. 17.24, Father,
I will: and Luke 22.29, I appoint unto you a kingdom. 3. He sustained this
relation for the ratification of that title and interest which believers have
unto Covenant-blessings: for their holding, being by a deed of will and
pleasure, so long as he who disposes of his estate and goods is alive, his
will is ambulatory and alterable: therefore he is a Testator (which takes in
the death of Christ, that his will of grace to his people declared in his
Testament might be irrevocable): so the Apostle argues, Gal. 3.15, Though it be
but a man's testament, yet if it be confirmed (to wit, by his death) no man
disannulleth or adds thereunto. Heb. 9.16, 17, For where a testament is,
there must also of necessity be the death of the Testator. For a testament is
of force after men are dead: otherwise it is of no strength at all, whilst the
testator lives. 4. Christ sustained the relation of a Testator in the new
Covenant, to make way for a possession of these Covenant-blessings, unto which
his people have a right: he makes his Testament, and dies, that his will in his
Testament might be executed, which could have no execution till by his death
(typical or real) and contemplation thereof, he declared a cession of his
possession: that this was his very design, the Apostle-proves, Heb. 9.15, That
by means of death -- they which are called might receive the promise of eternal
inheritance. Joh. 16.17, If I go not away, the comforter will not come; but if
I depart, I will send him unto you.

3. Let us consider how this design has its accomplishment in Christ's
sustaining the relation of Testator in the Covenant of Grace. And, 1. It Is
unquestionable, that by this relation, Believers have a new active title to the
Covenant-blessings; to wit, a testamentary title; they are his friends, and
legators, and do hold their mercies as Legacies left to them by the latter will
of Christ the Testator; his will of favor and grace is their title: so he
often taught his Disciples, to remember their testamentary title to their
mercies, Mat. 26.28. and 1 Cor. 11.25, This is my blood of the new testament,
shed for many, for the remission of sins, etc. Joh. 5.21, The Son quickens
whom he will. Jam. 1.18, Of his own will begat he us. Here is that title of
will acknowledged, and the design of absolute free grace, in the Testator
accomplished. 2. The design of God in Christ's sustaining the relation of a
Testator in the Covenant of Grace, is accemplished, in so far, as a
ratification and confirmation of the testamentary Covenant is thereby intended:
because by Christ's death, the right that believers have by this Testament
receives a threefold confirmation: 1. A confirmation of the verity and reality
of it; that it is a true and real deed, which by the strictest trial, for
probat of Wills, cannot be rejected: for it is confirmed, says the Apostle, Gal.
3.15. to wit, to be an authentic instrument and evidence, (...),
authenticatum, confirmatum and ratum habitum, Act. 3.15. And killed the prince
of life, whom God has raised from the dead, whereof we are witnesses. Luke
24.48, And ye are witnesses of these things. 2. A confirmation of validity, it
is made unalterable, so that it cannot be disannulled or abrogated thereafter;
so that no man can make it void, or put any alteration upon it, as the Apostle
proves, Gal. 3.15, No man disannulleth, or adds thereunto (...), Nemo
abrogat; eodem sensu quo leges dicuntur abrogari cum vim suam amittunt, as Heb.
7, 18, Christ's Testament cannot be made void, and of none effect: for it is
(...), testamentum ratum, Heb. 9.17. Firm and settled, as a pillar on its base.
3. A confirmation of efficacy; it is made available to our use, as our evidence
in judgment; it is of strength, says the Apostle, Heb. 9.17. (...), valet: But
the next and third accomplishment of the design of God in this
Covenant Relation, will clear this further; to wit, the executing of Christ's
Testament, by his ceeding the possession. Let us therefore consider how Christ's
being Testator does make way for those that are called to receive the
inhenitance, Heb. 9.15.

1. Christ the Testator is vested with the right and possession of all the
Covenant-blessings: for he is the first begotten of many brethren, Heb. 1.6.
And God gave him to be head over all things to the Church. Col. 1.15, 17, 18,
Who is the image of the invisible God, the first born of every creature. And he
is before all things, and by him all things consist. And he is the head of the
body, the Church: who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead, that in
all things he might have the pre-eminence.

2. The Testator by his Will and Testament, bequeaths, disposes, and leaves in
legacy the very same mercies, and Covenant-blessings that were his at the
first-hand, and all treasured up in the Mediator and Testator, as in a
storehouse: Lo, says he, I give you the sure mercies of David, Act. 13.34.
with Isa. 35.3.

3. The Testator dies: when Christ has made his Will, he laid down his life,
and by his death he opens a way, and gives Legal access to his people, to have
his Testament executed, and his will therein actually fulfilled. 1. He renders
up the possession, and by a cession yields it unto his people, Heb. 9.15. The
Mediator and Testator dies, that by means of death. -- they which are called,
might receive eternal inheritance: and Joh. 16.7, If I do not go, the comforter
will not come unto you, etc. If the Testator had not died, there had never been
room nor access for them who are called, to receive the inheritance: though in
this there be something singular, and different from humane conveyances,
because Christ does so give up the possession for his peoples access to it,
that he also keeps it for the same end, that he and they after ratifying his
Testament by his death, may live and possess the inheritance together, as joint
heirs with Christ, Romans 8.17. Joh. 14.2, 3. But in humane poss^ssions there is
no room for two to possess the same thing by a complete entire title to it; nor
for a person that yields the possession or inheritance to another, to return to
it, without divesting that person to whom it was resigned. 2. The Testator
himself pleads his Testament, and his making way through his death for his
peoples coming at the inheritance, and the possession of his goods: I say, he
pleads that to be of force through his death, as a valid Legal right, that they
also may now possess and enjoy with him, Joh. 17.24, Father, I will that they
may be where I am. And in Heaven he appears for us, and upon our account, in
the force of the Testators death, Heb. 17.23, 24. 3. The Testator who before
possessed the inheritance upon his own right and title, does now possess the
inheritance by a title super-added to that; to wit, upon our account, as our
Attorney, as one representing the Elect, and having wrought for their heaven,
Joh. 17.4, and come to heaven to be vested with a possession in their name, and
for their account: for now he appears in heaven, in the presence of God for us,
Heb. 9.24. And by the Testators being in Heaven, God has made us sit together
in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.6. And he as a forerunner is for us
entered, Heb. 6.20. 4. The Testator surrogates his spirit in his absence, and
after his death, to see his Will executed in all points, and to give real and
actual possession of his Testament-blessings unto those to whom he left them,
Joh. 15.26, But when the comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the
father, he shall testify of me: and Joh. 16.7, 8. Which accordingly is
fulfilled, and our possession quo ad exequnta, is ascribed to this Executor
surrogate by the Testator, and doing his will in his name, 1 Cor. 6.11, But ye
are washed, but ye are sanctified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
spirit of our God; the Executor of the Lord Testators will.

Use 1. This Covenant Relation does exceedingly magnify the riches of the
grace and love of Christ Jesus the Testator: 1. That the king immortal, 1 Timothy
1.17. should become a man subject to mortallity, Heb. 2.17. 2. That he should
act any thing in contemplation of mortality, and be a Testator, even he who was
to see no corruption, Psalm. 16.11. with Act. 2.31. Joh. 13.1. 3. That he who
could not see corruption, yet never theless should die and give up the Ghost,
for conveying a title and possession of life and immortality to his people,
Gal. 2.20.

Use 2. Let the friends and Legators of this blessed Testator, know, that your
holding is of absolute grace, and of the mere pleasure of the Testator: your
right and title is testamentary, and you have your mercies by Christ's will of
favor: you are Legatories, and he is the Testator, Joh. 5.21, The Son
quickens whom he will. And yet you are not left at uncertainty: for there is
nothing sure to changeable creatures, but what is pure Grace, and hangs upon
the free will of God, and the motions of his heart, Romans 4.16, Therefore it is
of faith, that it might be by grace, to the end the promise might be sure to
all the seed. Mal. 3.6, For I am the Lord, I change not: therefore ye sons of
Jacob are not consumed. You may say to him, as he said to his father upon your
account, Mat. 11.25, 26, I thank thee, O father. -- And even so, father,
because so it seemed good in thy sight.

Use 3. Comfort to believers in Christ, whose names are written in this
Testament: 1. That our Lord Jesus died not untested, and without a plain
declaration of his Will to whom he left his goods, and what the things be which
he left unto them, Act. 13.34, And as concerning that he raised him up from the
dead, now no more to return to corruption, he said on this wise, I will give
you the sure mercies of David. Joh. 14.27, Peace I leave with you, my peace I
give unto you, not as the world gives, give I unto you. Joh. 13.1, Now before
the feast of the passover, when Jesus knew that his hour was come that he
should depart out of this world unto the father, having loved his own which
were in the world, he loved them unto the end, Joh. 15.11, 13, 14, 15. and
16.33. 2. That your right is testamentary, the Covenant betwixt God and Christ
being turned unto a testament betwixt him and you, the blessings thereof are
the absolute will of the Testator, Joh. 14.27, Peace I leave with you, my peace
I give unto you, not as the world gives give I unto you: let not your heart be
troubled, neither let it be afraid. Joh. 17.24, Father, I will that they also
whom thou have given me, be with me where I am, that they may behold my glory
which thou have given me. 3. That there is force and strength in his latter
Will, by virtue of his death, that we can bring his Will as a valid deed of Law
now after his death, and can plead it with God, Heb. 9.15, 17, And for this
cause he is the mediator of the new testament, that by means of death, for the
redemption of the transgressions that were under the first testament, they
which are called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance. -- For a
testament is of force after men are dead: otherwise it is of no strength at all
whilst the testator lives. 4. That he has left one to execute his Will; that
the Testator wants not an Executor of his Testament, Joh. 14.26, But the
comforter, which is the Holyghost, whom the father will send in my name, he
shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance,
whatsoever I have said unto you. Joh. 15.26, But when the comforter is come,
whom I will send unto you from the father, even the spirit of truth, which
proceeds from the father, he shall testify of me.

Use 4. For Exhortation, both to consider of the design of Grace that lies
wrapped up in this Covenant Relation, and to search into the experimental
knowledge of the virtue and efficacy of Christ's being the Testator of the new
Covenant. 1. I say, study the design of grace which is wrapped up in this
Covenant Relation, as it super-adds a new title to Covenant blessings, as it
declares the absolute freeness of Covenant-mercies, as it ratifies Christ's will
of grace, and as it makes way for our possession of the things bequeathed unto
us in Christ's Testament, whereof we have spoken. 2. Search (I say) after the
experimental knowledge of virtue of Christ's Testatorship, 1. Quo ad executionem,
in the force and efficacy of it, that through the Testators death his Testament
has been executed and fulfilled as to thee, Heb. 9.17, For a testament is of
force after men are dead: otherwise it is of no strength at all whilst the
testator lives. Zech. 9.11, As for thee also, by the blood of thy covenant, I
have sent out thy prisoners out of the pit wherein there is no water. 2. Quo ad
executa, in the latitude of his Legacies, that nothing disposed and bequeathed
to believers in Christ's Testament, has escaped thee; that no part of his goods
which is the portion of his people, be wanting with thee, 2 Pet. 1.5, And
besides this, giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue, and to your
virtue knowledge, etc. 3. Quo ad executorem, in the kindly genuine work of his
spirit; that the good which God has done to thee, is the true execution of the
Testators will of grace to his people, 1 Cor. 6.11, And such were some of you,
but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of
the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. Joh. 1.13, Which were born not of
blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. Romans
8.9, But ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, if so be that the spirit
of God dwell in you: now if any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none
of his.

CHAP. XXII. Christ a Covenant of the people; or in what respects Christ is all
the Covenant.
BEsides the many and various relations before spoken of, which Christ
sustaineth in the Covenant of grace, he is the Covenant it self: for to him
does the father speak, Isa. 42.6, and 49.8, I will give thee for a Covenant of
the people: things attributed in abstracto, have a great signification, Romans
1.7, The carnal mind is enmity, etc. Christ is called the peace, Micah. 5.5.
And our peace, Ephesians. 2.14. This is more than the peacemaker, Col. 1.20. It Is
all the transaction of peace, the whole business of reconciliation comprised in
the Mediator, and acted by him. So here Christ a Covenant, is more than the
Covenant-maker, or the Mediator of the Covenant; the phrase imports two things:
1. The abridging and summing up of the whole Covenant in Christ Mediator; in
whose person the two parties at enmity were united. I will give thee for a
covenant of the people; that is, I make a gift of thee, to be to my people the
summary and compend of all that blessed transaction and Covenant which I
purpose with them. 2. It imports the commitment of the whole business (which
God purposed to do with his people in the way of a Covenant) unto Christ the
Mediator, to be managed by him: I will give thee for a covenant of the people,
is a designation of Christ's work, unto which he was called; and for the doing
of which, promises of assistance are made to him in the words preceding these;
as if it were said, I set thee over the whole business of the Covenant between
me and the people given to thee, that from beginning to end it may be managed
by thee: Again, Christ is not only given for a Covenant, but for a Covenant of
the people; that is, to be on the peoples side, and to deal for them: for the
people alone are not capable of confederation with God, but Christ stands
jointly with them, and is gifted of God to the people, to be given back again
to God for their part of the Covenant, Psalm. 89.19. Heb. 2.13.

Hence let us consider of these Propositions:

Christ is all the Covenant: or all this Covenant is comprised in Christ: or
God by giving Christ, does give the Covenant of the people with him.

Christ is the Covenant, 1. Originally and fundamentally: he is the original
and root out of which the Covenant sprang, and he is the foundation upon which
it is grounded: the Covenant of grace took its rise and being from Christ, Rev.
22.16, I Jesus have sent mine Angel to testify unto you these things in the
Churches: I am the root and the offspring of David, and the bright and
morning star. Isa. 28.16, Therefore thus says the Lord God, Behold, I lay in
Zion for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a precious cornerstone, a sure
foundation: he that believes shall not make haste. Judge. 14.14, And he said
unto them, Out of the eater came forth meat, and out of the strong came forth
sweetness. 1. He is the ancient foundation of that which was revealed of the
Covenant from the beginning of the world: therefore God revealing this Covenant
in Paradise, presently after the fall, bottomed it upon Christ the seed of the
woman, Genesis 3.15. And revealing it to Abraham, he grounded it upon Christ
Abraham's seed, in whom all the families of the earth should be blessed, Genesis
12.3. and 17.1, 2. 2. Christ is the eternal foundation of this Covenant, upon
whom it was bottomed in the eternal decrees of God: hence our vocation and
salvation are said to be promised and given to us in him before the world
began, Tit. 1.2, And in hope of eternal life, which God that cannot lie,
promised before the world began. 2 Timothy 1.9, Who has saved us, and called us
with an holy calling, not according to our works, but according to his own
purpose and grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus before the world began.
Ephesians. 1.4, According as he has chosen us in him before the foundation of the
world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love. 2. Christ
is the Covenant primarily, and by propriety; as fire is hot for it self, and
all things hot for it, and by participtation: Because with him was the Covenant
made as the chief party; which believers it was made in subordination to him:
with him it was made at the first hand; with us at the second hand: with him it
was made for himself; with us it was only made for him: therefore it is his
Covenant by propriety; and ours only by participation: and therefore all the
promises are made first to him, and fulfilled first to him; and all the acts of
Gods love terminate first upon him, and come at us only in the second room, and
at the second hand, Isa 59.21, As for me, this is my Covenant with them, says
the Lord: My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy
mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor
out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says the Lord, from henceforth, and for
ever. Psalm. 89.3, 33, I have made a covenant with my chosen; I have sworn unto
David my servant. -- Nevertheless, my loving kindness will I not utterly take
from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail. Isa. 53.3, And I will make an
everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies of David. Ephesians. 1.3,
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus, who has blessed us with all
spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ. 3. Christ is the Covenant
eminently, because he is the chief blessing of the Covenant; there being not
such another promise and gift in all the bundle of promises contained in the
Covenant; therefore is he spoken of by way of eminence, as being that
transcendent gift of God, matchless effect of Gods love, besides which there is
not another the like, Joh. 4.10, Jesus answered and said unto her, If thou
knew the gift of God, and who it is that says unto thee, give me to drink.
Joh. 3.16, For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have overlasting life. He is
the most precious stone in all the Jewel, Mat. 13.44, 45. All other things in
the Covenant, Righteousness, Life, Pardon, Peace, etc. are but the garnish of
this Jewel, Song. 5.10, My beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten
thousand. He is the most sweet and ripest Berry in all the cluster of Promises
which grow together in the Covenant; nay, he is the cluster himself, Song.
1.14, My beloved is unto me as a cluster of camphire in the vineyards of
Engedi. Romans 8.32, He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us
all; how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? He is the
fairest and most bright-shining star in all that constellation, Rev. 22.16, The
bright and morning star. He is the fairest stone in all the building, none like
unto him, Isa. 28.16, Behold, I lay in Zion for a foundation, a stone, a tried
stone, a precious cornerstone, a sure foundation. 1 Pet. 2.4, To whom coming
as unto a living stone, disallowed indeed of men, hut chosen of God, and
precious. Psalm. 118.22, The stone which the builders refused, is become the
head-stone of the corner. He is the fairest tree in all the garden of God, like
the tree of Life in the midst of Eden, Song. 2.3, As the apple tree among the
trees of the wood, so is my beloved among the sons. Rev. 22.2, In the midst of
the streets of it, and of either side of the river, was there the tree of life,
which bare twelve manner of fruits, and yielded her fruit every month: and the
leaves of the tree were for the healing of the nations.

4. Christ is the Covenant virtually, or equivalently: he is the just value of
all the bargain: he is of as much worth as all that is promised and contracted
to believers in the Covenant of grace; so that if the value of it were asked,
how much is it worth? it could not be answered otherwise, than so, It Is of as
much value as Christ is: and when the Promises are fulfilled to the utmost,
they amount not beyond the giving of Christ to believers, Joh. 1.12, But as
many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to
them that believe on his name. Col. 1.27, Which is, Christ in you the hope of
glory. Col. 3.11. Christ is all.

5. Christ is the Covenant exemplarily, the very sample and first pattern of
the Covenant, and of the design of grace carried on by the Covenant, was in the
union of the two natures in Christ the Mediators person: For consider, I pray,
the great design of favor carried on by the Covenant of grace, is an union of
man with God, a restoring of man to the first state of friendship with God, and
in Christ Mediator; his person was the samplar and original pattern of all the
business; to wit, 1. Of Gods infinite condescension and stooping so far toward
a nearness, a union with man, Phil. 2.6, 7, Who being in the form of God,
thought it no robbery to be equal with God: but made himself of no reputation,
and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the likeness of men.
2. Of the unspeakable exaltation of our nature toward an union with God, Heb.
2.11, 16, For verily he took not on him the nature of Angels, but he took on
him the seed of Abraham. For which cause he is not ashamed to call them
brethren. 3. Of the union and conjunction of God and man, which is the result
of Gods condescension, and our exaltation, and which is the summary of the
second Covenant, Mat. 1.23, Immanuel, which being interpreted, is, God with us.
Rev. 21.3, And God himself shall be with them, and be their God. So then,
Christ is the Covenant in this respect also, the first samplar of the union and
agreement of the parties covenanting, Ephesians. 2.14, For he is our peace, who has
made both one. Zech. 6.13, And the counsel of peace shall be between them both.

6. Christ is the Covenant comprehensively or summarily: he is the very
compound or abridgment of the Covenant: in the Mediators person there is a
little sum of the whole Covenant: Consider this, how the parties, articles,
mutual stipulations, promises, properties and blessings of the Covenant, are
all some way abridged in Christ, and summed up in his person. And, 1. Christ is
all the parties of the Covenant of grace, or rather both the parties are
comprehended in the Mediators person: he is both the parties in three respects;
1. Because of the union of the two natures in his blessed person: he is
God-man, God made manifest in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16. Who took not upon him our
nature in its primitive innocence and virgin integrity; But came in the
likeness of sinful flesh, Romans 8.3. He took upon him the nature of fallen man,
but sanctified for and by the union with the divine nature, Luke 1.35. Heb.
7.26. And so he is both the parties, the Covenant being betwixt God and man,
not innocent, but fallen man, yet believing and renewed man. 2. Because the
person who is Mediator, is upon both sides of the Covenant: as being one with
the Father and holy Ghost, he is on Gods side of the Covenant, 1 John 5.7, For
there are three that bear record in heaven, the father, the word, and the holy
Ghost: and these three are one. 2 Cor. 9.13, Whiles by the experiment of this
ministration they glorify God for your professed subjection unto the Gospel of
Christ. And as he is one with us, he is on our side of the Covenant, Heb. 2.11,
13, For both he that sanctifies, and they who are sanctified, are all of one:
for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren. -- Behold I, and the
children which God has given me. 3. He is not only upon both sides of the
Covenant; but he contracts for both the parties, carrying the relation of a
party, both upward to God, and downward to us: he treats and covenanteth for
God with us; and he treats and covenanteth for us with God, which upon the
matter is to carry, as having the representation and sum of both parties in his
person, 2 Cor. 5.19, To wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto
himself. Heb. 2.13, Behold I, and the children which God has given me. And as
it is said of Jacobs representing the people that came out of his Ioins, Hos.
12.4, He found him in Bethel, and there he spoke with us: So it may be said of
Christ's representing his people, for God spoke with us in him.

2. The sum of all the articles of the Covenant is in Christ: Consider, I pray,
what is the sum of the Articles; even this, I will be your God, and ye shall be
my people: you find the articles of the Covenant frequently summed up in these
two words, Ezekiel. 37.23. Rev. 21.3. Now this is in Christ Jesus, 1. In regard of
the conjunction of relations in him; to wit, God owning the people, and the
people owning him; he being the only person in heaven or earth, who does bear
or is capable to bear the relation of God toward the people; and again, of the
people toward God; for he is God with us, Mat. 1.23. He is God and the people
united and owning one another; and in some things he does represent and carry
forth God to us as ours, 2 Cor. 5.19. And in other things he does represent and
carry in the people of God, and present them before him as his own people, Heb.
9.24. and 2.13. Ephesians. 2.6. 2. In regard of causality: (for although Christ be
not the cause of Gods love to the Elect, but the effect thereof, Joh. 3.16: yet
he is the cause of the effects and acts whereby it runs forth toward us)
Christ is the bottom of the relation betwixt God and his people: for by his
taking a new Covenant-right unto God as his God and Father by Covenant, he is
lay the foundation of Gods being our God by Covenant, and of our being the
people of God by Covenant; which had never been, were it not for Christ's new
Covenant-right, Psalm. 89.26, He shall cry unto me, Thou art my father, my God,
and the rock of my salvation. Gal. 4.6, And because ye are sons, God has sent
forth the spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying; Abba, Father. Heb. 1.5,
For unto which of the Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this day
have I begotten thee? and again, I will be to him a father, and he shall be to
me a son. 3. In regard of conveyance, or of the manner and way how we have
access to this privilege and Covenant-state, to have God to be our God: God is
our God in Christ, and we are Gods people in and through Christ: and without an
existence in Christ, and union with him, God is not ours, neither are we his,
Ephesians. 2.12, That at that time ye were without Christ, being aliens from the
commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenant of promise, having no
hope, and without God in the world. For Covenant-relations, as well as
blessings, come to us through Christ: we come to God in Christ, and God comes
to us, and becomes ours in him, 2 Cor. 5.19, To wit, that God was in Christ,
reconciling the world unto himself. Heb. 7.25, Wherefore he is able also to
save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to
make intercession for them.

3. The sum of the mutual stipulation is in Christ: there are some mutual
conditions and stipulations in this as in other Covenants. But Christ may be
well called the whole stipulation: 1. Because it is he who obtains the consent
of both parties, and receives in their Amen to that blessed transaction of
friendship and union, the consent of the one from everlasting, Prove. 8.22, 23,
30. with 2 Timothy 1.9. Tit. 1.2: and of the other when we believe, Joh. 6.37,
Rev. 22.17, 20. 2. Because the Covenant was given to him, to be fulfilled on
both sides by him; it was fulfilled upon Gods side, for he is the person which
was sent to perform all that God had promised to his people, Luke 1.69, 70, 72,
73, 74, And has raised up an horn to salvation for us, in the house of his
servant David, as he spoke by the mouth of his holy prophets, which have been
since the world began: to perform the mercy promised to our fathers, and to
remember his holy covenant, the oath which he swear to our father Abraham, that
he would grant unto us, that we being delivered out of the hands of our
enemies, might serve him without fear. By him it was fulfilled upon our part;
for he is the person upon whom our help was laid, even to perform whatsoever is
required of us by the Covenant, Psalm. 89.17, 19, For thou art the glory of
their strength. -- Then thou spakest in vision to thy holy one, and said, I
have laid help upon one that is mighty. 3. Because upon the matter, Christ is
the very thing which is mutually stipulated upon both sides: Consider I pray,
God stipulates to give us Christ, and that is the sum of what he stipulates,
Isa. 55.3, 4, Incline your ear, and come unto me: hear, and your soul shall
live: and I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure mercies
of David. Behold, I have given him for a witness to the people, a leader and
commander to the people. And again, we restipulate to give Christ to God for
all that the Covenant requires of us, 1 Cor. 1.30, But of him are ye in Christ
Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption. Phil. 3.9, And be found in him, not having mine
own righteousness, which is of the law, but that which is through the faith of
Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith. For this is the nature of
the Gospel Covenant, it craveth conditions and duties from us, but fills the
hand with Christ, wherewith to pay the masters rent: and we do answer all that
is craved with Christ, which makes the craving gentle, Isa. 60.17, I will also
make thine officers peace, and thine exactors righteousness.

4. Christ is the sum of all the promises and blessings of the Covenant, Isa.
42.6, And give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles.
This does appear, 1. From the first discovery of this Covenant, which had but
one promise in it, and that was the promise of Christ, Genesis 3.15, The seed of
the woman. 2. This appears from Gods explicating the sum of the promises and
Covenant, when it was more explicitly held forth to be Christ gifted to his
people, Genesis 12.3, And in thee shall all families of the earth be blessed. Isa.
55.3, 4, And I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure
mercies of David. Behold, I have given him for a witness to the people. 3. This
appears from the holy Ghosts accounting Christ's coming to be the performing of
the whole Covenant and promises, Luke 1.69, 72, 73, And has raised up an horn
of salvation for us, in the house of his servant David: To perform the mercy
promised to our fathers, and to remember his holy covenant, the oath which he
swear to our father Abraham, etc.

5. Christ is the sum of all the properties of the Covenant, not only because
whatsoever these properties speak forth of the nature of that transaction that
is to be found in him; but also, and chiefly, because Christ is the foundation
of all these properties; as may appear by a short recapitulation of the
particular properties thereof, which are all comprised in Christ. And, 1. The
freeness of the Covenant is comprised in him. The Covenant of grace is free:
and indeed Christ is a free Christ, or Christ freely given to his people is the
sum of the free Covenant, Joh. 3.16, For God so loved the world, that he gave
his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but
have everlasting life. Joh. 4.10, Jesus answered and said unto her, If thou
knew the gift of God, and who it is that says unto thee, Give me to drink;
thou would have asked of him, and he would have given thee living-water. Isa.
42.6, And give thee for a covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles.
Romans 8.32, He that spared not his own Son: but delivered him up for us all: how
shall he not with him also freely give us all things? Yea, it is in and for
Christ that the Covenant is a free Covenant: for the same righteousness, and
life, and Covenant-blessings which are freely promised and offered to us, at
the first hand were purchased by Christ, and a satisfaction given to the
justice of God for them; and because he paid a price for them, therefore they
are free gifts to us: he made all Covenant-mercies free to us by Covenant,
because they were bought by him, in the Covenant that was made between God and
Christ, Isa. 53.10, 11, 12, Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise him: he has put
him to grief: when thou shall make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see
his seed, he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper
in his hand. He shall see of the travel of his soul, and shall be satisfied: by
his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many: for he shall bear their
iniquities. Therefore will I divide him a portion with the great, and he shall
divide the spoil with the strong: because he has poured out his soul unto
death; and he was numbered with the transgressors, and he bare the sin of many,
and made intercession for the transgressors. Joh. 17.4, 5, I have glorified
thee on the earth: I have finished the work which thou gave me to do. And
now, O father, glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I had
with thee before the world was. I do not say that Christ was the cause of Gods
eternal transaction which he purposed in himself; but that he is the cause of
these effects of Covenant-graces, which come freely to us for his sake, who
bought them with a great price, 1 Pet. 1.19, 20, 21, But with the precious
blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish, without spot. Who verily was
foreordained before the foundation of the world, but was manifest in these
last times for you who by him do believe in God that raised him up from the
dead, and gave him glory, that your faith and hope might be in God.

2. The everlastingness of the Covenant is comprised in Christ: the Covenant is
an everlasting Covenant; and he is God everlasting, yea, an everlasting
Mediator, who was set up from everlasting, and shall endure to everlasting,
Isa. 9.6, For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given, and the
government shall be upon his shoulders, and his name shall be called wonderful
councellor, the mighty God, the everlasting father, the prince of peace. Prove.
8.23, I was set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth was.
Heb. 7.25, Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come
unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them. Yea, it
is in, and through, and for Christ, that the Covenant of grace has
everlastingness in it; whether we consider it as everlasting, a part ante: it
could not have been an e^^^lasting Covenant in this respect, unless there had
been an^^^^r everlasting party for the everlasting God to deal (...) and there
was not another party of this kind, but (...); in whom grace was given to us,
and promises of life (...) made to us before the world began, 2 Timothy 1.9. Tit.
1. (...). 8.23. Or if we consider the Covenant as everlasting (...) part post,
Christ is the foundation of that, and it is (...) for Christ that the Covenant
is an everlasting Cove^^^^ (...) and because he is given for a Covenant of the
people, (...) everlastingness is given to that Covenant, Psalm. 89.^^ (...) 5, I
have made a covenant with my chosen; I have sworn unto David my servant: My
covenant will I not break: nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips.
Once have I sworn by my holiness, that I will not lie unto David. Isa. 59.21,
As for me, this is my covenant with them, says the Lord; my spirit which is
upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of
thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds
seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and for ever. Isa. 53.10, When thou shall
make his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed, he shall prolong his
days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in his hand.

3. The order of the Covenant is comprised in Christ: the Covenant is a well
ordered Covenant: and the order of the whole treaty of reconciliaton, and of
this Covenant-transaction, is summed up in Christ, in whom the parties meet
together in this order, God coming down to us in Christ, and we coming up to
God in Christ, 2 Cor. 5.19, To wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the
world unto himself. Mat. 1.23, God with us. Yea all things that are ordered and
disposed concerning Covenant-grace and blessings, are ordered in him, and for
him, and by him: for the methods and ways of Gods dispensing and ordering
Covenant-blessings, are through him, and in him, as the channel and conveyance
thereof; and for him as the cause; and by him as the great Administrator who is
over all that business for the managing thereof, Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5, 6, Blessed be
the God and father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all the
spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ; according as he has chosen
us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and
without blame before him in love. Having predestined us into the adoption of
children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his
will, to the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he has made us accepted
in the beloved. Ephesians. 2.6, 10, And has raised us up together, and made us sit
together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. -- For we are his workmanship,
created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before ordained that we
should walk in them.

4. The stability of the Covenant is comprised in Christ: the Covenant of Grace
is a sure Covenant, and he is a firm and sure Christ, who fails not, and
changes not, Heb. 13.8, Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, and to day, and for
ever. Yea, he is the very stability of the Covenant of Grace, 2 Cor. 1.20, For
all the promises of God in him are, yea, and in him, Amen, unto the glory of
God by us. The sure foundation upon which it is established, Isa. 28.16.
Because Christ is in the Covenant as a nail in a sure place, and as a
foundation and cornerstone which cannot be removed: therefore stability and
firmness is in the Covenant, Isa. 22.23. Because the Covenant made with him is
sure, therefore the Covenant made with us is sure, Psalm. 89.33, 34. And because
Christ is given for a Covenant of the people, therefore stability is given to
that Covenant as an essential property thereof.

5. The perfection of the Covenant of Grace is comprised in Christ: it is a
perfect Covenant, and he is a perfect and complete Christ; a Savior made
perfect, to be the author of a complete Salvation to his people, Heb. 5.9. and
to save to the utmost, Heb. 7.25. Yea, the Covenant is a perfect Covenant,
because Christ is in it, in whom we are complete, Col. 2.9, 10. And in whom
dwells perfect fullness, and all desirable perfections. If Christ had not been
in it, perfection had not been in it, nor should that Covenant have been able
to perfect us for ever, but it had left us as the first Covenant did: But
because God gave Christ for a Covenant of the people, therefore perfection is
in it, and came to us by it, 1 Cor. 1.30, But of him are ye in Christ Jesus,
who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and
redemption.

6. The satisfactoriness of the Covenant of grace, is comprised in Christ: it
is a Soul-satisfying Covenant, and he is a Soul-satisfying Christ, 2 Samuel 23.5,
For this is all my salvation, and all my desire, although he make it not to
grow. Song. 5.16, His mouth is most sweet: yea, he is altogether lovely. This
is my beloved, and this is my friend, O Daughters of Jerusalem. Psalm. 73.25,
Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire
besides thee. Yea, Christ is the foundation of that satisfaction which the
souls of the saints find by being within the Covenant of grace: he is the
desire of all nations, Hag. 2.7. It is in and for him, that it is satisfying:
if Christ were not in the Covenant, the soul of a Saint could nevery say of it,
This is all my desire; but because he is in it, therefore the spirits of men by
embracing it, find a satisfaction, Psalm. 16.2, 5, 6, O my soul, thou have said
unto the Lord, thou art my Lord: the Lord is the portion of mine inheritance,
and of my cup: thou maintainest my lot. The lines are fallen unto me in
pleasant places: yea, I have a goodly heritage. And because Christ is given for
a Covenant of the people, therefore satisfaction is in it.

6. Christ is the sum of all Covenant-blessings: they are all abridged in him,
Col. 3.11, But Christ is all, and in all: 1. Eminently: because he is the chief
blessing of the Covenant: he is the marrow and fatness of the whole bargain,
Joh. 4.10, 14, Jesus answered and said unto her, If thou knew the gift of
God, and who it is that says unto thee, Give me to drink; thou would have
asked of him, and he would have given thee living water. But whosoever drinks
of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst: but the water that I
shall give him, shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting
life. Joh. 3.16, For God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
Son. 2. Comprehensively: because in him, as in a store house, all
Covenant-blessings are treasured up, Col. 2.9, For in him dwells all the
fullness of the Godhead bodily. Joh. 1.14, 16, And the word was made flesh, and
dwelt among us (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only begotten of
the father) full of grace and truth. And of his fullness have all we received,
and grace for grace. 3. Vltimately: because he is that Covenant-blessing for
which the whole bargain is sought after, and all other things are but sought
for him, Mat. 13.44, 45, Again, the kingdom of heaven is like unto treasure hid
in a field, the which when a man has found, he hides, and for joy thereof
goes and sells all that he has, and buyeth that field. Again, the kingdom
of heaven is like unto a merchant man, seeking goodly pearls, etc. 4.
Virtually: because when God gives Christ, the whole Covenant is reckoned to be
performed, Luke 1.72, To perform the mercy promised to our fathers, and to
remember his holy covenant. 5. Consequentially: because all other
Covenant-blessings follow him, as accessories follow any principal thing, Romans
8.32, He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all: how
shall he not with him freely give us all things? Prove. 8.35, For whosoever
finds me, finds life, and shall obtain favor of the Lord.

Use 1. If Christ be all the Covenant, or the sum and marrow of all which God
has given to his people by the Covenant of grace; this speaks sad reproof,
1. To those who seek something else; the strength of whose endeavors is laid
forth upon something inferior, something beside the chief good, Isa. 55.2,
Wherefore do ye spend money for that which is not bread? and your labor for
that which satisfies not? hearken deligently unto me, and eat ye that which is
good, and let your soul delight itself in fatness. To such belongs that
warning, Isa. 50.11, Behold, all ye that kindle a fire, that compass your
selves about with sparks: walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks
that ye have kindled. This shall ye have of mine hand, ye shall lie down in
sorrow. 2. To such as seek and follow after some thing more than Christ, who is
all the Covenant; sure there are not a few, who think they have not a full
blessing in Christ; Christ alone, without other things of this world, cannot
content them, Genesis 30.1. This evil under the sun has reached some of those who
have been within the Covenant of Grace, Genesis 15.1, 2, After these things the
word of the Lord came unto Abram in a vision, saying, Fear not Abram, I am thy
shield, and thy exceeding great reward. And Abram said, Lord God, what will thou give me, seeing I go childless, and the steward of my house is this
Eliezer of Damascus? To such belongs that warning, Jer. 45.5, And seek thou
great things for thy self? seek them not: for behold, I will bring evil upon
all flesh, says the Lord: but thy life will I give unto thee for a prey in all
places whither thou go. 3. It speaks reproof to those who seek something
less than Christ: there being among those who are not of the worst sort of
people, whom life and salvation could satisfy: a creaated heaven without
Christ could answer their desires after happiness, Mat. 19.16, And behold, one
came and said unto him, Good master, what good thing shall I do, that I may
have eternal life? Something of this also may overtake the children of Grace
among their fevers and fits of distempers, Mark 9.5, 6, And Peter answered, and
said to Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here: and, let us make three
tabernacles; one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias. For he wist
not what to say, for they were sore afraid. Such should remember Peter's words
at another occasion, Joh. 6.68, Then Simon Peter answered him, Lord, to whom
shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life. Which import, that a created
Heaven would not be significant, if Christ were not there: see also Psalm.
73.25, Whom have (...) in heaven but thee? and there is none upon the earth
that I desire besides thee. 4. It speaks reproof to those who wrangle about
circumstances, to the prejudice of Christ the substance and marrow of the
Gospel Covenant: those who seek some things of Christ to the prejudice of other
things of Christ, that be the more weighty matters of the Gospel: as put case,
Forms to the prejudice of substance: Order to the prejudice of edification:
Uniformity to the prejudice of union, etc. And this, whether by extolling of
the highest and most weighty things of Christ, to the prejudice of other things
which are also his Ordinances: or by the depressing and decreeing of other more
subordinate things of Christ, and circumstantial, to the prejudice of the
weightiest matters of the Gospel: for although no Ordinance of Christ be a
little one, and to be set at naught; yet without controversy there be some of
them more weighty than others.

Use 2. For discovery how far we fall short in practical giving to Christ his
own place in the Covenant: There be very few, even of those who dare not
knowingly slight Christ, who yet do give him his own room in the Covenant.
Consider it but a little: 1. He is the root and original of the Covenant: have
you acknowledged and employed him as such? have your soul-transactions with
God, been grounded upon Christ's transactions with him? or have you not in point
of Soul-covenanting with God, dealt as if the Covenant had its first rise then,
when it first entered in thy heart? Consider, I pray, where you have pitched
the original rise and foundation of that blessed transaction. 2. He is the
principal party with whom the Covenant was made at the first hand: do you
always give that place to Christ? do you put him foremost? or do you not rather
drudg him after you? I fear, nay I doubt not, we deal in many things with God
as if we were the principal party covenanting: in matter of Gospel-promises, as
if we were the principal Creditor, to whom a performance of these things were
due: and in matter of Gospel-commands, as if we were the principal Debtors from
whom a performance of Duty could be expected. 3. Christ is the chief blessing
of the covenant: have you sought him as such? or has any other blessing of the
Covenant had his room in thy heart? have you sought life and salvation in the
promises, as the chief blessing contained in them? or have you seen something
in the promises better and more desirable than these, even Christ, who is in
every promise, and is the best thing in the promise? 4. He is valuable above
all things else contained in the Covenant: he is the full price of the whole
bargain; have you put this value upon him? have you made him your all, your
treasure for which you treated in this bargain, and bought the field? 5. He is
the samplar and first copy of the Covenant: did you ever consider how the peace
and union was first made in his person? have you followed that blessed copy, to
have this your Covenant with God, the Divine Nature coming down to you, and you
brought up to meet with God in Christ, and with him, and in him to have
mystical union? 6. He is the sum of the Covenant: have you studied this compend
well? how to reduce all the Covenant to Christ, to find it all in him, and to
make all the Covenant praise him?

Use 3. For trial, whether you be in the Covenant of Grace, or not: whether you
have taken hold of the Covenant: as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 65.4. Know it by
this, if thou art in Christ, thou art in the Covenant: if thou have taken hold
of him, thou have taken hold of the Covenant, Joh. 1.12, But as many as
received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them
that believe on his name. Ephesians. 2.12, That at that time ye were without Christ,
being aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers from the covenant
of promise, having no hope, and without God in the world. To be without Christ,
and to be strangers to the Covenant of promise, are equivalent: if the Covenant
be given, Christ is given: and if Christ be given, the Covenant is given: for
you are in so far in the Covenant of Grace, as you have any thing of Christ in
you, Col. 1.27, To whom God would make known, what is the riches of the glory
of this mystery among the Gentiles, which is Christ in you, the hope of glory.
2 Cor. 13.5, Examine your selves whether ye be in the faith: prove your own
selves. Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye
be reprobates? If you have no right to Christ, then none to the Covenant: try
therefore your standing: sinners where are you? under the first husband, or
married to another? are you in Christ or not? and consequently in the Covenant
of Grace, or without it? Romans 7.4, Wherefore my brethren, ye also are become
dead to the law by the body of Christ, that ye should be married to another,
even to him who is raised from the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto
God.

Try this, 1. By your divorcement from Idols, and all other lovers; this
Covenant breaks all former engagements, whether they have been to lusts or to
creatures: henceforth if thou be in Christ, and engaged with him through this
Covenant, all these former engagements must be so far cast loose, that hatred
must be to lusts instead of former love, Gal. 5.24, And they that are Christ's,
have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts. Mark. 9.43, And if thy
hand offend thee, cut it off: it is better for thee to enter into life maimed,
than having two hands, to go into hell, into the fire that never shall be
quenched, where the worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched, etc. And half
a love to the creatures, or limited, subordinate, secondary, regular,
submissive love to them, instead of old heart engagements, Ezekiel. 36.25, From
all your filthiness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you. Psalm. 45.10,
11, Hearken, O daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear: forget also thine
own people, and thy fathers house. So shall the king greatly desire thy beauty:
for he is thy Lord, and worship thou him. Josh. 24.23, Now therefore put away,
said he, the strange gods which are among you, and incline your heart unto the
Lord God of Israel. Hos. 14.8, Ephraim shall say, What have I to do any more
with idols? Genesis 12.1, Now the Lord had said unto Abram, Get thee out of thy
country, and from thy kindred, and from thy fathers house, unto a land that I
will show thee.

2. Try it by your consenting to the mutual tie which the Covenant brings
with it: for it does not only hold forth what God will be to you, but what you
must be to him: it obliges you to be the Lords, as well as it makes him
yours, Hos. 3.3. It says, Thou shall not be for another man; so will I also be
for thee. If then you consent as willingly to be Christ's, as to have him made
yours; by this reciprocation and echo of affection and engagement to him, you
may know your being in him, and so in the Covenant, Rev. 22.17, 20, And the
spirit, and the bride say come, and let him that hears say come. -- Surely, I
come quickly, Amen. Song. 2.16, My Beloved is mine, and I am his. 2 Chronicles.
30.8, Now be ye not stiffnecked as your fathers were: but yield your selves
unto the Lord, and enter into his sanctuary, which he has sanctified for ever:
and serve the Lord your God, that the fierceness of his wrath may turn away
from you.

3. Try it by your subjection and submission to Christ: for they that are in
Christ, they do not only consent to be his, but there is a subjection of their
consent unto him, as unto their Head, Husband, Lord, and King; as Wives and
Subjects do in their Covenants with their Husbands and Kings, 2 Cor. 9.13, The
subjection of your consent. There must be a through compliance with Christ in
all his offices, and in every part of each of his office: for we must not
comply with Christ as a Priest only, but also as a witness, a leadeer and
commander of the people, Isa. 55.4, since he is given for these ends, as well
as for the former: Neither must we submit only to that part of his Priesthood,
whereby he offered sacrifice, and slight his internession, Heb. 5.1, 7. and
9.24, 26. Nor only to the external part of his Prophetical and Kingly offices,
by subjecting our selves to ordinances (as the manner of formal hypocrites is):
but to the sovereignty of his inward teaching and ruling also, Jer. 31.33, 34,
I will put my law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts, and will
he their God, and they shall be my people. And they shall teach no more every
man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying, Know the Lord. Nor to his
inward teaching and ruling only (as despisers of Ordinances pretend), but to
the external administration of his Covenant, by Ordinances of worship and
government also, so long as his tabernacle is with men, which must be till
Christ's giving up the kingdom, Rev. 21.3, 22, 23. with Ezekiel. 43.11.

4. Try it by your satisfaction with, and acceptance of the whole bargain,
without division, diminution, addition, or alteration of any clause in it, Isa.
55.3. Jer. 31.32, etc. Those who are in Christ, and so within the Covenant of
Grace, do not divide the promises of the Covenant, from the condition and
commands thereof; neither do they reject any thing which God has put in that
bargain: but on the contrary they close with it as it stands in the offer of
the Gospel (without bogling and skaring at the reservation of the cross): and
with a soul-satisfaction found in the offer, 2 Samuel 23.5, saying with David,
this is all my desire. And Psalm. 16.5, 6, The Lord is the portion of mine
inheritance, and of my cup: thou maintainest my lot. The lines are fallen to me
in pleasant places: yea, I have a goodly heritage. Psalm. 73.25, Whom have I in
heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee.

5. Try it by your accounting duties your privilege, which other men account
their burden, 1 John 5.3, For this is the love of God, that we keep his
commandments, and his commandments are not grievous. Mat. 11.30, For my yoke is
easy, and my burden is light. By your experiencing that holy facility in
duties which springs from love to Christ, and delight in God, 2 Cor. 5.14,
For the love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge, that if one died
for all, then were all dead. Whereby it comes to pass, that the very work of
believers is wages and hire in their hands; that I say, is demonstrative of one
being in Christ, and so of a new-Covenant-estate.

6. Try it by your equal endeavors after holiness and heaven; after conformity
unto Christ, and communion with him: if thy endeavors after sanctification, be
as vigorous as after salvation; if thou would as gladly be made holy, as be
in heaven; if thou desire as really to be made like Christ, as to have
fellowship with him; this speaks thy being in him, and if so, thy being in
the Covenant, 2 Cor. 7.1, Having therefore these promises (dearly beloved), let
us cleanse our selves from all fil^hiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting
holiness in the fear of God. 1 John 3.3, And every man that has this hope in
him, purifieth himself, even as he is pure.

7. Try it by your being humbled and provoked to holiness, by the knowledge of
your being in Christ, and your reflections upon this great privilege with
humbling admiration: for after this manner has it wrought upon Gods children,
Romans 3.27, Where is boasting then? it is excluded: by what law? of works? nay:
but by the law of faith. Ezekiel. 16.36, That thou may remember, and be
confounded, and never open thy mouth any more, because of thy shame, when I am
pacified toward thee, for all that thou have done, says the Lord God. 1 Timothy
1.13, 14, Who was before a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious. But I
obtained mercy, because I did it ignorantly, in unbelief: and the grace of our
Lord was exceeding abundant, with faith and love, which is in Christ Jesus,
Joh. 14.22, Lord, how is it that thou will manifest thy self to us, and not
unto the world?

8. Try it by your superlative valuing of Christ: the weakest faith which is
precious, does value Christ above all, 1 Pet. 2.7, To you therefore which
believe, he is precious. Prove. 3.15, She is more precious than rubies: and all
the things thou can desire, are not to be compared unto her. Christ is
superlatively valued; 1. When Christ alone, without all other comforts, is
looked upon as enough, when the soul takes satisfaction in this portion, Psalm.
73.25, Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none upon earth that I
desire besides thee. Psalm. 16.5, 6, The Lord is the portion of mine
inheritance, and my cup: thou maintainest my lot. The lines are fallen unto me
in pleasant places: yea, I have a goodly heritage. When the soul reckons it
self eternally made up in him, and blesses it self in him, Lam. 3.24, The Lord
is my portion, says my soul, therefore will I hope in him. 2. When we value
Christ out of love, not out of necessity only, as the manner of those is, who
come to him only in their exigency, as men use Physicians, Psalm. 116.1, I love
the Lord, because he has heard my voice, and my supplication. 3. When the
excellencies of Christ do affect the heart to take pains to seek him,
proportionably, as we seek after other things, Song. 5.6, 9, 10, I opened to my
beloved, but my beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone: my soul failed
when he spoke: I sought him, but I could not find him: I called him, but he
gave me no answer. What is thy beloved more than another beloved, O thou
fairest among women? what is thy beloved more than another beloved, that thou
do so charge us? my beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten
thousand. 4. When we are not easily offended at him, Mat. 11.6, And blessed is
he, whosoever shall not be offended in me. Song. 5.7, 8, The watchmen that
went about the city, found me, they smote me, they wounded me: the keepers of
the walls took away my vail from me. I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, if
ye find my love, that ye tell him that I am sick of love. There is nothing that
argues more clearly a low esteem of Christ, than a readiness to be soon and
easily stumbled at him, or something in his way with us, or attending the way
of seeking him; and on the other hand, nothing argues a higher esteem of him,
than not to be easily offended at him; let him do what he will, yet will I go
after him; let me meet with what can be imagined, which stumbleth others, yet
will I hold on my way; is the thoughts and heart-language of one that valueth
Christ above all. Job 13.15, Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him.

Use 4. To teach us, whatsoever things appertaining to this Covenant we cast
our eyes upon, to observe more of Christ in it: for if we look upon it aright,
there is no part of the Covenant but we may behold Christ engraven upon it; he
is the precious subject matter of the whole, and of every part of the Covenant,
whether they be, 1. Things covenanted by God to us; Christ is engraven upon
every promise, and blessing, and privilege of the Covenant: the righteousness
and life whereunto we are restored, are the righteousness and life of Christ,
Jer. 23.6, And this is his name whereby he shall be called, The Lord our
righteousness. Gal. 2.20, Yet not I, but Christ lives in me: and the life
which I now live in the fiesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God. 1 Cor.
1.30, But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption. Col. 3.2, 3, Set your
affection on things above, and not on things on the earth. For ye are dead, and
your life is hid with Christ in God. The Sonship, the spirit, the grace, the
title to God, they are our partnership of Christ's Sonship, his spirit, his
grace, his Covenant-right to God, Romans 8.17, And if children, then heirs, heirs
of God, and joint-heirs with Christ: if so be that we suffer with him, that we
may be also glorified together. Gal. 4.6, And because ye are sons, God has
sent out the spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father. Joh.
1.14, 16, And the word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, (and we beheld his
glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the father) full of grace and
truth. And of his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace. Or, 2.
Whether they be things re-stipulated by us to God, as conditions of the
Covenant, or as duties of the confederate people; upon every condition and duty
of the Covenant, Christ is engraven: the faith accepting Covenant-grace and
blessings, is the faith of the Son of God, Gal. 2.20. The holiness and worthy
walking whereunto we are called, is that same thing whereunto we are chosen and
created in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.10. and 1.4.

Use 5. For commending Christ to you: 1. See the necessity of receiving Christ,
and of being in him, without which we can have no right to the Covenant, nor to
any thing contained in it: he is given for a Covenant: if it were possible for
you to receive all that is in the Gospel-offers, and not to receive Christ, all
these things without him could not change your Covenant-state, Ephesians. 2.12, If
you continue without Christ, you are still without the Covenant: therefore is
that expression so frequently used to denote one in Covenant with God, they
that are in Christ, Romans 8.1. 2 Cor. 12.2.

2. Learn the way how the confederate people should come to God: it is not
enough that we should come to God, and bring Christ with us as a third person;
but we must also come to God as being in Christ, as being one with him, Joh.
15.2. And this is to come to God through Christ, Heb. 7.25.

3. Be persuaded to take him who is given of God for a Covenant of the people:
make Christ your own, and you make all the bargain your own: for he is the
Covenant of the people, and he is all, says the Apostle, Col. 3.11, And, whosoever
finds me, finds life, and shall obtain favor of the Lord, says he
himself, Prove. 8.35. We beseech you receive the gift which draws all the
Covenant along with it, Joh. 1.12, But as many as received him, to them gave he
power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his name. If you
ask, When do we receive Christ? 1. When we receive the very bonds of the word,
and that which does most cross our corruption, and straiten the looseness and
liberty of our flesh, 1 Thessalonians. 1.6, And ye became followers of us, and of the
Lord, having received the word in much affliction, with joy of the holy Ghost.
2 Cor. 10.4, 5, For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty
through God, to the pulling down of strong holds: Casting down imaginations,
and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God; and
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. 2. When we
embrace and kiss the promises, that is, when we love them dearly, and welcome
them kindly, for the good that is in them, for the things which they carry
forth unto us, Heb. 11.13, These all died in faith, not having received the
promises, but having seen them afar off, and were persuaded of them, and
embraced them, and confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the
earth. So did those Worthies who obtained a good report through faith, verso
390 3. When we find and receive something sweeter and better in the promises
than salvation, even Christ himself, Song. 5.16, His mouth is most sweet, yea,
he is altogether lovely. This is my beloved, and this is my friend, O daughters
of Jerusalem. A temporary may receive the word with joy, and the promises of
the word; but how? for salvation that is in them: but the believer finds
something in them better than Salvation, Joh. 6.68, Then Simon Peter answered
him, Lord, to whom shall we go? thou have the words of eternal life. Psalm.
73.25, 26, Whom have I in heaven but thee? and there in none upon earth that I
desire besides thee. My heart and my flesh fails: but God is the strength of
my heart, and my portion for ever.

4. Since God gives Christ for all the Covenant, be you persuaded to take him
for all, and to make use of him for all, 1 Cor. 1.30, But of him are ye in
Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption. 1. To fulfill all the promises of the Covenant
to you; for in him they are yea, and in him they are all Amen, 2 Cor. 1.20. 2.
To fulfill and perform the condition of the Covenant in you; to determine your
wills to believe, Joh. 6.37, All that the father gives me, shall come to me.
Song. 1.4, Draw me, we will run after thee. Joh. 12.32, And I, if I be lifted
up from the earth, will draw all men unto me. 3. To perform the duties in you,
which the Covenant requires of you, Phil. 4.13. Joh. 15.5. Ephesians: 2.10.

Use 6. For comfort and encouragement to believers. 1. Comfort your selves in
the bargain which you have made, upon this ground, Christ is in the Covenant;
yea, he is given for a Covenant of the people, and therefore all shall be well,
and all shall be sure and firm, Isa. 22.23, And I will fasten him as a nail in
a sure place, and he shall be for a glorious throne to his fathers house. Zech.
10.4, Out of him came forth the corner, out of him the nails Isa. 3.10, Say ye
to the righteous, that it shall be well with him: for they shall eat the fruit
of their doings. Comfort your selves, 1. Against your being short of other men
in worldly-injoyments, Christ is given you for a Covenant, but not unto them: O
wonder at it! and be comforted, with him who said, Lord how is it that thou will manifest thy self to us, and not unto the world? You can own Christ, they
cannot, Psalm. 67.6, And God, even our own God shall bless us. Psalm. 73.26, My
flesh and my heart fails: but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion
for ever. 2. Comfort your selves against all snares, dangers, tentations, and
storms that can blow against you in your way to heaven, Christ is in the
Covenant, and that shall be your safety; as the disciples were safe at sea
against greatest tempests, because Christ was in the ship with them, Mat. 8.13,
to 28. Consider, he is embarked with you, and shall bring you to land, 1 John
4.4, Ye are of God, little children, and have overcome them: because greater is
he that is in you, than he that is in the world. 3. Comfort your selves against
all your wants and weaknesses, and all the miseries of your present condition;
Christ is given for a Covenant of the people: and though you be foolish, he is
wise, 1 Cor. 1.30, But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto
us wisdom. Though you be weak, he is strong, Psalm. 89.19, I have laid help upon
one that is mighty. Mat. 12.29, Or else how can one enter into a strong man's
house, and spoil his goods, except he first bind the strong man, and then he
will spoil his house? Though you be faithless, he is faithful, 2 Timothy 2.13, If
we believe not, yet he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself. Though you be
nothing, Christ is all, Col. 3.11. Whatsoever is wanting in you, is abounding
in him; and if you abuse not the grace of Christ by turning it into wantonness,
it is all one if it be betwixt you: its as good and much better it be in him
than in you: for if he be given to you, all comes with him, 1 Cor. 1.30, But of
him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.

2. Believers in Christ, you who have received him who was given for a Covenant
of the people, take courage and boldness to Godward in all that you have to do
with him: For, 1. Having received Christ for a Covenant of the people, you may
pray and deal confidently with God, as though Christ did beseech God by you,
Isa. 45.11, Thus says the Lord, the holy one of Israel, and his maker, Ask me
of things to come, concerning my Sons, and concerning the work of my hands
command ye me. 2. You have gotten Christ, and therefore nothing shall be denied
you, Romans 8.32, He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us
all: how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? 3. You have
received more than you know of, Joh. 14.4, 5, 20, And whither I go ye know, and
the way you know. Thomas says unto him, Lord, we know not whither thou go:
and how can we know the way? -- at that day ye shall know that I am in my
father, and you in me, and I in you. You have all the Covenant, if you have
him. 4. You have received more than you want, a greater thing than ever you
shall be capable to need or want hereafter; for how great soever your wants be,
you cannot conceive them to be so great as Christ, who is given to you, Phil.
4.19, But my God shall supply all your need, according to his riches in glory
by Christ Jesus. 2 Cor. 9.8, And God is able to make all grace abound toward
you, that ye always having all sufficiency in all things, may abound to every
good work.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and are to be sold by Tho. Parkhurst, at the Bible and
Three Crowns in Cheapside.
SERMONS on the whole Epistle of Saint Paul to the Colossians, by Mr. J.
Daille, translated into English by F. S. with Dr. Tho. Goodwin's, and Dr. Joh.
Owens Epistles Recommendatory. A practical Exposition on the 3d Chapter of the
first Epistle of Saint Paul to the Corinthians, with the Godly man's choice, on
Psalm. 4. v. 6, 7, 8. by Anthony Burgess. An Exposition of Christ's Temptation,
on Mat. 4. and Peter's Sermon to Cornelius; and circumspect walking. By Dr. Tho.
Tailor. Dr. Donns 4to Sermons, being his 3 Volumes. Pareus Exposition on the
Revelations. Choice and practical Expositions on 4 select Psalms: viz. The
fourth Psalm in eight, The forty second Psalm in ten, The fifty first Psalm in
twenty, The sixty third Psalm in seven Sermons. By Tho. Horton. D. D.
Books 4to
The Door of Salvation opened by the Key of Regeneration, by George Swinnock,
M. A. An Antidote against Quakerism, by Steph. Scandret. An Exposition on the
five first Chapters of Ezekiel, by William Greenhil. The Gospel Covenant
opened, by Pet. Bulkley. Gods holy-Mind touching matters moral, which he
uttered in ten Commandments: Also, an Exposition on the Lords Prayer, by Edward
Eston, B. D. The Fiery-Jesuit, or an Historical-Collection of the rise,
increase, doctrines and deeds of the Jesuits. Horologiographia optica;
Dyalling, universal and particular, by Sylvanus Morgan. A seasonable Apology
for Religion, by Matthew Pool. Separation no Schism, in answer to a Sermon
preached before the Lord Mayor, by J. S. The practical Divinity of the Papists
discovered to be destructive to true Religion, and Men's souls, by J. Clarkson.
An Exercitation on a question in Divinity, and Case of Conscience, viz. Whether
it be lawful for any person to act contrary to the Opinion of his own
Conscience? Certain considerations tending to promote Peace and Unity amongst
Protestants. The Saints triumph over the last enemy, in a Sermon at the Funeral
of Mr. James Janeway, by Nath. Vincent. The Morning Lecture against Popery,
preached by several Ministers of the Gospel in or near London. Doctor Wilds
Letter of Thanks and Poems. A new Copy-Book of all sorts of useful hands. The
Saints privilege by dying, by Mr. Scot. The new World; or new-reformed Church,
by Doctor Homes. The Intercourse of Divine Love between Christ and the Church,
or the particular Believing soul: in several Lectures on the whole second Chap.
of Canticles, by Joh. Collins, D. D.
Large 8vo.
Heart-Treasure: or a Treatise tending to fill and furnish the head and heart
of every Christian with Soul-inriching treasure of truths, graces, experiences,
and comforts. The sure mercies of David; or a second part of Heart-treasure.
Closet-prayer a Christians duty; all three by O. Heywood. A practical discourse
of Prayer; wherein is handled the nature and duty of Prayer, by Tho. Cobbet. Of
quenching the Spirit, the evil of it, in respect both of its causes and
effects, discovered by Theophilus Polwheile. Heaven and Hell in a Good or Bad
Conscience, by Nath. Vincent. The re-building of London encouraged and improved
in several meditations: by Samuel Rolls. The Sure way to Salvation; or a
Treatise of the Saints mystical Union with Christ; by Richard Stedman, M. A.
Sober Singularity by the same Author. Heaven taken by Storm.

