PHAETON: OR, The Fatal Divorce. A TRAGEDY As it is Acted at the THEATER ROYAL
IN Imitation of the ANCIENTS.

With some Reflections on a Book called, a Short View of the Immorality and
Profaneness of the English Stage.

Principibus placuisse Viris non ultima Laus est. Hor. lib. Epist. 1. Eist. 17.
Non ego ventosae Plebis Suffragia venor. Lib. eodem. Ep. 19.

LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper, at the Black-boy over against St. Dunstans
Church in Fleetstreet. School.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE CHARLES MONTAGUE, Esquire Chancellor of the Exchequer, One
of the Lords of the Treasury, and One of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council, etc.
SIR,
I Have, methinks, a sort of Right to your Patronage for this Play, since to
you alone I owe the Power of writing it; for it was YOU alone, by the most
generous Action in the World, and done in the most generous and engageing
Manner, that delivered me from Misfortunes that might else have oppressed me,
and made me incapable of all Attempts of this Nature. And that Satisfactiou a
Poet finds in the Success of his Endeavors, I receive with infinite Additions,
since it gives me an Opportunity of owning in Public ^he uncommon Obligations I
have to Mr. MONTAGUE's Generosity. Our Acknowledgements and Thanks are All the
Returns required of us by Heaven, and the Poet has no other to make to the
Great, who, when dignified with your Virtues, Sir, are the true Images of
Heaven. There is a Pain in being Obliged to most Men, but there is so
Reasonable a Vanity in Receiving a Favor from Mr. Montague (distinct from the
Benefit) that we are fond of it, and that exalts the Satisfaction into a
pleasure almost equal to the Power of Obliging.

But besides the Duty I am under of laying this Play, Sir, at Your Feet, it
brings me this Advantage, that I secure my self from the Severe Censurers of
Dedications, for Flatery here would be an unpardonable Folly as well as Crime,
a superfluous Falsehood, that would rather weaken, than support the Truth, and
so instead of heightning I should only debase the Character, I so much admire.

When a Poet, indeed, makes so imprudent a Choice, as to throw himself on a
Poverty of Desert, he lies under a sort of Necessity of having a Recourse to
the Embellishments of his Art; yet then, the Dawb is easily seen through: For let
the Poets pretend to what they please, they can in Reality add no true Luster
to a Piece, that has not an Innate Worth. In spite of their Gilding, the baser
Metal will soon appear to a nice Observer. But under this just, and more happy
Choice, I have no occasion for Heigthings, no shadow of a Pretense to seek
additional, when the Native Beauties are so numerous, and so perfect; to lose
Those would be to lose the Likeness in imaginary Charms, and that would be to
lose the Value of the Draught, for an Unaccountable and Useless indulgence to
Fiction.

Your Easiness of Access; your Affability; your admirable Address in the
Dispatch of Business; the Vivacity of your Wit, your Penetration, and true
Judgment in Books, Men, and in the most perplexing Affairs, and Exigencies of
State; your Candor, Integrity, Justice, and Open Truth, with all the other
Virtues, that make YOU, Sir, conspicuous, and your Friends and the Nation
happy, are an evident Proof of this. But to show the Advantages that
Particulars, as well as the Public, receive from them every day, would make a
Volume of this Epistle, and yet amount to no more, than what daily Experience,
and the general Voice afford us; from which every one says of Tou, what Horace
said of Quintilius to Virgil.

Cui Pudor, and Justiciae soror
Incorrupta Fides, nudaque Veritas,
Quando ullum invenient Parem?
The Benefits the Nation has received from your Administration are too
Numerous, too evident, and too important to suffer us to forget the Virtues,
whence we derive them. It Is your Happiness, Sir, to have Obliged the bravest
People, and the greatest King in the World; for such vast, and uncommon
Services, deserve the Name of OBLIGATIONS.

You found the STATE engaged in a most important, necessary, and expensive War,
for the Honor, and for the Safety of Europe; in which the Liberties of our
Neighbring Nations, as well as of our own, lay at Stake; and in which they all
had so absolute a Dependence on US, that without our Extraordinary Help the
whole Cause must have fallen. At such a Time as this, at so very nice and
difficult a Conjuncture, Providence brought You from a private Life to do your
Country, and all Europe, such stupendous Services, that Seven Years ago, would
have been looked on, as impossible to be done, and Chymera's to be promised.

Money (next to the admirable Conduct of the greatest Prince, and General of
the Age) was the Support, the Life, the Nerve of the War. The means of raising
which, with all that Satisfaction and Ease to the People, as we have found it
done, was a Talent Peculiar to your self. But as by the Continuance of the War
the Difficulty every Year increased, so it gave every Year fresh Proofs of your
Abilities, and how necessary your Administration was to make us Happy. But
never was such a Tug of Judgment, never was such a Noble, daring and necessary
Undertaking, as the Alteration of the whole Coin of the Nation, by the villainy
of so many, corrupted to the public Misery, and to the Ruin of our Trade, of
our Glory, nay, of our very Liberties, and all that could, or ought to be, dear
to Mankind, had it not been for Your admirable Adress and Management: This
dreadful Evil, that had been so many Years coming to a head, You, in a moment
(as I may say) removed.

Who is there that does not know? Who is there, that does not sensibly enjoy
the Benefit of your Counsels, in this great and happy Turn of Affairs? Who is
there, that as long, as he possessess the Advantage of this Service, can forget
the Virtue, the Judgment, and the unwearied Industry, to which he chiefly owes
it? In this you have obliged Posterity, as well as the Present Age, since both
must derive their Wealth and Safety from Mr. Montague.

Such Singular, and such Important Services as these, Sir, have gained you the
most noble Testimony of Your Merit, that Man can desire, and which we have seen
none but You obtain. I mean that Public Vote to your Honor, of the most
August Assembly in the World, the HOUSE of COMMONS. The Vote of that HOUSE OF
COMMONS, that has given so many evide^t and admirable Proofs of their Wisdom,
Justice and Zeal for the public Good; in the Useful and necessary Laws they
have promoted, and the Punishments they have inflicted, like the Old Romans, or
(what is not less Praise) like the Old English, without Regard to the Power or
Wealth of the Offender. But their Glory had been imperfect, had we had no
Example of their Justice in REWARDS, as well as PUNISHMENTS. Mr. MONTAGUE alone
was that Noble Object of their Esteem, You alone could furnish them with this
Example which they wanted, and to You they owed the completing of their
Character and Praise, in their memorable Vote of the 16th. of Feb. 1697.

Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this House, that the Honorable Charles
Montague, Esquire Chancellor of the Exchequer, for his good Services to this
Government, does deserve his Majesty's Favor.

I have put their own Words, because they are more Glorious, and Emphatic, than
all the weak Flourishes of a false Rhetoric. This is no Flatery of a Mercenary
Pen, but the Sentiments, the awful Judgment of a HOUSE of COMMONS, that have
all along had the impartial GOOD and HONOR of their Country perpetually in
their Eye: a HOUSE of COMMONS, which no Considerations have yet been able to
Byas from the divine Medium of RIGHT, and from whom nothing but a tried and
substantial Virtue, could bear off so noble and distinctive a Mark of Honor.
And in this they are the True Representatives of the English Nation, which,
nobly jealous of their Liberties, will be soothed by no gaudy Show, no mere
Appearance; Virtue alone must win their Love, as Yours has done. For this Vote
is the Voice of the People, not excepting your very Enemies, who are yours
only, as they are so to that Government, to the support of which your Wisdom,
your Industry, and your Virtue do so much contribute.

You, Sir, have the Happiness at once to have the Love of the People, and the
peculiar Favor of your King, which is a Sovereign Mark of undoubted Merit. And
there can be n^ gre^ter Proof of the Goodness, and the Wisdom of a Prince, than
when a jealo^s People approve the Choice of his Ministers, for that must be an
^n^enyable Confirmation of both their Capacity, and their Virtue. And this
Confirmation is most evident in Mr. MONTAGUE, who is unanimously owned at once
the Darling of the Bravest People, and of the wisest King.

To whom, therefore, should neglected Learning fly for shelter but to You, Sir?
From whom implore and hope an immediate Protection but from You? You have
already given us many Instances of your Care and Encouragement of Wit and
Learning, in the Favors you have bestowed on several Men of Merit; from whence
we draw an Expecta^ion, that one day the English Nation will owe as much to You
for her Honor and Glory in the Ornaments of Peace, as she has for the Support
and Establishment of them in the War: And that France will have nothing to
boast of their Richlieu (unless in precedence of time) but what we shall
receive from our MONTAGUE, in an Accademy of Sciences equal, if not superior,
to theirs.

^ut, Sir, when you unbend from the Thoughts of your important Employments,
permit me to offer this Play amidst your more valuable Diversions. Your
Judgment in Poetry, ought to make me dread your Censure; but your Candor and
Generosity forbid my Fears, and make me hope you will, with some honorable
Judges, that are pleased to approve it, excuse my Defects for the Usefulness
and Boldness of the Attempt, from whence the Stage may get the Advantage of
Encouraging some better Pens to go on with the Design. Yet this I may say for
my Performance, that I am free from all that Immodesty, Immorality and
Profaness, objected by a late Author, against our Modern Plays, and I Am
confident, that he himself (that is so industrious at perverting the Meaning of
the Poets, and giving their Words a most false and malicious Turn) will not be
able to fix any shadow of an Accusation on this Play.

I have no Reason to Complain of the Success it had on the Stage, which was
more than I had Assurance to hope, even from the Helps of Euripides. But if it
prove so fortunate as to please Mr. MONTAGUE, it will complete the Satisfaction
of

SIR, You^ most Obliged, most Devoted, and most Humble Servant,

THE PREFACE.
IT IS not that I Am fond of following the Mode of Prefacing, that I trouble the
Reader with this; but, because I lie under, what I esteem one of the greatest
Duties of Mankind, that of Gratitude to a dead Hero, and living Friend, to make
my Public Acknowledgments for the helps I have had from them both, in the
following Poem.

That I owe a great many of its Beauties to the Immortal EURIPIDES, I look on
as my Glory, not Crim^; and I have so little to fear on that Account even from
my Enemies, that I find their chief Objections is, that I have not followed him
yet more close. But I hope, the Impartial-Reader that can, and will with Candor
compare this Play with the Medea of EURIPIDES, will own that I had Reasons
suffi^ient to justify my deffering from him in some particulars. For my
Intention being to compose a Piece (if I could,) to Please our Audience; I was
no farther to follow my great Master than both our Two Hearers agreed; but
where their Sentiments differed, there I was obliged to forsake him, and comply
with those who had my Profit, and what is much more in my Opinion, my
Reputation in their Hands.

The little Observation I had made of our Audience, gave me reason to think,
that a Play after the Model of the Ancients, would be far from displeasing
them, for I found that what delighted and transported them, was contained in a
very little compass of those long Plays, that were in Possession of the
Theater, which was the chief Characters only, and the violent Emotions of their
Passions; that the multiplicity of great Characters (under the spacious name of
v^riety) divided their concern, and by consequence, render it of less force;
and that the several inconsiderable Persons were only born with, for the sake
of the Chief, and most passionate Parts. And this seems to me, to have been
long ago observed by our admirable SHAKESPEARE, when he says, As when a well
graced Actor leaves the Stage,
Our Eyes are IDLY bent on him that enters next,
Thinking his prattle to be TEDIOUS, etc.


Now whatever is tedious, can never please; and therefore I concluded, that the
paring off those Superfluities that only swelled the Bulk, without contributing
to the end, could not render my undertaking less agreeable.

Fixed in this Opinion, before it was my good Fortune to meet with the Me^ea of
EURIPIDES, I drew the Plot of an Opera according to this my proposed Model,
from some hints of the French Opera of Phaeton; but after I had drawn the
out-lines of the whole, and proceeded to the very ^urns, and business, nay,
almost Expression of the two first Acts; the Medea of EURIPIDES, accidentally
fell into my Hands, and not only gave an extraordinary pleasure in the perusal,
but made me resolve, since my Plot came so very near it, to make use of those
Advantages the Imitation of so excellent an Author might afford me. But the
Third Act was finished before I could prevail wi^h myself to quit ^^y de^ign'd
Catastrophe of the Fall of Phaeton for that which now it has, which was one of
the reasons of my preserving the Names of Phaeton and the rest,

But for fear this should not satisfy our sou'r Critics, (Custom will make me
give them the generous Name Critics) that my alt'ring the Names of Medea and of
Jason, is not so inexcuseable as they seem to make it; I shall pr^^^^d to some,
perhaps, of more force.

I saw a necessity on my first perusal of EURIPIDES of alt'ring the two ^hief
Characters of the Play, in consideration of the different Temper and Sentiments
of our several Audience. First I was Apprehensive, that Medea, as Euripides
represents her, would shock us. When we hear of her rearing her Brother to
pieces, and the murdering her own Children, contrary to all the Dictates of
Humanity and Mother-hood, we should have been too impatient for her Punishment,
to have expected the happy Event of her barbarous Revenge, nay, perhaps, not
have allowed the Character within the Compass of Nature; or at least decreed it
more unfit for the Stage, than the Cruelties of Nero. Monsters in Nature not
affording those just Lessons a Poet ought to reach his Hearers. But we should
with the extremest Indignation have seen her (as Mr. Dryden observes) at last
furnished with a Flying Chariot to escape her just Punishment. Nor would our
Audience, I fear, ever have considered the reasons that might justify
Euripides in so uncommon a Character, viz, First, that Medea is the Instrument
of the Gods to bring a wonderful Punishment of Perjury about, on those, whom
Power had secured from all other means. Or Secondly, that he, by this
Inhumanity of a Barbarian Woman, strove to deter the Athenians from Marriages
with those, whom they generally estem'd Barbarous, and by that means, enforced
by the most prevailing Motive Example, a known Law of Athens against any
Athenians Marrying a Stranger. Or Thirdly, that Medea being the Granddaughter
of the SUN, had that Chariot as a Present from him. The Descendants of the
Gods, (at least of so near a degree) being exempted, by the Pagan Theology,
from the common Rules of Mankind, as if walking more at large, and being a
superior, and more unconfined sort of Beings.

These considerations would sufficiently justify Euripides; but I could not
hope the whole, or even the greater part of my Hearers, should allow 'em as a
Defense for me; and my Opinion was so far jus^ifi'd by some, that I read my
Play to, that they thought, the very Revenge of Al^hea, tho the Natural Re^ult
of slighted Love, lost her a great share of that pity I wished she might find.
And this was the reason that I made use of those Advantages of the Heathen
System of Divinity, which the Foundation of my Play allowed me, as of Juno,
Hymen, and her Father's Ghost, to fire her with that resentment her unhappy
Love might else have smothered; by this means to render her Revenge as
in-involuntary an Act as possibly I could; tho it was all along my own Opinion,
that the Natural Effect of those Passions every one finds in himself, would
have moved our pity, when her yielding to their most violent impuls, had
brought ^o deplorable r^in on self, and her Children.

Revenge in Woman for slighted Love, for being cast off for another, while yet
she was, and thought her self Beautiful, after Possession, after Vows, and
Oaths of Cons^ancy, after the highest Benefits, is so natural a Frailty, that
I Am confident no Woman of any Spirit would bear it, without attempting some
Revenge or other, and that, more or less violent, according to the Temper of
the Woman. So that I could not see how this, could reasonably rob Althea of
pity; since no unfortunate Character ought to be introduced on the Stage,
without its Humane Frail^ies to justify its Misfortunes: For unfortunate
Perfection, is the Crime of Providence, and to offer at that, is an Impiety a
Poet ought never to be guilty of; being directly opposite to his duty of
Rewarding the Innocent, and punishing the Guilty; and by that means, to
establish a just notion of Providence in its most important Action, the
Government of Mankind.

This the great Sophocles has been notoriously guilty of in his Oedipus
Tyrannus, where he punishes Oedipus for an Accident, as much as for the most
Criminal Offenses. For it is evident, ^that his Mind was ever so far from being
guilty of Parricide and Incest, tha he always expresses the utmost horror of
them. And his voluntary Banishment from Corinth, proved, that he had done all,
that Man could do to avoid the threatened Evil. I know very well, that some
pretend, that he was punished for his Curiousity and Rashness, not Parricide
and Incest, but I can find no tolerable reason for this their Assertion. For,
first, it is not to be gathered from the Play it self, nor from the Moral of
it; and next the Curiosity he was guilty of in consulting the Oracle, was so
far from being a Fault in the Heathen Religion, that it was one of its chief
Duties; and then for a Man to defend himself against ^everal insolent
Assaulters, was rather an Act that merited a Reward, than Punishment, and
Laius, not Oedipus, was here the Offender. The Grecians (as is evident from the
Laws of Athens, etc.) were too great lovers of Bravery, to encourage any
passive Notions, and too Zealous for their Religious Rites to suffer any Moral,
or Lesson of a Play to expose them as foolish. But the miseries of a King or
Tyrant, however brought about, were agreeable in a Democractic Government. And
I Am apt to believe, Sophocles, in this, run along with the Sin of the Times,
which entertained none of the most favorable Notions of Providence. And the
Sons of Orpheus might well be guilty of complementing the depravity of
Humane-kind with the Doctrine of Necessity, at the expense of Providence; since
he himself had, by perverting Religion into Profane Mystery, and Evidence into
Fables, scarce left the Deity one Attribute uncorrupted; and his Successors
made the Godhead guilty of all those Crimes, which (according to them) were
caused in his Family of Mankind by a fatal Necessity.

But to return from this Digression, (into which I insensibly am fallen) what I
have faid, proves, that it is necessary that the unfortuna^e Characters should
be guilty of some Frailties at least, to make Providence just in those Evils
that fall upon them. And those Frailties that produce those Misfortunes being
what we may all be subject to, must cause our pity for the suffering Object;
and this I think, would demand it for Althea, if I had not in compliance with
my Friends opinions, added those Machines to take off from her Guilt.

But if these nice Judges could not pardon her punishing the Guilty, by her
Revenge, how would they have born her destroying the Innocent, and those her
own Children? For whom, Nature imprints in every Woman an uncommon tenderness.
Althea runs mad for the Death of her Children, Medea in-humanly Butchers hers;
which made Seneca give a very odd, and impious Conclusion to his Play on this
Subject; when he makes Jason (when she is aloft in her Chariot) flying away,
say, Per alta vade spatia, sublimi aethere
Testare nullos esse qua veberis deos.


This, I hope, is sufficient to justify my altering the Character of Medea. I
shall now proceed to that of JASON, which, however justifiable in the Original,
I had some reason to fear would not be forgiven in my Copy. In the first Scence
of my Fourth Act, on their meeting after his forsaking her Jason, would seem
too harsh, rough, and Ungentleman-like, to a Lady on our Stage; for to this
purpose is his first Speech to her;

I was always of opinion, that ungoverned Anger was a^ impotent, and desperate
Evil. Your own vain words (that hurt not me) have driven you to Exile; whereas,
could you have quietly born the Commands of Power, you might here calmly have
enjoyed your House, and Home. Continue to call me as you do, the most
prosligate of Men, I matter it not; but if you're Banished for what you vent
against the Royal House, you may take your Exile as a favor. I endeavored to
appease them, to remit your Banishment, but by your proceeding still foolishly
to rail against them, you do not suffer for me, but your own exorbitant Tongue.
But words do not make me desert my Friends, and therefore, Woman, I am come to
know how I can be serviceable to you, that you may not go with your Children
destitue of Necessaries. For Exile brings inconvenencies enough of its own
along with it; nor can I wish you evil, tho you hate me.

I must beg pardon that I have not put this Speech of Euripides into a better,
and more Poetical dress, but that want of leisure will not permit; beside, I
quote not this as a Specimen of his Poetry, but a Proof of the Character of
Jason; which in my Opinion, would have seemed on our Stage too Magisterial
Proud, and Inhumane an Address to a Woman he had unjustly forsaken, to whom he
should (in our Climate at least) have rendered his leaving her more soft and
easy, but he after her passionate Reply, makes a more cruel and barbarous
Answer, which in Prose is to this effect.

Woman, I find, I ought to be no small proficient in Eloquence, but like an
artful Pilot sheer by that empty Loquacity of your. Since therefore you so
extol your Benefit, I must tell you, that Venus alone preserved my Life, as
she alone was the Convoy of my Voyage; nor do I think that I Am obliged to any
other, either of Gods or Men. Your Gall, and the sharp fertility of your Wit,
furnish you with Words; but it is all but a mere arrogant boast of Speech, when
you upbraid me with what Love compelled you to do, that is, to deliver me from
Dangers. I Will not attribute it to a worse Cause, but as you did assist me, I
acknowledge it, and freely own the Favor. But I shall make it evident to you,
that you have received greater Advantages from my Safety than my self. First,
instead of your own native barbarous Country, you enjoy Greece, where Law and
Equity flourish, and where Right gives not place to Favor, or to Force. Your
Parts and Learning are made known to the polite Grecians themselves, among them
your Fame and Reputation is spread: Whereas if you had still been confined to
those obscure remote parts of the Earth, you had lived and died unknwon, etc.

In the same Speech he tells her, that Nature had done better to have found out
some other way of propagating Mankind, than by Woman etc. That the Impotence of
Women was arrived to that Degree, that an Injury to their Bed dissolved the
strictest Friendship, and made them mortal Foes to them they Loved before.

In need quote no more, to show the Reader the Motive of my presuming to alter
this Character too. For though Euripides, full of noble Thoughts of his Country,
or to flatter his Countrymen, makes it a Favor beyond any Retaliation, to be
made an Inhabitant of Greece: Yet I feared that would not be allowed a
Justification of such a manner of dealing here; therefore as Phaeton is young
(the Age of Compassion) as well as Ambitions, I have given him a more generous
sense of his Obligations. For though his Heart, and his Love, were not in his
Power, yet it was always in his Power to endeavor to render his parting with a
Woman that loved him, and to whom he had such uncommon Obligations, as easy as
he possibly could, and not to make this his Endeavors, seemed too Barbarous to
me, when there was no necessity of so cruel a Character. It must always be some
Pain to a generous Temper not to be able to Love, where a Man is beloved, and
impossible to use a Woman harshly for the violent Effects of that Love.

Being, as I thought, under an Obligation to make such Alterations in these two
chief Characters, I confess I had not Assurance enough to keep the Names, my
great Master had made use of, since that might be pardoned in an Imitation,
which would not be forgiven in a Translation. I might indeed, had I thought it
worth my while, have chosen other Names than what I have; but that Objection is
so egregiously trifling, that I think it not worth an Answer.

The next Objection my Hypercritics make, is, -- against Phaeton's being in
Love with Two at the same time: But this, I am bold enough to say, proceeds
from want of Reflecting (a Crime our Critics are often guilty of) as I shall, I
hope, make evident in the sequel of this Preface. But let a Play succeed, or
not, Faults must be found, or some Men would lose a Character they seem very
fond of; for they have a peculiar Aversion to the being distinguished by their
discovery of the Beauties and Excellencies of a Poem; but desire rather to be
known by their si^ting, turning and winding the best Performances, to squeeze
out at least the Shadow of a Fault, if they miss the Substance; grossly
mistaking the true Business of a Critic, and forgetting the Justice of the best
of Critics (because a Poet) Horace, who says of himself.

Verum ubi plura nitent in Carmine, non ego paucis
Offender Maculis, quas aut incuria fudit,
Aut humana parum cavit Natura, etc.
I am far from imagining, that this Play, notwithstanding its Success, is
without its Faults; for it is impossible any Man should produce a Work of this
Nature, where the Principles of the Art are not Demonstrations, but what will
be liable to critical Disputes: For this very Reason the generous part of Men
should excuse what they may dislike, for the pains the Poet has been at to
please them.

But besides these Gentlemen, who sowr'd with their Learning, are too
ungenerous, to have their little Endeavors of force enough to influence the
Lovers of Poetry. I have another Sort of Readers to undeceive, who are much
better Natured, and who may Condemn me through Ignorance, not Malice. Their
want of Acquaintance with the Ancients, may give them a prejudice to my
uncommon Model. To do my self Justice with these, I am obliged to lay down a
very succinct Account of the Difference betwixt the Ancients and the Moderns,
from which they will be the better able to pass a just Sentence on my
Performance.

First, the Ancients to dismiss their Audience with that Pleasure and Profit
they designed them by their Plays, scarce ever extended their Tragedies to
above half the Lengths of ours: For, by obliging the Mind to a too long
Attention, they thought they should make it grow dull, and tired, whi^^ must of
necessity render it less susceptible of those Ends they proposed: Though the
Diversion indeed was something lengthened by the singing of their Chorus, which
answers the Music I have brought in in Mine.

The Moderns on the contrary generally Spin out theirs to an unreasonable
Extent, by adding Under-plots, and several Persons, no way necessary to their
Design, which was admirably avoided by the Ancients, by introducing no more
Characters than were indispensably necessary to ONE Complete Design. And in
this I have endeavored, here to imitate them.

Next the Ancients differed from the Moderns, in the Choice of their Subject.
We are for making the Scene of our Plays, the Field of Battle, a Siege, Camp,
etc. Where, what ever we do else, we are sure to keep the Audience awake with
our Drums and Trumpets, and make them Laugh with our Battles and Rencounters on
the Stage, when they ought to be more concerned: The A^cients never, as I can
remember, chose such noisy Opportunities of perverting the End they proposed in
their Tragedies, viz. the moving Terror and Compassion, which can never be
touched, where such tumultuary Objects come in view.

I urge not this, nor any other Argument here, to Reflect on those great Men of
our Nation, who have followed this way; who finding it delivered down to them
from an Ignorant Age of the Theater, thought, without doubt, that no other way
would please, because this had been so long received. But I Am confident those
who have so much excelled others in this, would have excelled themselves in the
more Natural Way of the Ancients.

Thirdly, the Ancients differed from our Poets in their Incidents. We seek
after various, and surprising Turns in the Fortune of the Persons introduced,
which seldom or never happen in Common Life (the just Object of a Poet) and so
very often lose all PROBABILITY, in what we falsely esteem ADMIRABLE.

Thus, striving to draw, not the Passions, and Natural Inclinations of Man, by
which we might inform the Reader and Hearer in himself, but the Fortune, which
is something foreign and extrinsic, and the Faults of which lie seldom in our
power to amend. Whereas the Ancients only (or chiefly at least) had regard to
the Representation of Man in himself; and the Turns they made use of in their
Tragedies (at least the most Beautiful of them) were of the Passions, and not
of the Fortune only, the Turns of which were ever so placed, as to give a
better Light to the Passions they drew. In this too I have made it my
Endeavors to imitate Them. In the first ACT I have aimed a a Representation of
the Turns, and Sturglings, of an expiring Love, and one that is just rising. On
one side Ambition and Novelty; on the other Obligations and Use, contending
with all their Force for the Mastery: The sure, and Experienced Love of the
present Object, enforced with an uncommon Burst of Tenderness, prevailing, for
that Instant, over the absent, and uncertain Beauty.

This may, in some measure, Answer the Objection I hinted at before, of
Phaeton's being in Love with two at the same time; for a sensible and just
Reader, or Hearer, would easily find that I had Nature, and certain Experience,
not any Dogmatical Notions in my Eye, when I formed that Scene. For a Generous,
and an Amorous Man, when he passes from his first Love, to a new Affair, does
not immediately loose all his former Ties; but doubts a great while, which he
loves best, his old Mistress, or his New; and may very well mistake the Effects
of Use and Gratitude, for the Sentiments of Love, especially when these are
increased and magnified, (as in my First ACT) by all the Tenderness of a
constant Passion. Justice, Gratitude, and a thousand other Motives, range
themselves on the side of the Present Beauty, and experienced Charms, and may
well hold the Mind in suspense a while, which Passion is the most prevailing.
And as our Best Resolutions, are often broke by a present Temptation, so I am
very sure, that any young Man, in Phaeton's Circumstance, would have the same
Sentiments. And as his present Love for Althea, might be the Effect of other
Causes, so might that Passion he thought he had for Lybia, owe its greatest
share to Ambition; as, on a further Thought, he himself seems to imagine, Love
and Ambition bear such equal sway,
And have such blended Power over my Soul,
That it is with Difficulty they are distinguished.


This I am certain every Man, that has his share of Love and Ambition, must
experience in himself on the like occasion.

But I must not forget Ovid, the Great Master of LOVE -- Who justifies this
particular in a much higher degree, in his Verses to Graecinus; in those he is
positive that he Loves two at once: Whereas I only suppose here, that the
Sentiments of other passions might in a Mind unsettl'd, be mistaken by Phaeton
for those of Love; but to proceed.

In the second Act, the Motions, and Turns of Anger betwixt the two Friends,
and the resolving it into a seasonable Reconcilement, carry on my Imitation of
the manner of the Ancients; and I hope that Phaeton's Youth and Ambition, will
make his Change in the Conclusion of the Act, sufficiently Natural.

In the third Act I Am more secure, for there, I have closely followed the
Divine Euripides, in the grief, despair, rage, dissimultation, and resentment
of Althea; as I have in her several Passions in the fourth Act, and something
more at a distance in the fifth.

All just Critics have agreed in prefering Euripides to Sophocles himself, in
his lively draught of the Passions. And therefore I cannot forgive Scaliger's
ill Taste, in prefering Seneca's abominable Medea (I mean in comparison of that
of Euripides) to his. Seneca has nothing but a stiff, unnatural Affectation of
Sententiousness. Euripides is all free, easy, just, and natural; Seneca
prepares nothing, Euripides has an admirable Preparation of every thing, and
this brings me to the last difference I shall now take notice of betwixt the
Ancients and us.

We are fond of FINE THINGS, (as the Ladies call 'em) which common-Place-Books
will supply to any moderately industrious dull Fellow, on all occasions. Nay,
Seneca has store enough of them to set up half a score Modern Authors, as
admired as these Sentences are, tho generally unnatural; for no Man or Woman
agitated by violent Passions, can naturally speak, what they call Fine things,
and to bring in Persons without any concern in the business of the Play, would
be equally Faulty.

I had some thoughts when I begun this Preface to say something of the Style of
the Play, and to have examined into what is the true sublime, and what is
generally mistaken for it, many, both of the Ancients and Moderns, having
affected a tumid, puffy Style for the sublime; but this I have industriously
avoided. One is only sound, the other, as Longinus observes is in the sense as
well as words. Wherefore that Poet that is fond of Gigantic words without a Soul
proportioned to their vast Bulk, falls under the Censure of Horace. Professus
grandia turget --
and -- dunvitat humum, nubes and inania captet.
Statius and Virgil are two Authors that may give us a just Idea of the true
and false Sublime. Statius is fond of the sound, and chooses words that fill
the Mouth, indeed, but when the confussion which that makes, is over, you seek
in vain for the sublimity of Thought, but find nothing but a sonorus emptyness,
numberless Catachreses, and monstrous Hyperboles. On the contrary, Virgil is
great, and magnificent in Expression; but it is not noisie, and always animated
with a Noble, and sublime sense; he is easy (like true Majesty) as well as
great; he fires your mind, but does not confound it; he may be read for ever,
some parts of Statius scarce once.

But this Discourse is of too great an extent for me to pursue here, and my
Preface is already swelled to such a bulk, that I have scarce room to add a
word of my Numbers, therefore, I shall only say, that I have often
industriously affected a roughness in them, to avoid that satiety I find in
many of our best Modern Plays, which proceeds from a perpetual Indentity of
Cadence.

What other Objections my Cavillers have made, I can easily loose the Sense of,
in the satisfaction of the success of my Play, not only with the indifferent
Spectators, but the best Judges of Poetry that I know in the Nation, as well as
the most generously Candid, who, for the boldness of my imitation of the
Ancients, forgave the faults I have committed in the performance. I Am sensible,
and must own it to the World, that Mrs. Knight's admirable Action was no small
advantage to me; who is playing Althea, has evidently showed her self one of
the foremost Actresses of the Age. And we may say of her in playing, as Lassels
says of Tasso in Potery, That he has hindered Virgil from being the only Poet;
so has she proved that the English Stage has more than one Actreses. Nor
indeed, do I complain of the Representation; Most of the Players doing me
justice. But the Music was so admirable, that the best Judges tell me (for I
dare not give it as my own bare Sentiment) that there is the true Purcellian
Air through the whole: that though it be so very different in the several Acts,
it is every where Excellent; and that Mr. Daniel Purcells Composition in this
Play is a certain Proof, that as long as he lives Mr. Henry Purcel will never
die; or our English harmony give place to any of our Neighbors.

As I begun my Preface with my Acknowledgement to the Divine Euripides, so I
shall close it with owning my extraordinary Obligation to my Friend. The
Character of Mr. Cheek is too well known to the Witty, and Conversible Part of
the Town to need any Encomium from me; I am proud of being reckoned among his
Friends, and equally pleased with, and Vain of his particular Approbation of
this Play, and the extraordinary Zeal he had showed for its success

'Twas under his Protection, and the security of his Name, that it ascended the
Stage, and got a Reputation before it was acted, and by that I am satisfied it
met with a more favorable hearing on its first appearance. From his Judicious
and friendly Correction, and Hints, it was secured from injuring his justly
established Reputation of Wit and Poetry. The Obligation was uncommon, and
Merits a greater Return than my Abilities are capable of Making. For a Man of
Sense is, and ought always to be very Cautious of hazarding a Good, that is got
with so much difficulty from so envious, and so ungenerous a People as
generally have the disposal of a man's Fame in that particular. And indeed if I
had not entirely confided in his Judgment, as much as Friendship, I should not
have desired him to put his to the hazard for my own Advantage. It would be
needless to repeat the particular Hints he gave me, or the Corrections he made
in several parts of the Play upon its perusal. But I must own that the
Castrophe, ows most of its Beauty to his advice. For tired with writing the
rest of the Play, I had hurried the Madness of Althea, with too much
Precipitation, and without any apparent Cause. Which at first hearing he
condemned and obliged me to write it over again, and alter it till it pleased
him in the form you now find it.

Since the Conclusion of the foregoing Preface, I have met with a Book, called
a short View of the Immorality, and Profaneness of the English Stage, etc. by
Jeremy Collier, A. M.

NO Man would be more glad to see all Indecencies driven from the English
Stage, than my self; but that desire ought not to influence me or any other Man
to conjure up ten Thousand Devils of our own, and then lay 'em at the Expense
of the Theater. And yet this is the Conduct of this Younger Histrio-Mastix, I
have no Room in this Place to show all the Abuses, and Absurdities this Author
is guilty of, but I reserve most of them for a work I have long designed, and
which I resolve to conclude some time this summer in Vindication of the Stage,
etc. Now I shall only give you a taste of this furious Gentleman, by which you
may Judge of the Man and his Honesty as well as Understanding.

The principal Heads of this Book are included in the Immodesty, Profaneness,
and Immorality of the Stage, and the Clergy's being there abused. A word to
each. The first Point I can say little to, since he is not pleased to be any
farther particular, than to make References to several Plays, which I have not
by me at this Time; but I suppose they are Goblins of his own forming, as many
of those are, which he has produced under the other heads. Under Profaness he
Places the Swearing on the Stage; but to prove this he Quotes no Oaths, but an
Interjection, that has very little Affinity to an Oath, unless it be because it
has two letters of one of the Words, which do in reality compose One.

I grant this Gentleman is no Friend to Oaths, yet his Zeal should not
transport him out of his Princely Wits, or make him run into such a Whimsie in
Etymology as a certain fellow did in Pedigre, to derive himself from King
Pepin. Dipper, diaper; Napkin, Nepkin; Pipkin, King Pepin, as foolishly
Extravagant as this seems, Mr. Collier is more so through great part of his
Charge against our Stage, which to impartial Judges must seem very Innocent,
when its professed Enemy is driven to the wretched Necessity of fixing forged
Crimes upon it. If he replies, that the harmeless Interjection Gad is at least
a vain Word, and therefore to be abandoned, I answer, that if the Poets must
suffer for a few Vain Words, Mr. Collier has a much larger Account to make up,
for a great part of his book will fall under that Condemnation. Another Branch
of his Profaneness, is Abuse of Scripture. Nay he is full of Indignation to
hear Jeremy, in Love for Love, Call the Natural Inclinations to Eating and
Drinking, Whoreson Appetites. This is strange Language, pursues he, the
Manichaeems, who made the Creation the work of the Devil, could scarcely have
been thus Course. Risum teneatis? They are our Authors own words I assure you,
If this be not turning all the Theological Controversies into Redicule with a
Vengeance I Am much mistaken.

What this Gentleman understands by Whoreson I know not, but if our Natural
Inclinations are not to be spoke against at all, I Am sure few Preachers are
Innocent, the fathers of the Church very guilty, and Mr. Collier at last as
criminal in this particular as Mr. Congreve, for he himself calls our Natural
Inclinations to Generation brutal, and which are fully as Natural as that to
Eating and Drinking; to say nothing of Divine Injunction in Genesis. Now I
cannot help thinking that brutal, is to the full as infamous, and impious an
Epithete for our Inclination, as Whoreson. Again he will have Mr. Congreve
guilty of no less than Blasphemy, for making Valentine in Love for Love say
that he is Truth, because there is an Expression something like it in the holy
Scriptures. At this way of arguing he may deny us the Use of the Whole
Alphabet, because the Words of the Bible are composed out of it; or evidently
cut out three parts of all the Languages, the Bible is translated into.

Here he is angry at Mr. Congreve for hitting by chance on two words which
stood together in the New Testament? anon he is more Angry with Mr. Vanbrook,
for altering the words of the Text in the Provoked Wife. I find a man must be
an admirable Pilot to Steer betwixt this Scylla and Charybdis. If he had been
that Good Christian, or that Honest Man he would be thought, he should have
shown more Candor and Charity, than to put the worst, and most Scandalous
Construction on any Gentleman of Honor and Probity's Meaning; for I dare, in
Mr. Congreves Name, assert that the impious design which this Author has coined
out of his own head, was far from his thoughts and where there is any way to
think well of a Man, that way ought certainly to be taken, both by a Christian,
and an honest Man. I have not Room here to bring the most evident
demonstrations of Mr. Colliers foul dealing, but I do not doubt in my Answer to
his Book to prove, that he is guilty of greater Immorality, Profaneness and
Blasphemy, than, from his Quotations, all or at least the greater part of the
Authors, he has arraigned, can be convicted of. If the public Defamation of
several Men of Reputation be Immorality, he is guilty of it. If to make half
Quotations, put false, and forced as well as guilty Constructions on innocent
Words, be dishonest, and Immoral, he is notoriously so. If (as shall be made
evident) great part of the Blasphemy he has Charged on the Stage, be but the
Child of his own Malicious Invention, it must unavoidably follow that a great
share of the Blasphemy in his Book is his own, and not the Poets.

I have neither Room nor Leisure now to examine his Charge on the Stage, for
abusing the Clergy of the Church of England, so eminent for piety and Learning:
if there be any such practice, I think it ought to be reformed. Yet he of all
Men living, is the most unfitting Man to appear their Champion, who has made it
his endeavors to make much the greater part of that Venerable Body pass for a
company of perjured, and Mercenary Times-servers. But of this more hereafter.

To insinuate himself with the Ladies, he has taken, in my Opinion, a very
awkerd Method, for with all the Persons of the highest Quality, Virtue, and
Learning of the Other Sex, he has fixed an Infamy (I mean to his little Power)
on all the Ladies of Honor, Piety, and Sense, who remarkably encouraged those
very Plays he would render so monstrous. He must argue them guilty of want of
Honesty or Understanding, for though they are not by Blushes, or any public
Indication in the Theater to show their dislike of these things, yet by their
absence they ought to discourage Blasphemy, and such Obscenety, that our Modest
Author dare not transcribe. But from the Encouragement of these Plays, it is
evident that Mr. Collier has a Notion of Words, and Things peculiar to himself,
and should therefore, to make himself understood, have given us the definitions
of his Terms in the front of his book. Which I desire he may do before I
publish mine in Vindication of the Stage against Mr. Pryn, and Mr. Collier; in
which I question not, but I shall make evident that the Wit of Man can invent
no way so efficacious, as Drammatick Poetry, to advance Virtue and Wisdom, and
the Supreme duty of an English man, (next the Love of God which is always
Supreme) the Love of our Country, a Lesson I shall particularly Recommend the
Stage for to Mr. Collier.

THE PROLOGUE Spoken by Mr. Powel, Mrs. Cross, etc.
COULD we but hope Athenian Judges here,
We should have then but little Cause to fear.
Euripides to Night adorns our Stage,
For Tragic Passions famed in every Age.
In every Age adored by men of Sense,
Comes here on you, to prove his Influence.
Fixed in his Glory now Two Thousand Years,
No puny Critick's weak Attaques he fears,
O! that he could be tried here by his Peers.
Him the Wise Socrates alone would see,
( Socrates the Wisest by the Gods Decree.)
His Faults our Author hopes that you will please
To pardon for the Beauties of Euripides.
If you damn this (as who knows but you may,
Consid'ring What strange things y' encourage er'y day)
This our New Poet boldly bid me say --
Since pou with Trash more willingly are fed,
He Will toil no more to give you wholesome Bread.
But quit the Ancients, and avoid the Expense
Of Nature, Probability, and Sense:
And furnish out with Speed another Play,
Of Empty Bombast in your Modern Way.
Forced Passions, undistinguished Manners Use,
Surprising Impossibilities he will Choose,
With all the unnatural Charms of your own darling Muse.
Mrs. Cross and six of the Youngest Actresses come forward. Mrs. Cross. Lord,
Mr. Powel! What do you talk of those
Hard Words, to Courtiers, Soldiers, Cits, and Beaux?
Fray let us speak -- We shall be understood,
We speak the Language of All Flesh and Blood.

Mr. Powel. Oh! Mrs. Cross pray do as you think good. Exit.


Mrs. Cross. On our Advice our Poet thinks not fit
To trust his Fortune wholly to your Wit,
For that is the Rock, on which he fears to Split.
As much a surer way his Hopes to Advance,
He wisely borrows Ornaments from France.
Here Is what you Use to to take so much Delight in,
Music, and Dance, and every thing but Fighting.
And though he knew that always here would please,
He left it out to Complement the Peace.
But yet for fear this should not make you easy,
He sent all us here, in hopes to please ye.
For when a wanting Friend has often failed,
With the rich Churl our Sex has soon prevailed,
Molded the ingenerous Cully to their Mind,
And made him prove most Prodigally kind,
If then this Charming Tribe should fail to win ye,
I needs must say some strange dull Devil's in ye.
Cannot our Eyes, our Youth, our Form appease ye?
And have we Nothing? -- Nothing that can please ye?
Has Malice such Confounded Power over ye,
That you will damn, though Youth, and Charms implore ye?
-- Well if your darling Envy damn this Play
(At least before we have had a full third day)
All your Efforts I hear I will defy.

The first. And I. 2d. And I. 3d. and I. 4th. And I. 5th. And I.


Miss Chock. Not one of us -- I Am sure I Will never comply.


Mrs. Cross. You hear what Doom is past, therefore beware,
And for our Sakes the unknown Poets Spare,
All you that have Loves Fear before your Sight,
For Women may be honest out of Spite.

Dramatis Personae.
MEN. Mr. Mills: Merops, King of Egypt, and the Indies, Father to Lybia, and
Husband to Clymene.


Mr. Powel: Phaeton, Son of the SUN, by Clymene, in Love with Lybia, and
Married to Althea.


Mr. Williams: Epaphus, the Son of Jupiter, by IO, now the Goddess Isis, Friend
to Phaeton.


WOMEN. Mrs. Powel: Clymene, second Wife to Merops, and Mother to Phaeton.


Mrs. Knight: Althea, Neice to Argus, and Daughter to the King of Samos, Wife
to Phaeton.


Mrs. Temple: Cassiope, Maids to Althea.


Mrs. Kent: Merope, Maids to Althea.

Lybia, Daughter to Merops by a former Wife, and Heiress to Egypt, and the
Indies, in Love with, Phaeton a mute Person.


Priests, Shepherds, Messengers, etc.

SCENE a Grove, and adjoining Temple in the Court Egypt.

ACT I. SCENE I.
The Curtain rises, and discover a pleasant Grove, etc. the Prospect ending in
a River running through a Valley. Phaeton, Althea, and her Maids in the front of
the Stage, and on each side Shepherds and Shepherdesses in Green.

Phaeton and Althea come forward before the rest. Alth.' I Was on this day,
that first I saw my Phaeton,
'T was on this day, that first I loved my Phaeton:
For when I first beheld you, I first loved you.

Phaet. I loved Althea too, when first I saw her;
Lov d did I say? no, I adored her rather:
For as the Gods to Man, so she to me
Revealed herself in generous Benefits
Of Life, of Liberty!

Alth. O! my dear Lord!
Permit me here in safety to review
The wondrous Rise of my unchanging Love:
Or I lose half the Triumphs of this day.

Phaet. Oh! lose no joy that Phaeton can give.


Alth. It was the solemn Festival of Juno,
The great Protectress of our Samian State,
When at the sacred Rites this wondrous Sight
Surprizd us all, but most affected me.
The Priest o'th sudden started from the Victim,
And threw aloft his trembling hands to Heaven:
His hair erected, stood upripht like bristles;
His glaring eves about confus dly rolled,
And his stretched nostrils breathed a cloud of smoke:
When from his widen'd mouth an awful voice,
A Voice much more than mortal shook the Temple;
As thunder dreadful, and almost as loud,
And in a storm pronounced these fatal words;
Samos is lost, and Hierax is no more,
Unless we drive these Strangers from our shore.
He said, and full of sacred Fury led
The willing people to the neighboring Sea.

Phaet. 'T was there he found us, just escaped the Wreck;
The shattered Relics of the inclement Tempest;
Our Swords, and Virtue, all the Waves had left us.
With joy we spied the Ensigns of the Gods,
Secure of help, and hospitable rights,
Both from his age and office. But alas!
Our hopes all vanished e're they well were formed;
For on the verge of the descending Strand,
With hostile threatenings he forbad our passage.
The ignoble Vulgar, with confirming shouts,
All seconded their Leader.
What cou d we do? on e ry hand beset:
The Sea on this side, and on that the People,
All sworn to our Ruin? Resolved on Death,
My small, but chosen Band, unsheathed their Swords,
Appealing to the Gods, we rushed upon 'em,
And drove the inhumane herd into their street.

Alth. Ay, there I first beheld my Godlike Lord,
Like Mars undaunted, but like Cupid Fair;
A charming terror fill d his lovely face,
That did more execution than his Arm;
Tho that did Wonders scarce to be believed.
As from the Palace we surveyed the Fight
(For the first Tumult drove us from the Temple)
We all took Interest in your doubtful Fate;
And those that feared you, prayed you might overcome;
At least that swift Agreement might secure you.

Phaet. The people now amazd at what we did,
Had soon agreed, had not Sesostris Sword
Cleft down their Mitred Chief. For tho he fell
Himself to expiate his Crime, their rage
Increased still with their numbers; till unable
To wield our glutted Swords, we all were taken.

Alth. Then, like the Sun obscured in noisome Fogs,
I lost my Phaeton in the earthy Vulgar. --
A powerful Pity for thy youth and beauty
(I thought it Pity but I found it Love)
Compelled my steps down to thy frightful Dungeon,
To set thee free from Chains, and hastening Death.
But oh! the Joy! the Transports of my Soul,
When you refused your liberty and life,
If those must rob you of your Benefactress:
Refused a flight, that bore you from Althea!
O! the soft melody that through my ears
Dissolved my heart at your dear vows and oaths
Of boundless love, and of eternal truth!

Phae. O! my false heart! thou have too soon forgot 'em! Aside.


Alth. By the bright God, the Author of thy Being,
I could not help the Fondness I betry'd.
The struggling Ecstacy too mighty grew
For my weak breast to hold! it bore down all
The artful coyness of our modest Sex:
The Ties of Blood; the Fears of Womanhood;
Father, Mother, Country, and toilsom Dangers.
I fled with joy from all that men hold dear,
Alone o re Seas to Asia in a Boat,
My Pilot thou, and my protecting God.

Phae. Aside Oh! why was glory, and this charming woman
Such mortal foes, as not to be united?
Why must I owe so much, and be so poor,
That I can pay so little! O Lybia!
Thy tyrant Beauties have usurped my heart,
And ravished me from all my vows and oaths.

Alth. My Lord, you're thoughtful; nay you seem disturbed,
^s often you do oflate: does ought aggrieve you?

Phae. Nothing, Althea, but the mournful Thought,
How much ill-fated love, alas! has cost thee,

Alth. Tho Father, Mother, Country, all be lost,
Tho for my Unkles truth to ^uno's trust,
For the Fidelity of Argus --
Egypts protecting Goddess hates even me:
Yet in her Egypt, I have nothing lost,
While Phaeton is mine, and only mine.

Phae. Gods! why dye throw such Tenderness away,
On one so little meriting her Goodness! Aside.

Alth. Come, come, this day banish all anxious thoughts;
We'll drown in Music, and the sports prepared
To celebrate this Feast, all sad reflections.
Come sit with me, and please my wishing eyes,
While these delight our ears.

They seat themselves, and the Music comes forward, etc. First Shepherd. Come,
come all ye Shepherds, come come all away,
Forget all your Cares,
Your Fears, and Despairs,
For it is the Lovers Holiday. Repeat this in a Chorus.

Second Shepherd. Let every Shepherd bring his Lass,
in mirthful sports the hours we'll pass;
And while we sing, to raise our pleasures,
Tread you the earth with grateful measures. Here repeat the Chorus, while the
Shepherds and Shepherdesses dance.

Third Shepherd. Ye smiling Graces, come inspire
In every Breast a tender fire,
While wanton laughter adds to our desire.

Chorus and Dance again. Boy and Girl come forward. Boy. Life is but a little
span,
Let us pass it all in pleasure;
Id not lose this dawn of Man,
Since my day's so short a measure.

Girl. Why so hasty? forward Boy:
Sure it is not so long you have fasted?
E're Im ripe, to crop the joy,
Is to eat me ere Im tasted.

Boy. Why this coyness? why this coursing
To the joys you long to prove?
Nature made you all for sporting,
Nature made you all for love.

She. O fie! O fie!


He. You must comply.


She. I must deny.


He. You will comply.


She. No, no, not I.


He. Good faith I Will try.


She. No, no, not ^


He. Indeed you lie.


First Shepherd and first Shepherdess. He. Come, gentle Phyllis, we'll softly
retire,
And once more attempt to allay the dear fire,
My Wishes, thy Eyes and thy Arms inspire.

She. No more -- for I fear we never shall attain
The end of our wishes, but burn still invain.

He. As often as we burn, we'll repeat the soft joy.


She. To repeat it t^o often the bliss will destroy.


He. When the fire's abated, and the passions is done,
We shall both be as easy as e're it begun. The two last lines repeat
together, and then repeat em in a Chorus.

Second Shepherd pursuing a Shepherdess that flies him. Cruel Daphne do not fly
me,
Hear me tho you still deny me.
Hear each piteous groan and sigh,
See, oh! see! your Strephon dye.

Third Shepherd coming to him and pulling him back by the sleeve. Fond Shepherd
prithee cease to woo her,
She flies the more, that you pursue her.
All your whining, and your pining
Will but make her proud, and vain.
Do but slight her, that will spite her,
And revenge on her your pain.
There Is Lydia, there is Chloris, and Phyllis to please you;
They Are fairer than Daphne, yet humble and easy,
When to sighing, and groans you pervert the brisk joy,
You sin against youth, and offend the soft Boy,
For the pleasures he offers, you fondly destroy.

The last three lines repeated in a Chorus. Fourth Shepherd. To passive years
resign your pining,
Active youth no time can spare:
To unperforming Age leave whining,
Youth can better please the fair.
That sweetly should gain,
By the languishing pain,
And sigh more with joy, than despair.

While the last Chorus is here repeated he seems to leave her and she looks
back kindly on him, and then sings, Can you, can you, will you leave me?
Mind em not, for they deceive you.
Quick possessing,
Palls the blessing,
While resistance makes it lasting.
Easy love destroys desire,
Sighs, and wishes fan your fire.
You lose your Appetite by tasting,
Which you sharpen still by fasting:
It Is resistance makes it lasting.
The three last lines repeated in a Chorus of Shepherdesses. He. Enough of
delays, my passion to raise,
And now to Feast let us repair;
Never fear I shall prove a glutton in love,
My stomach^s so keen by despair.

Chorus. Resistance and yielding well tempered, still prove
The best Sauce to the surfeiting Banquet of love.

They all go off Singing. Phaeton and Althea come forward. Phae. aside. O
Lybia! still thou sit'st too near my heart!
For Sports and Music to remove thee thence.
Music blows up the shame I should extinguish.

Alth. My Lord, why still thus sad amidst this Mirth*
You dash the pleasures, that you should advance,
And with forbidding frowns, you check my rising Joy.
What secret sorrow thus o're-clouds your face?
On such a day as this too? Speak my Lord --
I will ease your mind to let me share its burden.

Phae. Nothing -- But that I Am weary of this floath;
These weak enervate softnesses; this rest.
My active soul disdains this woman's life.
I would in youth hoard up for feeble' age,
An awful Treasure of immortal Glory.

Alth. Mistaken men invert the use of nature;
Age is most fit for Mischief, Youth for Love.
When years come on and Impotence of pleasure,
Provoked by envy of the joys they want,
We may allow them to disturb the world.

Phaet. You speak, but like a woman, as I live
How shoud I here exert the God within me?
In thrilling notes? in languishments? and kisses?

Alth. How would my Lord, my Love, exert the God,
But living like the Gods in peaceful joys?
Come, you're unkind to let an empty name,
Rival a love so generous as mine.

Phae. I struggle to thee, spite of my ambition;
But yet my soul starts back to ambition;
For it is ambition is my natural bent:
And tho I give you all of me I can,
You are unsatisfied you have no more.

Turns away and walks from her Alth. Turn not away -- I Am pleased with what
you will give.
Let me but have you all while you are here.
For toilsome thoughts, you will have too much. time
Give me unrivaled this auspicious day.
Be sort, be tender now, look kindly on me,
For my soul languishes, and I am sick with love.

Looking wistfully on him. Phae. Aside. I dare not let my guilty eyes meet hers,
She views me with such pointed searching looks,
As if she would spy into my very heart,
And there discover all the fatal secret.

Alth. You shun my Eyes as if they were disgustful
What have I done? or how have I offended
My Lord! my Life?

Phae. Offended! thou offended?


Alth. I swear I love with my first Virgin fondness:
I live all in you, and I dye without you.
At your approach my heart beats fast within me,
A pleasing, trembling thrills through all my blood,
When e're you touch me with your melting hand.
But when you kiss! O it is not to be spoke!

Phae. No, no, you have not -- nay, you cannot offend me
You're innocent --

Alth. In act, in Word, in Thought,
I call the Gods to attest by innocence.
If e're I wished, or hoped, or thought of joy
But what you gave, but what was all in you,
May you be angry, may you be unkind;
Or in one curse to sum up all that is hateful,
May you soon love some other!

Phae. Gods! Gods! can I hear this and yet be false. Aside:


Alth. So man the Lord of my desires be true,
As they all mov^, and center all in you.

Plae. Alas! Althea I cannot doubt thy truth,
And know thy love. But yet --

Alth. But yet? but what?
He walks up and down discomposedly and thoughtfully. Unfold that fatal Yet --
O tell me that!

Phae. Aside. Gods! why am I by double love made wretched?
Too much abundance it is that makes me poor.
Oh! had I never seen One, or seen but One,
I had been happy then: but seeing both,
I burn for both, and with an equal fire,
I love them both, and both I most desire!

Alth. Oh why thus thoughtful! why that look cast down?
Those folded Arms! Oh why those sudden starts?
Some fatal Sorrow you conceal from me
That shakes your soul thus. Give, O! give my part.
O! do not rob me of my share of woe.
Not on these terms I gave my plighted faith,
To taste your joys, and not partake your grief.
Indeed, I cannot hear such cruel kindness,
Such partial woe, where I must have no share! Weeps

Phae. Aside. O wavering heart! do I deserve such love?
Treacherous, false, persidious, as I am?
Yet she is excellent, divinely excellent! Looks earenestly at her.
Young as the Spring, and as the Graces fair;
Constant as Truth, as melting Pity tender;
As Want ingenious, and as Goodness kind!

Alth. Speak, my dear Lord, these looks are kind indeed:
Come let your Tongue convey my bitter potion,
Which yet, to share with you, will be most sweet.

Pha. Aside. Lybia is fair as her --
She must be proud too of the Crowns she brings,
If she would bring 'em me: for tho I loved her,
Yet she perhaps would never have loved me!
Or not so well, so fiercely, as Althea!

Alth. Quite lost in Thought, he hears not what I say!


Pha. Aside. 'Love and Ambition bear such equal sway,
And have such blended power over my soul,
That it is with difficulty they are distinguished. --
It must be so, Ambition pleads for Lybia,
But for Althea Love. -- And Love prevails, Aloud and turning to her.
She must, she shall, she does possess me all,
Be gone Ambition with thy noisy charms,
Thy tinsel glare -- Haste, take me to thy arms,
O fold me here most charming of thy kind! Run into her 'rms.
Here, form me, mold me, shape me to thy mind,
Glory, Ambition, all you have driven away,
You never possessed me all till this triumphant day!

Alth. O racking joy! O most transporting Rapture!
O gift bevond return! what shall I say?
What shall I do to she how I am ravished?
What can I give, I Have given you all before,
I Have given my self, and I can give no more.
But take that gift, I Will give it over and over.

Flies into his Arms and embraces him. Phae. O! gift like Heaven, the same, yet
always new!
Full of young pleasures, and unfading joys!
Unwasting fuel of Loves growing Fires!
Exhaustle^s source of ravishing desires!
I will forego the chase of false renown,
And my pursuit shall be thy Charms alone;
Of all things else unknowing and unknown.
Happy in thee I will sublimely move
Within the perfect circle of my love.
There blooming pleasures, will be always found.
And ever springing Raptures fill the glorious Round.

ACT II. SCENE I.
The same Scene of the Grove continues. Enter Epaphus and Clymene. Clym. WIthin
this Grove, or the adjacent Valley
You Will find your friend, my hapless Phaeton.
I have used all persuasions of a Mother
To make him quit this cunning Samian Songstress;
But all in vain. -- I hope from friendship more,
And what I could not, you, perhaps, may gain.

Epa. Clymene be sure I Will do my utmost.
Epaphus is not us^d to be denied
When in so just a cause he makes demand.

Clym. I will be near to come to your Assistance,
Friendship, and filial duty joined cannot fail.

Epa. You need not stay, but leave it all to me.
I Will free you from this Samian.

Clym. Be not too rough.
He will not brook Command, tho to entreaty
Plyant.

Epa. Madam retire, I hear some coming --
Leave this Affair entirely to my conduct.

Clym. I go -- but not far off, for fear he fail, As she goes out.
There mark the strengths where friendship cannot prevail,
Then against those my batt^ring Engines move,
Of Power, Ambition, and a Virgins Love. Exit

Epa. Gods! the proud Boy presumes too much, yet sure
He builds upon my former friendship for him:
He durst not else have brought this hated Greek
This Neice of hostile Argus into Egypt,
Nay even into the sacred Roofs of ^sis,
My great but injured mother. But he comes,
Enter Phaeton. And at his sight my blood with fury boyls,
And combats fiercely with expiring friendship.

Phae. What do I see? My friend, my Epaphus*
Come to my Arms, and let me press thee close.

Offers to embrace him but Epaphus puts him away with his Hand. Epa Forbear --
for tho it is certain you see Epaphus,
Yet whether he ought to be your friend, y^had
Best consider. -- if not, I press no Foe
To this true bosom.

Phae. What can this strangeness mean?
I am not conscious to my self of ought,
That does deserve this cold, this unkind meeting.
After thy long thy most regretted Absence.

Epa. Perhaps you hoped I never should return


Phae. O! barbarous thought for one so well beloved,
It was my Mornings Prayer, my daily Vow.
That thou mights it loon be here.

Epa. You thought me tame then,
Mean, Cowardly, base enough to bear it?

Pha. Bear it! bear what?


Epa. Come, come, you know you have wronged me,
And this affected ignorance is unmanly.

Phae. Come, come, you know I cannot wrong you.


Epa. How! cannot wrong me?


Phae. The brave can do no wrong.
I cannot wrong my Fee, much less my Friend.

Epa What er the brave can do* I say you have wronged me,
Treacherously, falsely wrong d me.

Phae. Wrong^ Falsehood --
False to my Friend^! as soon
I would forego m* Love my Mistress -- nay --

Epa. Mistress! what Mistress? for when I left thee,
Thou stoodst an activ^ Candidate for Glory:
Fame was thy Mystress then, and War thy Courtship;
Thy Sword the moving eloquence that won her.
If thou art altered, if thou^ rt fallen from her,
If thou art sunk to puling Woman's Love,
You Are false -- too changed to be a friend of mine,

Phae. That I do love a Woman is most true:
But such a Woman; so unlike her Sex:
Full of such noble Virtues --

Epa. Full of Follies,
Fall of Vice, most worthless of her Sex --

Phae Hold friend, no more, I charge thee say no more,
For s^ou^d I bear to hear he wronged by thee,
Thou well migh^st think, I Would wrong an absent Friend.

Epa. Name not that sacred word? a Friend is what
Thou do not understand: for Friend to Friend
Is holy sacred, preferred to all but Heaven
While thou dese^^e't thy friend for a vile Woman,
A Toy, a Butterflye: the worst of Women too --

Phae. No more -- it is a m^ghty proof of Friendship,
That I can bear all th^s, tho ev^n from thee. --
I do prefer my friend to all but Honor,
And Ho^our binds me to this worthless Woman.

Epa. Honor! what Honor can thou challenge now
That you foorsook when you affronted me,
Affronted me in much my dearest part
My Mother, Isis, the Goddess of thy Country;
Aegypt's protectress, the beloved of Jove.
What honor binds you to a Vagabond,
When your friends honor, and your Mothers tears,
The safety of your native soil, and Gods
Forbid her presence, this hateful Niece, this
Limb of cursed Argus?

Pha. I owe my life
To her.

Epa. I Would sooner owe it to a Coward,
He has the face of Man -- but to this Woman! --

Phae. I drew her from her Father, and her Country.


Epa. That was your Crime, now send her back then.


Pha. 'Twou^d be
Unjust to leave her now.

Ep. It Is impudence
To keep her here. Come, come, young man, you must
Forego this Samian.

Pha. Must?


Ep. You shall.


Pha. Shall?


Ep. Shall! yes shall; I come to force her from thee.


Pha. Force her from me! ha! ha! I laugh at thee;
Thou know, proud Man, thou can not force her from me.

Epa. Proud obstinate Boy, I will.


Pha. Ha! -- By the
Bright God, m' illustrious Father --

Epa. Name him not,
He must dis own thee, a Woman's Property,
A fond convenient tool for useful ends.
Do Gods get such as thee? no it is a Boast,
An empty groundless Boast.
Some Trader got thee, and some Strumpet bore thee,
And shuffl'd thee into the Royal Cradle.

Pha. If I bear this, may Girls, and Eunuchs hoot me;
Cowards buffet me; Infamy drive me
From all Resorts, where manhood^s to be shown. Draws.
Draw, draw, thou noisie Talker; try whose Arm
Will best assert its Heavenly Author. Epaphus draws too.

Ep. Come on. Clymene runs in betwixt them.


Cly. O! hold! O! stay your furious Swords, and Arms!
Or else through me you cut your guilty passage.

Pha. Ha! my Mother! -- Was this your cunning, Sir?
To place your Safeguard, e're you durst provoke me?
But I shall find a Time she shall not protect thee;
Thou Wordy Hero; thou Tongue -- thou Woman Fighter.
Thy guilty Mother lurked within a Cow
So long, she fixed the dastard Spirit in thee
Of that tame Brute.

Ep. Madam, I pray withdraw,
Or I before you shall chastise that Boy,
By your approach made bold.

Cly. O! Epaphus!
Was this well done? was this done like a Friend*
To heap more Sorrows on me by this Quarrel?
Wast thus that I should leave it to your Conduct?
Was this your Word to M^rops, and to me?
Did we entrust to you our Common Darling,
To brave, insult, and quarrel with him?
Under the Friend have you concealed the Foe?
And made me lead you to destroy my Son?
It is unjust, inhospitable, base,
Unworthy the bright Goddess, whence you sprung!
To her I must appeal against her Son.

Ep. I have been to blame, I ask your Pardon.
But thoughts of Injuries from him in Absence;
And offered to my Mother -- from him I loved;
My only b^som Friend, that should have made
My Cause his own; so stung my Heart before,
So wrought my fiery Temper up to Rage,
That at his sight, I scarce k^ew what I did.

Pha. A poor Evasion of th Affront you have given,
To avoid its Punishment, I Will surely pay.
The Time be sure I Will find -- I will -- till then --
I will have naught to say to thee.

Ep. You know I do not fear you -- but I^m calm.


Cly. O! my dear Phaeton! I do conjure thee
(I would command, but you have forgot Obedience)
By all the Pains, and Fears I Have felt for thee,
To give me up thy Vengeance, and thy Anger.

Ep. I ask the same, tho not for Fear but Friendship.


Cly. O think that both a Friend, and Mother ask you!


Pha. He said, I was a Woman's Property,
A Tool -- And can a Tool have any Friend?

Ep. I said it in my Rage, but could not think it,
The Injuries of such a one, could never move me.

Pha. The wrong I did you, if I Have done you wrong,
I had not thought enough, that it was so,
I was so lost in Love, else I^d not done it.
For if there be a Love, above the Love
Of Woman, sure it is the Love of Friends,
And that I had for thee in its Perfection.
If then a Fault, tho done without Design.
Because a Friends, so touched the Friend in thee,
How must thy bitter and reviling Words,
Move such a Friend; wound such a Friend as me?

Ep. You were too Good, and I too rudely brutal?
You gave too much to Fri^ndship. I too little.

Ph^. If thou think so, I gave not then enough;
I should have born more, much more, if possible!
Or else have left thee till thou d^'^ been more calm --
But that I thought your Friend should not be brav^d,
Perhaps I h'd been more passive. OF my Brother!
You us^d me Harshly, -- but you are my Friend --
And have a Right to chide me. O! Epaphus!
Thy name has ^ous^^ the Friend, which bears down all,
And over-runs my Soul! can^t thou forgive me?

Epa. Oh! can thou ask it? ask it too of me?
Who have offended most? Shame and Confusion
Sink me -- Oh! let me kneel, and crawl into thy Arms.
I dare not cheer my guilty Eyes with thine,
Till they with Tears have washed away my Stain.

Kneels and moves forward to him on his Knees embracing his. Pha. Taking him
up. Oh! rise my Friend, or I shall dye with shame.
Cleave to my Bosom with an unfeign^d Ardor!
Thou shall to overcome, this Samian shall be gone,
And bear this guilty Wretch away from Egypt.
Yes, I^ll atone my Mother, Friend, and Country,
The Angry Gods too, with my just Exile.

^pa. Now Heav^n forbid!
No rather let ten thousand Samians stay,
Let rather the whole Race of Argus stay,
Than Egypt should lose thee, the pride of Youth,
The Soldiers Courage, and the Virgins wish!
No by the Gods! I will my self step in
'Twixt thee and Fare; appease my Mothers Rage,
Or in her Temple sacrifice her Son.

Pha. But his Samian! --


Epa. Now, by my Soul, do with her what thou will,
Give me but Friendship; firm me but thy Friend.

Pha. embracing. O! with more Joy than I would grasp at Victory.


Epa. Ha! in that Word your Native Virtue spoke. --
I would not, could I help it, have my Friend,
Unlike the Son of the All-seeing Sun,
Lie thus obscur^d in Shades, in Groves, and Grotto's,
Averse to Glory, and inviting Greatness!
But mount himself to the topmost spoak of Fortune,
And meet the waiting Homages of Kings.
For as thy Father lights the world above,
So should his Son rule all the World below.

Phae. And do thou think that Phoebus was my Father?


Epa. Forget the barbarous Trespass of my Anger,
Or you will break my Heart. I know he is,
Your Deeds, your Virtues, and your Form confess him.
My conscious Soul is Wi^ness that he is.

Phae. By a^l his awful Beams, I swear my Friend,
A vast, and unexperienc^d Joy strikes through me,
Fires all my Blood, and bounds through every Vein,
Rolls in my Breast, and so exalts my Soul,
That I Am unable to contain the Ecstasie.
To hear thee own me Son of the great Sun,
Extends my Limbs, and make me shoot aloft
To a more Go^like Stature. And now methinks
I tread in Air, and mount yon dazzling, Orb,
Exert my Father, and confess the God.
O! Mother! Friend! O! lead me out to Glory,
I Will shake this downy lethargy of Love
From off my Eyes, that thus forbids my Flight.

Epa. Ay now you do indeed exert your F^ther!
You look, you speak, you move, y^u are a God!
To fire you m^re* I bring you joyful News,
The Crowns of India, and of Egypt wait you;
Stretch out your hand, and set em on your Head,

Pha. You speak mysterious Won^er^, be m^re plain.


Cly. Thus long I Have stood, by joyful Wonder fixed,
To see the powerful Motions of your Friendship
Working on to this blessed Union. Now
I tell yon, that your Friend, and Mother bring you
Love, untasted Beauties, and a Crown!
Lybia, my Son, the Charming Lybia!

Pha. What?
Says my Mother? how knew you that I loved her?
Althea's self never yet found out that secret.

Cly. I knew not you loved her, but she loves you;
And I Am o'rejoy'd to find the Passion mutual.

Pha. Oh! you attack me with such subtle Arts,
You must, you will overcome. A Crown! and Lybia!
The Force is too resistless! But Althea!

Ep. Let not that worthless Woman cross thy Thoughts.


Pha. O! do not call her Worthless! She has Worth,
Eternal Love and an immortal Truth!
She saved me from her Fathers barbarous Rage,
And loved me so, she fled from him with me.

Ep. It was a wanton Girls thoughtless Trick,
And it was her Folly what you call her Love,
To leave her Friends, to fly with a young stranger.

Clym. It was her Crime -- for she betrayed her Father,
E're she delivered you.

Ep. Then add to that,
It was her Father slew your guiltless Friends,
Against all Rights, both humane and divine.

Pha. Again, she saved me in Alphenor's Court,
By treacherous means, when he had bound me fast,
She snatched the Dagger from his lifted Hand,
And struck it to his Heart.

Ep. She was not free. So very plain the Choice
'Twixt Age, and Youth; my Friend, and old Alphenor;
A petty Tyrant of an Asian Village,
And the young blooming Pride, and Hopes of Egypt.

Cly. Whate^re she did, she did compelled by Love,
You owe to Venus, what you pay to her.

Ep. He has indeed over paid her for a Trifle.
Thus long she has enjoyed the Court of Egypt;
And fill^d her Bosom with a future God.

Pha. But oh! my Children!


Ep. Send her back with Gold
Enough to purchase a more noble Kingdom
Than was her Fathers, for her self, and Children.

Pha. But it will break her Heart!


Ep. O! think not so --
A Wife, and break her Heart to lose her Husband!

Cly. You have no other way to save 'em all:
The life of Merops is bound up in Lybia,
And hers in thee.

Pha. Ha! does she love me so?


Cly. More, more than I can tell thee. She Is impatient,
Not having seen thee now so many hours.

Pha. O Friend! O Mother! haste, and bring me to her!
For I Am impatient too! I long, I sigh, I burn!
I am unpardonable by the least Delay,
And lose an Age of Pleasure, in one moments stay.
With furious Love I Will rush into her Arms,
And rise a God from her immortal Charms.

The End of the Second Act. ACT III.
SCENE the same Grove, at the end of it an Arbor, in it Althea, in a very
melancholy posture; her Maids attending without. Music is heard, and Juno, and
Hymen, with their Trains descend.

Juno. O Hymen! must we always see
Perjured Man thus faithless be,
And still securely slight our Deity?
Must Vows, and Oaths by man be swore,
And then be never thought on more?
In vain our Votaries seek our Aid,
If thus they still must be betrayed.

Hymen. These crimes unpunished must not go:
No longer delay,
But call just Nemesis away,
From her dismal shades below.
To her Almighty Fate allows
To punish broken Vows.

Chorus. Come come, just Nemesis away,
Too long your justice you delay.

Nemesis and her train of Furies ascend. Nemesis. Grieve, grieve no more, nor
sigh in vain.
Revenge alone can ease your pain.
Revenge affords a sure Relief,
While Love alas promotes your Grief.

Chorus. At the hiss of their Snakes let that passion retire,
That more noble revenge that Bosom may fire.

In this Chorus they dance and shake their Snakes over or toward Althea, then
descend -- Juno and Hymen with their Train ascend, and then Merope and Cassiope
come forward. Cass. Methinks Strange sounds fill all the Ambient Air.


Mer. Of late too frequent have the Portents been,
Boding, I fear, some fatal Evil to us,
Which now alas! appears too imminent
In Phaeton's forsaking our poor Lady.

Cass. Ah! Merope! that this inhumane Man
Had never landed on our Samian Coast.
That prosperous Winds, and Seas had born him safe
To Delos, Claros, or to any place
Far from unhappy Samos. --

Mer. O! my Cassiope! that he h'd been sunk!
For ever sunk in the devouring Tempest!
Or that h' had perished too in the Samian Dungeons!
Then had our Princess never been thus wretched,
By a too fatal, and too tender Love
For an ungrateful, and a false deceiver.
Then had Althea never left her Country,
For the proud Piles of these Egyptian Palaces;
Nor on precarious Favors here depended;
Nor on the sickle Passion of a faithless Youth.

Cass. Surcharged with the too p^ndrous Weight of Evil,
Thus fixed she fits, her down-cast streaming Eyes
Dissolving in a constant Flood of Tears.
Sometimes, with sighs, she wrings her tender Hands,
Then casting up to Heaven her watery Eyes,
In soft Laments, and most pathetic Murmurs,
Condemns her self for having left her Country,
Her Father, Friends, and ^ou^hold Gods, for one,
For one, who thus inhumanely deserts her.
Deaf as the Rocks, or Winds, or raging Seas,
She Will hear no Counsel, and admit no Comfort.

Mer. Alas! how will she be^^ the app^^^ching Evil.


Cass. Ha! What is it you say? more Evils yet?


Mer. The Tyrant Merops, Father ^^ her Rival,
Unsatisfy^d with all the brutal (...)
Sent by his Messengers -- new (...) himself,
To drive her, and her Children out ^f Eg^pt.

Cass. Will Phaeton, tho weary o^ ^is Wife,
Suffer his Children to be sent to Ex^^e.

Mer. This new Alliance, ^akes up all his Thoughts,
He has no Memory of his past Love,
Althea's Tenderness, or his broken Vows.

Cass. O! hard condition of poor Womankind!
Made Slaves to Man's imperious changeful Will!

Mer. O! cruel Custom! O! too partial Laws,
That give to Man an Arbitrary Power,
To throw us from him, when his Fancy veers,
And points him to another!

Cass. Hold -- See s^e rises and comes forward.


Al^hea rises and comes forward. Alth. Ah! me! -- Alas! -- Undone, undone!
forsaken! --
Weep, weep fond Eyes! dissolve, dissolve in Tears!
You let the fatal Mischiefs in! -- Oh! woe!
Oh! Misery! Oh! Ruin!

Cass. Have Patience, Madam, my Lord still loves you.


Alth. No, no, he^s false! -- he is chang^d! -- he loves no more!
For when he loved he scarce would er be from me;
Or if he left me, swift was his return,
And still preventing the appointed Minute.
But now how many tedious Hours are gone!
And yet he comes not -- comes not, tho I Have sent
To beg his Presence -- Na^ he does not send
To ease my Pain or contradict my Fears --
My Fears! -- alas! my Ruin is too certain!
The common talk of every busy Cour^ier!
Am I not pointed at, and ^^unn^d by all?
Already twice commanded to be gone
Erom Egypt, and from him! Despair and Horror! --
Relentless Powers, hurl, hurl your Thunder down
On my devoted Head! propitious fates
Cut off, cut off my thread of wretched Life* Walks up and down in a
discomposed and mournful manner.

Cass. O! wondrous Power of Woe to make us wi^h
For Death, which is by Nature most abhorr^d!

Alt. O! mighty Themis! O! holy Artemis. kneels.
Ye awful Pow^rs that Guardians are of Vows,
Do not my Husbands impious Deeds provoke you?
He breaks through all your sacred. T^yes of Oaths,
To the cursed Joys of a new ridal Bed. Rises
Sink, sink, destro, tumble down the Tyrants Palace
On him, on her, on every gui^^y Cause
Of my unmerited, my dismal Ruin -- pauses.
Oh! my Father! oh my poor widowed Mother!
Oh! my dear lost Country all abandond!
All forsaken! for the false perjured Phaeton!

Mer. Indulge not thus a passion, whose Violence,
If you give way, must b^^^ down Life before it.

Alth. What use of Life have I, that I should spare it?
Robbed of my peace by this enormous Evil?
That dear false Man, within whose faithless Bosom
Was all my Hoard of Joy, alas has left me!
Lef^ me alone, forlorn, of F^iends berest,
Beset all round with Foes! -- in a strange Land,
Na^ed of needful Helps, no Refuge near me!
No Country, Brother, Father, or Mother here;
To who^^ from th impetuous Storm of Sorrows,
As to a welcome Harbor I might steer.
I^m lost! I perish! taste the Sow^rs of Death,
Even while I live! Oh! let me taste its Sweets
In Death itself, and so forget my Woe!

Cass. I beg you for your Childrens sake be calm.


Alth. My Children! ha! my Children did you say?
The joyful product of our mutual Love?
They^re part of him, and of his barbarous Sex --
Pauses and walks thoughtfully up and down, starting now and then -- Avert --
avert the thought ye Pow^rs Divine*
Alas they are innocent! and wronged like me,
Like me forsaken, and undone like me!
No let the Offending only feel my Anger!

Mer. Ay, give it Vent, on those discharge your pain.
It is our Sexes Quarrel, Womankind
However fearful else, will here be bold,
And with confederate Mischief back your Vengeance.

Alth. Vengeance! Vengeance! alas! I love too much! --
My wrongs are great, but oh! my Love is greater!
When his dear Image comes before my Mind,
False as he is, my Rage ebbs out apace,
And Love in a full Tide of Tenderness flows in.

M^rop. For Lybia's Lover? and for your Betrayer?


Alth. For Lybia's Lover? Oh! the very Thought
Strikes Daggers through me, and alarms my So^l:
Rouze^ my injured Heart to hateful Mischief!
I cannot, will not bear it. -- Ha! Her Fathers Ghost arises, and she starts
back, and gazes as affrighted.

Ghost. Bear it not.


Alth. O! all ye Gods! and heavenly Powers protect me!
O! Juno guard me from this dreadful Vision!

Mer. O! gracious Heaven restore her wandering Senses!


Cass. Tho I see nothing, yet a trembling Horror
Shakes me all ^'re

Alth. O! Gods! see yet he stays and glares upon me!


Ghost. Let not the Image of thy Father fright thee!
I come not now to punish, but assist thee!
At least as far as cruel Fate allows.
Fear not, but hear me!

Alth. O! thou paternal Shades! O! Hierax! Father!
Father (for yet that kind indulgent Form
Speaks Tenderness, that merits that dear Name)
Can you? O! can you, yet forgive my Flight?
My guilty Flight? that bore me from my Father,
My Hopes, my Happiness! my Innocence!
But oh! severely have I suffered for it,
Pierced through and through with most ungrateful wrongs!

Ghost. Too strong, Althea, were the just Impressions
Thy Virtue made upon a Fathers Soul
For Death to raze. --
Our Passions are immortal, as our beings,
A part Essential of them, for without them
There is no Pain, nor Pleasure; Bliss, nor Woe^
I blame not then thy Flight, compell^d by Love,
That over the young maintains a Tyranny.
I blame thee not for Love, but for thy Tameness;
For bearing Wrongs from this Egyptian Race.
The injured Genius of thy native Country
Calls loudly on thee for Revenge, Revenge.
How long? how long must our unhappy House
Call for Revenge in vain, in vain from thee.
Aegypt's the Source of all our Houses Woe.
For Isis, Argus falls; I for Phaeton:
For Lybia thou. Juno and Hymen both
Demand Revenge for violated Vows.
Juno herself assists thy just Revenge
Revenge! Revenge! Revenge! -- Sinks down.

Alth. Oh! stay -- Oh! do not fly so swiftly from me!
Take not away so soon that pious form,
That pleasing Image of paternal Love,
That touched with Care of his unhappy Daughter,
Burst from the peaceful Mansions of the Dead,
To rouse my Justice and accuse my Tameness;
This poor Insensibility of Wrongs!
I feel my Father roll through all my Veins,
Rage in my Blood, and fire my doubting heart!
Revenge! Revenge, Revenge it was he cried
Justice, and Pity demand revenge.
My Country, Father, and the Gods demand it.

Cass. O! Gods appease this Fury of her Mind!


Mer. Revenge is the best ease the Gods can give her.


Alth. Revenge! Revenge! it gives some taste to Life
Nor am I wholly wretched while I can
Revenge my Wrongs, and punish my Undoer. --
Inform, advise, instruct, direct my Fury,
While yet my mind is capable of acting.
Yes I will live. -- but live for speedy Vengeanc^,
Great as my Causeless Wrongs, on him, on her;
On her the cursed Usurper of my Bed:
On Merops, Clymene, and all the Guilty House.

Cass. Might I advise; I Would leave him to the Gods,
Nor think more of him.

Alth. How! not think of him while yet he wrongs me?
While yet he flights and leaves me for another?
No I Am all Rage, whole Nemesis is in me!
And I Will pursue him with immortal Hate,
Rev^nge my Injuries, tho I fall my self.

Mer. But hold. -- Compose your self -- hide your concern;
For see the Egyptian Tyrant Merops comes.
Please not his Eyes with Griefs you should not own
To their vile cause -- till your Revenge is sure.

Enter Merops, Guards and Attendance. Merops. How long must I command you hence
in vain?
Weak Monarchs thus are Brow-beat by their Slaves,
When they forget to see themselves obeyed
Therefore depart -- immediately away,
For hence I Will not remove till you are gone.

Alth. Protect me Heaven! this blow compleats my Ruin.
Ah! me! to whom! Ah! whither shall I turn?
When thus I fall on every side most wretched.

Merops. I have no leisure now to hear you rave
Impatient of your hated sight -- be gone --
Ease me and mine of this most odious Burden.

Alth. Thus low, oppressed with such a Weight of Woe,
Permit me ask the Reason of my Exile.
What new! what sudden motive could I give,
A helpless Woman, and of All forsaken?

Merops. Let it suffice I fear thee;
(For mean disguises are below a King)
I fear you will plot some Mischief against my Daughter,
And for these Fears you are a fertile Cause.
Asia and Europe yield too fatal Proofs,
With what impetuous Fury it is you love;
And how my Lybia ought to dread your Rage,
Since you're divorced for her, from Phaeton.

Alth. I grant, that forced by Loves Almighty Power
I dard above my Sexes ^oster Temper
For him that said, nay swore too that he loved me
Above his Life, his Life! above his Glory.
Yet think not Merops, think me not so mean,
So very fond to love when I am slighted.
What e^r I did for him when yet he loved,
I nothing shall attempt for him that hates
Nor boots it me who loves, or who is beloved,
Since he loves me no more, since he hates me.
Go on, proceed, consummate their Espousals;
Live long; live happily; I envy't not.
Allow this Wretch alas a sad Retreat.
A shelter against worse Fortune's all I ask.
In secret only I^ll on him complain;
Murmur the pangs of my expiring Love.
Where soon I^ll learn to yield him up to her,
That more deserves him, than my self.

Merops. Your Words a specious Mildness only bear,
I fear the deadly Rancour hid within.
For with more Ease w' oppose the Lust of Vengeance,
When it appears in its own native fury,
Than when disguised in smooth submissive Words.
Therefore be gone -- nor think with subtle Speeches
To change my Will; thy Exile is decreed;
Nor shall thy cunning Arts reverse thy Doom.

Alth. Oh! I will clasp your Knees: O Sir! by these, She kneels, and clasps his
knees.
By the new Pair I beg, I do conjure you --

Mer. You beg in vain, all you can say is lost.


Alth. It is unkingly to reject a Suppliant.


Mer. It is unjust to prize you 'bove my Family.


Alth. O! my Country! it is now, it is now, it is now, alas*
That I remember thee!

Mer. That you should never
Have suffered to escape your Memory.

Alth. O Love! destructive plague to womankind!


Mer. Yes, when pursued against a Parents will.


Alth. O! Jupiter!
Remember who was the Author of all this!

Mer. Trifler be gone, and free me from my Cares.


Alth. It Is me, it is me alone hat Cares oppress;
No need I more to make me wholly wretched.

Mer. Be gone I say, or Slaves shall drive you hence.


Alth. O! Merops hear me! yield to my Request!


Mer. In vain you strive to break my fixed Resolve.


Alth. No, I will go -- I aim not by my Tears
To bend your Stubborn Mind to let me stay? Rises

Mer. What wou^d you then? Why leave you not my Kingdom?


Alth. Give but a day to fit me for my Journey.
And since their Father has forgot his Children,
Permit me give em the best Help I can.
Ah! pity them, for you^ve had Children too!
As your a Parent let a Parents sorrows
Touch you -- Young, tender, and unused to Hardships,
As you well know I am; yet, O* Merops!
I am not grieved for my own Banishment,
But the Misfortunes that attend my Infants,
My little helpless Babes! my early Orphans,
Orphans, while yet their Father is alive.
It Is these torment me, these that rack my Soul.

Mer. That I^m not rul^d by an obdurate Mind,
Let this convince you; your Desire is granted.
Yet hear me, Woman, hear, and mark me well,
If then to morrows Sun do find thee here
Thou dy'st, thou and thy Childr^n surely dye. Exit Merops cum suis.

Mer. Alas! unhappy Mistress!
What will you do? or whither will you fly?
To unexperienced miseries exposed?

Cass. Whose Friendship? or what Nation will you seek?
What Hospitable coast against your sufferings?

Alth. It Is true, my Friends Ill-Fortune does surround me,
Yet think not that I ll lose this last success.
Think you I could have couched so to the Tyrant?
Have been His Suppliant? held to Him these Hands?
Had not my hopes of Vengeance bent my Knees,
Softened my Language, and thrust out my Arms?
Besotted Merops should have driven me hence,
Not given a Day! a Day's a mighty Space,
Enough to Sacrifice all, all my Foes,
The Daughter, Father, Mother, Son
My perjured Husband! Where shall I begin!
Amid this Crop, this Glut of my Revenge?
Shall I set fire to their cursed Nuptial Bed?
Or with this Dagger pierce their guilty Hearts?
No, by more subtle Arts I must prevail,
Deceit with the Deceivers should not fail;
Yet if this do not, as it ought, succeed,
I with this Hand will do the dreadful Deed:
Amid their Guards, in the full face of Day,
Nor Heaven nor Hell shall stop my furious way;
I Will wound, I Will stab, transfix their conscious Hearts; ^aufes.
From me they shall be sure of their Deserts.
With joy I Would dye, and as in Triumph fall;
If with my pondrous Fate, I crushed them all,
Exeunt Omnes.
The End of the Third Act. ACT IV. SCENE I.
Enter Phaeton on one side, and Althea on the other, attended by her Maids.
Phae. Moved by my Love, I come, unkind Althea,
To mourn, and to provide for your sad Journey;
For I cannot wish you Evil, tho you hate me.

Alth. Then you are come? you dare approach me then?
O! worst of Men! most guilty of thy kind!
(For want of Power allows me but Reproaches)
It Is not assurance, but vile Impudence,
That brings you to a Friend, you so have wronged.
And yet it is well, it is just, that you are come,
That I may vent m' imprisoned Griefs on thee,
And with contageous Sorrows blast thy Joys.

Phae. Madam, I have no joys, while you're in Pain.


Alth. First (for I ll begin with my first Benefits)
I sav^d your Life (nor can you yet deny it)
When in one Night your Guiltless Friends were slain,
Then you Ingrate, then you too should have died.
In pity of your untimely Fate.
I Snatched you from my angry Fathers Rage,
And set you free -- O! that I h'd done no more!
But pressed by my ill stars, over pow'red by Love!
By artful sighs, and your unmeaning Vows,
At once his Hopes, and Vengeance I betrayed;
Not only gave you life, but ^led too with you.
-- Again -- in Asia where I might have reigned,
Neglecting still all interests of my own,
To save your Life I slew the King Alphenor.
And fled again by Night through Foes and Dangers,
And tho I fled from, what you seek, a Crown,
I fled well pleased because I fled with you.

Phae. Yet hear me; and be patient while I speak --


Alth. I took all Fears from you, and in Return
Of such, so man^ Benefits have you?
Have you betray^d me? O! Prodigy of Falsehood!
Made by my fruitful Love now twice a Father,
In all my youth, in all my Spring of Beauty
To leave me for another!
O! my false Joys! O! disappointed Hopes!
How have I been deceived; O how abused!
Think thou there are no Gods, that heard thy Oaths?
Or think thou, they want Power to punish Crimes
Like thine? O! Hands! O! Knees! so often pressed
In vain in vain by his protesting Hands

Phae. Would you but hear I should not seem thus Guilty.


Alth. I Will calmly reason with you like a Friend,
As if I hop^d some Benefit from you.
Whither shall I go? to whom shall I return
Cast off by you? What to my native Country?
That I forsook for you! what to my Father?
Alas! he is dead! killed by my guilty Flight!
I was the only Pleasure of his Age,
His prop, his stay, and when I ^led, he fell,
And left this Throne to m^ inveterate Foes.

Phae. Yet hear me speak, and then condemn or quit ^e!


Alth. Or shall I fly to slain ^lphenors Court?
Where for his Death, I shall be kindly treated.
You bid me go, but cut off all Retreat.
My native Friends that merited no evil,
For thee I Have lost, for thee I Have made all Foes!
And now for all these fatal proofs of Love,
I Am thrust a Vagabond to the wide World.
Defenseless, Widowed, Friendless, and alone!
Or what is worse, with my two helpless Orphans.
If this must be, O! think but how 'twill sound,
At your new Nuptials, that you have driven to exile
Your Children Beggars, with that tender Wife,
To whom you owe the life you use against her.
O! Jupiter! why have thou given to Gold,
A certain Test to know the true from false,
And yet in Man has fixed no certain Mark,
To know the Good from Evil?

Pha. I find you have drawn a dreadful Charge against me,
And such as Guilt could never hope to Answer,
Yet, fortified with Innocence, I dare
Appeal to your own self to judge my Cause.
Lay but your Passion for a while aside
And tell me who? who caused this mournful parting?

Alth. Ask thy self that Question? ask thy own Heart.


Pha. It was not I, I sought not this Divorce,
The Gods, the angry Gods would have us parted,
Witness ye Powers! how long I did oppose you!
Struggling with Fate, my Mother, and my Country,
Before I yielded up a Prize like this.
The hoary Priests of Isis threatened Egypt,
With Evils imminent, with Plagues, with Famine,
Unless that you were banished -- And the Nil^
Withdrew its fertile Streams within its Bed,
And shrunk its noble Flood into a Brook.
In vain the holy Priests mourned drowned Osiris,
With shorn Locks, and dismal Cries in vain
A Successor they sought to the white God!
All was denied till you was driven from Egypt.
What could I do? or how could I deny
My Friend, my Mother, and my falling Country?

Alth. If this were so, why left we not this Egypt?
Why should my Banishment from Egypt part us?
We had been wanderers together before this!
Nor Gods, nor Priests, required that you should stay,
And Love, and Benefits, and Vows, and Oaths
Obliged you to go with me --
But these are Feints, weak Blinds to hide their Guilt,
It Is Lybia is the God compels your stay!
It Is Lybia drives Althea out of Egypt!
It Is Lybia is the dreadful Fate that parts us!

Pha. Be calm a while, and give me leave to speak.
I will not urge the Love that Lybia bears me,
(Tho that, I swear, would move another strangely)
The Crowns she brings (tho I was born for Crowns)
I will not urge, for these are foreign Motives:
It was for you I yielded to these Nuptials. --

Alth. For me! for me you left me for another!
O wretched Trifler!

Pha. Pray hear me out --
You ask what God! what Priests require my stay?
Why you, Althea, are the God compels it.
Knowing the Hardships of a Friendless Exile,
How could I bear to see Althea perish,
And have it in my Power to ward her Fate?
My Children too, sprung from that beauteous root,
Attackt my Heart, and with resistless force,
Tore me from what my Soul desires most!
For Me, you have made too many Foes already,
And should I then add to their fatal Number?
If Asia and Samos are provoked for me,
Should I dare Egypt too, to fix your Ruin?
Alas! if I go with you I destroy you,
If I stay here, I^m but my self unhappy,
And by my pain provide for you and yours,
It Is Death to my Desires to lose Althea,
But it is Damnation to undo her more.
Yet wou^d I go, the Power of Egypt stops me,
The Power drives you hence, that confines me here.
Come calm that Rage (which yet I cannot blame
Because it shows you Love me) and consider
That by this match the Wealth of Egypt s yours,
For what is mine is so. By which ill-Fortune
Will follow you in vain, but never reach you:
Contending Nations will with Pride invite you
That know your Interest in the Prince of Egypt.

Alth. How easy it is to give us Words for Deeds!
No more with specious Arts disguise the truth;
The fulsom Dawb too visibly is seen.
It it was for me you did these wondrous things.
Why was the secret kept thus long from me?
Who first should have been won to yield you to her.

Phae. How^ could I plead a hateful Cause with you?
I could not wish to gain even from my self?

Alth. These are invented Causes, not the real;
Your proud aspiring Soul disdain^d my Bed,
Because I brought no Kingdoms for my Dowr.

Phae. Believe the brave Ambition of my Soul.
Would not permit me to forgo my Love,
For any Cause, but what I have assigned,
Your Childrens, and your Happiness --

Alth. Give me no Happiness that^'s mixed with Woe,
Nor Wealth and Power that rack my Soul with Grief.

Phae. Opinion only makes you here unhappy,
Who in the midst of Plenty think you're Poor.

Alth. Delude me on with Words, you^ve got a Refuge,
And you grow eloquent upon it: But your Deeds
Your Deeds are more emphatic: am I not
Forsaken? with my Children forced to Exile?

Phae. To ease that Care take largely of my store,
Rich presents to our Friends to recommend you.

Alth. I^ll use no Friends of thine, nor touch thy Gifts;
The Gifts ill men bestow advantage none.

Phae. By the refulgent God, that gave me being!
My Father Phoebus! --

Alth. Thy Father! thine! the illustrious God disdains thee.
Thy Father! 'twas a boast of thy false Mother.
By which she would conceal her guilty shame.

Phae. No more -- for yet I call the Gods to witness
I Would pour into your Arms what ever you want,
Both for your journey, and your after Ease;
Tho you to your own detriment refuse it.
And with in^urious Language drive me from you: Exit.

Alth. Go, go make haste, to your new Bride make haste!
Too long I Have kept you from her wished for sight.
Go on, go on, Consummate your new Nuptials,
Yet if the Gods but lend a pitying Ear,
You soon shall wish you never had prepar^d 'em.

Walks up and down in a Passion. Cassi. If once, O! Venus! I must feel thy
Power.
Far be this racking Violence of Passion!
A Love more gentle in my Soul inspire!
Calm be my Joys, temperate my Desire!
Easy the soft Emotions of my Heart!
Or if they must be fierce, Oh! make 'em short.
My inclinations veering, as the Wind,
In change preventing that false roving kind!

Alth. O! Juno! early Guardian of my youth,
And sacred Pledge of our Connubial Vows,
If ever my Offerings have been grateful to you,
I do adjure you suffer not my Foes
To gather Joys from my opprobrious Grief!

Mer. Madam, transported by untimely Rage,
You Have lost the occasion that before you wished for. Ex. Mer.

Alth. Ha! -- thou say true -- haste after Phaeton
And call him back, say what thou will to bring him.
Ungoverned Fury at his sight burst out,
And almost robbed me of my dear Revenge.
Althea summon all the Woman in thee,
The large Hypocrisy of all thy Sex,
And add to that the subtle Arts of Priests,
And Courtiers, when they would make their vengeance sure.
Thou wantst them all, nay more if possible,
To smooth thy Brow, to calm thy Face and Eyes,
That not one glimps of Rage to him appear. --
Away fond Love: ye tender Thoughts away!
I feel my Wrongs, Beware my Soul, beware!
Of leaving me the sport and jest of Egypt,
The Byword, and scorn of this Barbarian Race.
But hold -- these Thoughts too much disturb me.
Let me have Music to compose my Mind.
Here in this mournful posture he shall find me.
Sits down and reclines her Head on her Hand. Symphony and Song.
How happy would poor Woman be,
From the Cares of Love still free,
Did not false Man's deluding Arts
Rob us of our Peace and Hearts.
With Tears and Oaths the Cheat maintain
Till we poor helpless women love again,
And wound our selves, alas! to cure their pain.
But then, ah! then! how soon they change!
How soon the fickle wanderers range!
How soon forget each Oath and Vow,
And to some other beauty bow!
Again they beg, again they pray,
On purpose only to betray.
Ah! seal my Heart! ye chaster Powers,
Against their cunning Art,
And of my Life's succeeding Hours,
Ah! give to Love no Part.

At the end of the Song, Enter Pha^ton and M^rops. Phae. Madam, I Am told you
sent for me again,
Tho you are angry with me I obey,
And come with Joy to hear what you will command me.

Alph. Rising and coming forward Forgive, my Lord, the outrage of my Tongue
Nay I beg you, by our mutual benefits,
By our past Love (alas! that it is past!)
To pardon my Violence of Passion.
If I said ought too harsh, or to severe,
Think me a Woman, impotent of Reason,
That could not see through Pain my future Good,
And such a Pain, as to be rent from you;
My Soul, my All (for you were All to me)
Just in the fierce abundance of my Love.
Then add to this my little helpless Infants
Banished, and in the tender Bud exposed
To nipping Blasts of an inclement Fortune. weeps.
Pardon these Tears, that spite of me will fall
When e're this dreadful Image comes in view.

Phae. Excuse them not, they speak a noble Nature.


Alth. These Ills through them transfix^d the Mother in me,
And worked the raging Terror into Madness --
But now I Am calm, and Reason rules again,
I am convinced, that you have done most wisely,
Perhaps most kindly too! Sighs.
I own your Care of me, and of my Children;
I own I ve nothing to accuse but Fate,
And since our Stars will have it so, I Will bear it.

Phae. O^ my Althea! I approve thy Grief,
Nor can I blame thy Rage; for both are just.
I swear thy Tendern^s^, and Love so charm me
But that the Gods, have d^om^d me to be Great
For thy Protection, I should leap down with thee
Into ignoble Ruin --
Nor think of my immortal Glory more.

Alth. Dissembling Villain! Oh! my Heart be calm!
Or I shall lose this only Hour of Vengeance! Aside.
Fool that I was, who could not see my good.
Had I been wise, I had my self advised it,
And stood a glad assistant at your Nuptials.
But alas! I am a Woman! and it is
Below you to emulate me in Evil;
Or rail because I railed, I then was Mad,
But now I have considered, I consent,

Pha. You do, Althea! like a tender Mother,
To share that Pain for them, I feel for you.
In this we both prefer the Good and Fortune
Of what we Love to our own fond desires.

Alth Bring forth, bring forth my pretty Babes, bring me
To their Father to take their last Farewell.
Enter two Maids with two Children, Althea goes to them, and as she speaks
takes hold of them and him alternately. Let him behold in these his double
likeness.
Extend, extend your little Arms; embrace him,
Cling you about his Neck, and you about his Knees,
The Maids apply each as directed, and Althea Kneels, and takes hold of his
Hands Speak to him tende^ly; and move his Soul!
Methinks even now their Eyes, and Motions speak,
And with me beg your most peculiar Care.
Look on them well -- do they not deserve it?
Are these young tender Images of you,
Fit for the Hazards of a tedious Voyage?
O! my 'dear Children! O! my little Babes!
Must you so soon partake your Mothers Woe?
Oh! press him closer yet, and yet more close,
And with your melting cries excite the Father.

Children. O! my Father! oh! good Father pity us!


1 Child. Father, what have we done to make you leave us?
Have I done any thing to anger you?
If I have been a naughty Boy, indeed
I Am sorry for it, indeed I am. Pomp of Sadness't

Pha. speaking te^derly and moved. Rise, oh! rise! What means thi^
What wou d these Tears? What would these dear Embraces?
Embraces them all, takes up Althea, and the Maid and Child. You cannot think
that I can ever slight 'em?
They shall, as my first Hopes, be my first Care.
And if the Gods but favor my Designs,
I once shall see them Princes here in Egypt.
Grow up my Boys, and be your Mothers Comfort,
And my Glory. She turns and aside her head, seems to weep.
Why do thou turn thy Beauteous Face away?
And with stolen Tears bedew thy tendder Cheeks?
Why hear these wi^^es, with unwilling Ears?

Alth. Nothing -- It Is a fond Mothers sudden pang
For her unhappy Children.

Pha. Let them not.
Give you farther Grief: I Will take care of them.

Alth. I would obey you -- but I am a Woman --
A Sex, that is born for Tears -- Oh! my Children!

Pha. But why so often call you on your Children?


Alth. Indeed I cannot help it, for I bore 'em,
And brought them forth into this World of Woe.
And now must see them, e're they know what life i^.
Exposed, and driven upon a thousand hazards
Perhaps there may be cause why I should go,
But what alarms can these afford the Court?

Pha. What would you have me do?


Alth. Implore their stay:
Beg it of Merups with your utmost zeal.
While they are secure, within their Fathers sight,
The dearer half of me is free from Danger.

Pha. Well I will try, but cannot assure sucess.


Alth. What cannot only Daughters do with Fathers?
Employ but Lybia, and the Boon is granted.

Pha. I will -- nor will she I believe deny me.


Alth. O! I will help you in this grateful labor;
I have a Robe, that^s wove by hands Divine,
Materials rich, as the famed story's artful:
Minerva's Trial it is with bold Arachne.
This with a Crown of Gold by Vulcan wrought,
And given by Juno to our favorite House;
I will, with my two Children send to win her.
No Mortal can resist such a powerful Bribes.

Pha. Rob not they self of such unequally'd Treasures,
The Egyptian Court has wealth enough for her,
With whom my Will outweighs a Mine of Gold.

Alth. You must permit me, Sir, to send them, for
Were my life demanded for their stay,
I Would freely part with it, much more with these,
And Gold with Man's more prevalent, than duty,
The Gods make Fortune still attend on Gold,
As if their Blessings too were bought and sold.

Pha. Well then, Althea, you shall have your will.


Alth. I fly on all the Wings of swift desire,
To send this noble Ransom with my Children.

Pha. I will before to make their way more easy. Ex.


Alth. Now Gods befriend me, and one fatal Hour,
Shall venge my wrongs, and your affronted Power. Ex. Omnes.

The End of the Fourth Act. ACT V.
The Temple of the Sun. Enter Alth. disguised, with Cassiope and M^r Alth. GIve
me a full account of all, that past.


Cass. Soon as your Gifts and Children reached the Presence,
Your Friends, that felt your Sorrows, were o'rejoy'd,
That Phaeton, and you were reconciled.

Alth. On to Lybia. -- of her I Would only hear.


Cass. Unmark^d by her (for she was fondly toying
With her new Lord, her Eyes fast fixed on his,
And darting wanton Wishes to his Soul)
We came up to her. -- Seeing us she started.
Sprung from his Arms, and turned away her Face,
As i^ the Gorgon ^ight would make her Stone,

Alth. Gods! Gods! how I despise her petty Malice.
That reached my tender in offensive Children,
Yet she might fear them well; they brought her Death.

Mer. Averse she held her angry Eyes a while.
Till Phaeton thus mildly check^d her scorn.
Receive my Friends with a more gentle Brow,
Think these a valued Portion of your Husband.
Receive their precious Gifts, and beg your Father
For my sake to remit my Children Exile.
Soon as her greedy Eyes had spied the Presents;
The dazzling Crown and Robe of heavenly Make.
She could deny him nothing, All was granted.
Upon her downy Hair he set the Crown,
And on her Shoulders fixed the flowing Mantle.

Alth. O! height! O! Masterpiece of dear Revenge!
To make my perjured Husband put 'em on,
And with officious Hands ensure her Ruin!

Cass. Proud of the glitt ring Load, with haughty steps
She traverses the Room; and in the Glass,
With self-pleas'd Eyes, surveys her shining Form.

Alth. So the fond Victim to the Altar doomed,
Bounds over the Earth exalted with its Trappings,
Its sacred Wreaths, and holy Pomp of Death,
Unknowing that these usher its Fate,
So Lybia too. -- For all those glittering Presents
Great Juno gave me, and she bid me send 'em
To my most hated Foe for sure Revenge.
Here in the Temple of the Sun I Will wait
To see my guilty Sacrifices fall.
Thus veiled secure, within this hostile Roof.

Enter Priests of the Sun, etc. and move gravely down, one each side the Stage.
Cass. The holy Priests already are advanced,
And see the Court, and Bride and Bridegroom come. They all Enter.

Alth. With guilty Joy they come, but shall return,
With an avenging Grief. I know the poison
Must have effect before the Rites are done.

The Bridegroom places himself on one side the Altar, the Bride on the other,
and the rest in their order, then the Music begins; during which, Althea often
looks on Phaeton. 1st Priest. O! sacrid Isis! and Apollo hear!
O! bright Divinities give ear,
And shower your blessings on this Royal Pair.

Repeat in a Chorus. 2d Priest. Look down bright God of day, look down,
On this fair Virgin, and thy Son.
Ease their Pain:
Increase their pleasure,
In soft Chain^s ensure their Treasure.
Give 'em joys, ah! give 'em blisses,
Melting as their warmest wishes!

Chorus. O! sacred Phoebus hear,
And shower your blessings on this on this happy pair.

1st Priest. Isis, by the pains Love cost you,
By the storms in which it tossed you,
By the awful charms of Jove,
By the Transports of his Love.

Chorus. O! sacred Isis and Apollo hear,
O! bright Divinities, give ear,
And shour your Blessings on this Royal pair.

After the Music, two Priests lead Lybia up to the Altar, where she kneels down
on a Cushion, and offers Incence, as she is leading up, Althea speaks. Alth.
Why beats my Heart thus! what does love return?
Why should such tender thoughts besiege my Breast
Even in the Act, in which he wrongs me most?
Oh! could he yet repent, I could forgive him:
For he has got a Friend within my Bosom,
Pleads for him with prevailing Eloquence.
Methinks too midst this outward formal Joy,
There sits a sort of sorrow on his Brow.
That flatters me, that I am yet within.
I Will try him --
And if he yet persists -- then let him dye.
Goes up to him and pulls him aside. My Lord!
While your fair Bride her Sacrifice performs
Permit me speak with you.

Phae. Some other Time.


Alth. It does concern your Happiness, and Life.


Phae. Come to me then, soon as the Rites are over.


Alth. 'T will be too late.


Phae. No matter -- then I Will dye.
No Fears shall interrupt my present Joy.

Alth. Gods! how he is transported! -- one moment, Sir,
Or midst your Joys you perish.

Phae. Prithee leave me.


Alth. I wish I could! but -- you must hear me speak.


Pha. If I must hear you, I pray you be most brief.
For I Have no time to trifle.

Alth. This way a little. Seems to discourse him.


The Princess sinks down on her cushion before the Altar. Priest. The Princess,
help, the Princess faints away!


The Company gets about her, but Phaeton is stopped by Althea. Alth. You must not
thither, for your Fate lies there.
Or if a Woman's Death you long to see,
Turn! oh! turn your barbarous Eyes on me! Vnveils herself.
See your Althea perish at your feet!
Does no Remorse? no pity touch you yet?

Pha. Althea ^ha! what means this fond relapse?


Alth. Is then Althea quite forgot? forsaken,
Cast off for ever? here at least remember,
Before the Gods within their Roofs, your Vows.

Merops in the crowd. Ha! she grows paler, see a sudden shivering
Has seized on all her Limbs. Oh! bear her quickly
Back to her Apartment. O! fatal Nuptials!

All go off with the Princess. Phae. Let go my Arm -- my Princess is not well.


Alth. Your Wife is worse, your Benefactress worse.


Phae. Her sudden Ill has discomposed me so,
I am unfit to reason with you now.

Alth. So grieved for her! so unconcerned for me!
Gods! sure you owe me more, than foolish Lybia!

Phae. Some other time will better suit your Madness;
Now Love and Honor call me to my Princess.

Alth. Ha! Love and Honor! thou, alas! have neither.
What, Love and Honor call you from your Wife?
From your Preserver? from the Wretch you have made so?

Phae. Grief fills my Soul so, there is no Room for Anger,
Or I should chide the impertinence away.

Alth. False Wretch! beware, beware how you provoke me;
A Qualm of Pity stopped thee from thy Ruin --
But have a Care --

Phae. Then let your Cruelty strait send me to it,
If with my sickning Princess I shall find it.

Alth. Fond Man, here is Life, there certain Death attends thee.


Phae. Let me but go, I Will face that certain Death.


Alth. Hell! and Furies! how he slights my Love!
Is Death with her better than Life with me?

Phae. Since you will force the Secret from me -- it is.


Alth. Enough! enough! thou Ill without a Name!
Yes, false betrayer, yes, ungrateful Wretch,
You shall go to her -- but you first shall hear
The Noble Vengeance, that you have assisted.

Phae. Starting. Ha! Vengeance say thou? and by me assisted


Alth. I did not wrong thee in thy darling Office,
For Death, and Ruin are the just Returns
You're used to make for Tenderness and Love.

Phae. Ha! Death, and Ruin! O! my boding Heart!


Alth. When with the Crown and Robe you decked your Bride,
You dressed the Victim of my injured Love.
You fixed ten thousand Poisons on her Head,
And clothed her in inevitable Fate.
Even now she breathes her last; now gasps for Breath,
Go reap the Fruit of Perjury in Death,
Clasp to thy fickle Breast her dying Charms,
And hug the Infection in thy faithless Arms.

Pha. O! dire Revenge for what was kindly meant thee!
O! barbarous Woman, or fell Tygress rather,
More cruel far, than Scylla, or the Sirens,
Like the Hyaena, and the Crocodile,
With false Laments, and artful Tears you kill --
But may the avenging Furies soon overtake thee.
The Gods destroy thee, or the earth devour thee:
Heaven pierce thee with its Bolts: Hell rack thee with its Tortures

Alth. In vain you rave; in vain you vent your Curses;
What God, or Demon can regard your Prayers,
Perjured, as you are, by all their Deities?

Pha. They need not, for thy Guilt will always haunt thee.


Alth. My Guilt? Why I am wholly innocent!
Thy Crimes provoked it, and thy Hands performed it.

Pha. My Hands? my Hands too should revenge it.


Alth. If it be kind, or just thou can not do it.


Pha. You Are troublesome to me, and thy Speech is hateful.


Alth. W' agree in this, for thine is so to me:
Go, go, and bury your expiring Bride,

Pha. Oh! Honor! Piety! Manhood now assist me!
Assist, thou bright paternal Fire, assist!
Or Rage unmans me: drives me to a Deed,
Will fully all my past, and future Glories. Pauses.
Woman away -- lest all should be too weak
To guard thee from my Rage, my growing Madness.

Alth. This slighted Outcast, this abandoned Wife,
Alone, deserted, had the Power, you find,
To sink the Pride of your injurious Egypt;
And punish thee, 'midst thy fond security.

Pha. Woman, I say be gone -- be gone! or yet --


Laying his hand upon his Sword. Enter a Messenger in haste. Mess. My Lord,
If you would see the Princess ever she dye,
You must outstrip the Minutes swiftest haste.

Phae. Thanks to thy call, I h'd lost my self in Rage;
Almost forgot my Lybia too. -- I fly. Is going.

Alth. Fly, fly swiftly, to complete my Vengeance.


Enter Epaphus hastily, meets Phaeton and stops him. Phae. Whence is this
frightful haste?


Epaph. I come to you,
But whence, alas! I come, I scarce dare tell you.

Phae. Speak boldly, for I am prepared to hear you.


Epa. But oh! I bring so sad a Tale, so near
Concerning you, you will never bear it.
A tale so dreadful, and so full of Horror,
'Twill chill your Blood, and freeze you into Age.

Phae. Speak on -- say Lybia's dead, and yet thou wilt see
I have a Godlike Virtue to support it.

Epa. You Will need it All, for it is from her I come.
Scarce had she reached the door of her Apartment,
When from her Mouth a white, but horrid Foam,
Spread over her lovely Face, her Eye Balls rolled,
And wildly whirled about with dire Convulsions.
Silent she lay, or breathed but piteous Sighs,
And piercing groans, till the first sit was over

Phae. Gods! how this staggers all my boasted Courage!
Was not her Death enough? but Tortures too?

Alth. Go on, for all my injured Blood it warms.


Epa. No sooner to herself she came, but saw
The blazing Crown belch out a fiery Deluge,
That preyed upon her Hair, her Head, her Face;
From whence her Flesh like melting Wax ran down,
Mingled with Fire and Blood. Mean while the Robe
With fatal Rage devoured her fainting Limbs.

Phae. How did she? nay, how could she bear all this?


Epa. First starting up, she shook her flaming Hair:
From side to side she tossd her burning Temples,
To dash the cleaving Gold from off her Head.
In vain, the more she shook, the more it fixed, and burnt.

Pha. O! strange! O! miserable Fate!


Epa. But then over come by the prevailing Mischief,
Alas! she fell -- but too unlike herself!
Gone were the rosy Honors of her Face,
And fled the awful Luster of her Eye.

Phae. O hapless Maid! O! wretched Phaeton!


Epa. All struck till now with the amazing Evil
Forbore to touch her; till the unhappy Father,
Now starting from his Trance of sudden Woe,
Threw down his aged Body by her, clasped,
And kissed her -- Then burst-into these Moans.
O! m' unhappy Daughter! what angry God
Denied thy pious hands to close my Eyes,
Even on this shut of Life! O! my poor Girl!
Gods that I might but perish with thee now!
He said no more, secure of being heard.

Phae. Oh! parent God support me or I fall.


Epa. But oh! the dreadful Contest that ensued
Striving at length to raise his tired Body,
He stuck too fa^t to the envenomed Robe
Ever to part from his consuming Child.
He rends her Flesh and Bowels if he rises,
And if he sta^s immediately he dies.
Few were the weak Efforts the Father made,
But soon his fainting Body by her Corpse he laid,
He saw his Daughter in the Flame expire,
Then sunk himself in the same fatal Fire.
And then alas! sad Cl mean. --

Phae. No more.
I charge thee, by thy Friendship, say no more.
But cast a Veil of silence over the rest.
I Have heard too much, too much already -- lend your hand.
The Ghastly Image sinks my floating Senses
I bore what man could bear, but Ills like these
Overcome the God within me! Faints away.

Enter a Messenger. Mess. Where, where is the Prince? the Multitude,
Enraged at what the Royal House has suffered,
Forcing the Palace, with one common Voice.
Devote Althea to immediately Vengeance.

Alth. No, dull Egyptian, no, I am not born
To fall by their vile Hands, by base Egyptians.
This Dagger is my Safeguard, and this Hand.
Protects from that Infamy.

Cassi. O! Madam do not pierce your own dear Bosom!
This awful Temple will repel their Fury,
And gain you Time for a more gentle Fate.

Atlh. Impossible! the People Rage spares nothing.
Has no respect to Altars, or to Gods! --
Besides -- Happiness has for ever left me,
And to live wretched, is much worse, than Death.
It is enough I Have lived to see my Wrongs
Amply revenged: I Will leave no turn to Fortune
To rob me of that Joy, but thus --

Cassi. O! stop your fatal Hand! As she stabs herself they seize her hand, and
wrest the Dagger from her, but could not prevent a slight wound.


Merops. What have you done?


Alth. Do you conspire too against my Peace?
It Is well the Dagger^s armed with double Fate,
I h'd mist my Aim else, now this scratch will do it;
What the Blow cannot, the Poison will perform.

Epa. He breathes, go bear him gently to his Bed,
I Will but appease the people, and attend him. They bear off Phaeton,

Enter another Messenger. Mess. My Lord, the tumult now is grown too fierce
To be repelled, or even to be withstood.
Like Fire in Stubble driven before the Wind,
They bear down all.
Althea's Lodgings they have destroyed already,
And tore her Children in ten thousand pieces.
Nor satisfied with this they rave for her.
And much I fear, unless she is found, their Fury
Will reach the Prince himself as her Concealer.

Epa. The Prince; alas! he feels too much already
Of this their common Woe.

Mess. You they declare,
As Son to their bright Goddess, King of Egypt.

Epa. The Crown, I own, is an Illustrious offer,
Yet not to be accepted by a Friend
In a friends wrong, that is unworthy me. I will go to 'em
Appease their fury with the Awe of Isis,
Or fall my self to vindicate my Friend
Fortune does every day dispose of Crowns,
But Heav n too seldom gives a faithful Friend. Ex. cum suis

Alth. Ha! Merope! what did the fatal Raven Croak?
My Children! my dear Infants torn to pieces?
O! dreadful News! O! cruel Rage! O! cursed Egypt!

Mer. It Was so, alas! he said!


Alth. Dead! are they dead! the pretty Orphans dead!
Their Tongues that used to charm me with such Music,
For ever silenced? And their sparkling Eyes
Shut up, and closed for ever. Walks up and down discomposedly.

Cass. Grieve not too much for
What you cannot redress.

Alth. Yet the great Gods, that suffered all this Evil,
Might have some mighty End, and Purpose in it.
To prevent Ills hid in the Womb of Time.
They took them innocent from this bad World,
As yet incapable of Guilt, or Grief.
For had they lived, perhaps they might have proved
False as their Father, or like me unhappy.

Mer. Then grieve no more, for what the Gods have doomed


Alth. But thus to 'dye! thus to be torn to pieces!
Their Limbs dissever'd, their dear litte Arms
That have so often twisted round my Neck,
Their balmy Lips, that have so often kissed me,
Mangled and torn to pieces by vile Slaves!
By barbarous, cursed Egyptians! O! pain!
O! Torture! greater far than Lybia bore!
She faints away into their Arms. This cannot; must not be! -- Oh!

Cass. Oh! Merope! our wretched Lady's dead!


Mer. No -- Life still struggles with grim Death within her:
Her Heart with furious, and thick beating Throbs
Bounces against her Breast.
Bend her more forward -- So she revives.

Alth. Stand off, and give me way, that I may fly
Swifter than thought, to stop the murdering Hand
Of Destiny. -- Gods! Gods! I Am come too late!
The Deed is done, their tender Threads are cut!
Oh! for the power of strong Thessalian Charms!
To mock her Envy, and reverse their Doom!
All will not do -- they are for ever lost!

Mer. Alas! she raves, her Look and* Motion's wild!


Cass. Alas! my Heart bleeds at the piteous sight!


Alth. Hist -- in your Ear. I Have found the secret out.
Drawing 'em to her. -- Softly we'll creep to the black horrid Scene
Of Infants Blood, and steal the precious Pieces;
Gather them all, and carry 'em to the Gods
To solder them together -- the Gods can do it,

Cass. What can we do to give her some Relief?


Merops. Oh! it is not to be done -- Despair, and Poison
Unite their Force to disappoint ous Wishes.

Alth. Ha! the unequal Gods deny the Boon!
Again disperse and scatter the dear Relics,
I with such Pain, and Hazard have collected. Pauses, and looks upward.
It Is Guilt, not Innocence is now their Care*
For perjured Phaeton is born a loft,
And grows familiar with the partial Gods.

Mer. O! ye jut Gods! remit her ranging Grief!


Cass. Oh! that I could, by sharing it, abate it.


Alth. Ha! now he is leapt into his Fathers Seat!
He h's seized the ^iery Chariot of the Sun.
But see the Steeds despise his feeble Rein,
And swiftly whirl him o re the Azure Plain. pauses, looking fix'dty upward.
The Chariot burns! the Heavens blaze, th Earths on Fire!
See Athos, Ida, Taurus, Oeta Flame!
Hills and Valleys burn! Fountains and Streams dry up
Stars, Earth, and Air are swallowed up in Fire --
Ambition falls, see now he tumbles down!
The Precipice of Heaven! -- Oh! shield us Jove!
For now he comes directly on our Heads. Breaks from them that endeavor to
hold her, tears off her Head-Cloaths, etc. and her hair tumbles about her
Shoulders.
Tear, tear, tear off these Flaming Tresses,
These burning Garments, this catching Fuel!
Haste, haste into the Flood, or we consume! Throws herself down.
So so, hark! hark! that Thunderclap has saved us!
See hes fallen, he is motionless, he is dead!
Ha! how freezing cold he is grown already!
I Have caught the shudd'ring Fit, it chills my Heart!
Oh! Dies. Re-enter Epaphus.

Epa. Here let the People wait till we return, Speaks entering.
Too far already has their Fury bore 'em
Egyptians! Countrymen! see where she lies!
And let your Anger terminate with Death
But learn ye All from this too fatal Day
That Jove over Kings maintains an awful Sway.
All things are ordered by the Powers above.
Against whose Will our Counsels fruitless prove.
In sad Events our wisest hopes we lose;
And what we cannot expect the Gods produce. Exeunt Omnes

ERRATA.
IN the Preface, p. 1. l. 22. r specious p. 2. l. 19, add of: p. 4. l. 40 r.
yours: l. 41 r. Benefits: p. 7. l. 30. r. Reasonable. p. 8. l. 21. r. dum. l.
35.1. Identity. In the Play p. 3. l. 22. r. graceful: p. 10. l. 10. add and: p.
11. r. Goddess: p. 13.4.30. r. her: p. 16. l. 15. r. Shade: p. 19. l. 8. r.
crouch'd: l. 15. add and her: 1.26. dele pauses: p. 20. l. ^. add too: p.
22.1.4. aster Power add that, and after hence dele that: p. 24. l. 48. for Me
r. them.

THE EPILOGUE Made by a Friend, and Spoken by Mr. Mills.
OUR Poet wanting some kind Friend in V^gue,
To give you the Desest of Epilogue;
His Stock being Spent, has sent me here to borrow
Of you Some Wit to write one for tomorrow.
Stay (...) me see -- Where shall I find this Wit?
Gad I Am afraid to venture on the Pit.
What if I hunted in the Side Box Rows?
But who would seek for wit among the Reaux?
O! there is a twisted Stinkirk -- but his Wits placed
Preposterously from his Chin down to his Waste.
Below his head, if any where, I Am sure
His Brain can nothing but Pulvils endure.
There Is one well powdered, gad and be looks bigg --
And yet his Head is empty in a full Wigg.
I know him -- he is an old Halt-Act Peeper,
A true Friend -- I mean to our Doorkeeper,
To plunder there is a sin of that degree
'Twou'd come within the Act of Immortality
But there is a Cit -- I Am sure that he has None --
At least ^o spare -- Unles^ upon a Loan,
And to beg there is a too vile. Disgrace --
For City Security's wrist upon his Face.
His Wit besides, another Way is Bent,
As how t'evade some Act of Parliament.
O! now I Have found it -- And be cannot withstand it --
Death! it is a Soldier! and his Wit's disbanded.
No Beaux? no Wit! no sharper left to spark it,
What a Plague are they all gone to New Market?
Since he in vain here to the Men would Sue,
Our Poet, Ladies, throws himself on You;
His Inspiration seeks from your bright Eyes,
Those Charms would make the dullest Spirits Rise.
FINIS

