A LEARNED AND Accurate Discourse CONCERNING The Guilt of Sin, Pardon of that
Guilt* and Prayer for that Pardon.

Written many Years ago by the Reverend Mr. THOMAS GILBERT, Minister of the
Gospel, lately Deceased at OXFORD.

Now Published from his own Manuscript, left by him some Years before his
Death, with a Friend in LONDON.

LONDON, Printed for Nath. Hiller, at the Princes Arms in Leaden-Hall-Street,
over against St. Mary Axe. 1695.

THE PREFACE.
THE Light held out in these Papers is accounted so clear and so useful, that
it has been thought great Pity it has not been set up upon a Candlestick.
They have passed up and down in Manuscript about Thirty Years, being much
valued by those who were Possessors of them. It is Credibly reported that a
very great and Learned Man (whom for some Reasons I will not name, though his
Commendation would have great weight with Persons of different persuasions) did
upon the perusal of them, speak to the Learned Author to this purpose, That it
was worth a Man's Living a great while, though he did nothing else but bring
forth such a Composure. The Subjects Treated on are so weighty and of such
concernment, that any contribution of Light therein ought to find Acceptance,
and be rejoiced in by all. The manner of this Authors Treating on them is
succinct and plain, and wholly unoffensive. The Differences and Contests about
these Points, which have of late appeared among us, do further recommend them
and the Publishing of them as very seasonable at this Juncture. The Blessing of
God go along with them. So prays

L. R.

A Learned and Accurate Discourse concerning the Guilt of Sin, Pardon of that
Guilt, and Prayer for that Pardon.
THE Reader, least he should stumble at Terms (the most proper I could think of
to express my Notion) is desired to observe, that in this Discourse, I
understand by Legal
1. Precepts, Such as rigidly exact their observance for Justification. 2.
Sins, The Transgression of such Legal Precepts. 3. Threatenings, Such rigid
unallay'd Threatenings as being Curses as well as Threatenings, form Obligation
to Legal Punishment for such Legal Sins. 4. Punishments, the Execution of such
Legal Threatenings as Curses, as well as Threatenings.


Legal Guilt and Legal Pardon, are in the Discourse expressly defined

And in Proportionable Opposition to the former, I mean by Gospel
1. Precepts, Mainly the same for Substance with those of the Law, but not
exacting their Observance with the same Rigor, namely, for Justification. 2.
Sins, The Transgression of such Gospel-Precepts. 3. Threatenings, Mainly the
same for Substance with those of the Law, but now such mitigated allayed
Threatenings, as being Threatenings only and not Curses, form Obligation only to
Gospel Punishments (or Chastisements) for such Gospel Sins. 4. Punishments, The
Execution of such Gospel-Threatenings, which have therefore no more of Curse in
them, than such Threatenings themselves.


Gospel-guilt and Gospel-pardon are in the Discourse expressly defined, and the
Sense wherein the Distinction of Legal and Gospel-pardon proceeds, plainly
enough declared.

Some Considerations touching the Guilt of Sin, Pardon of that Guilt, and
Prayer for that Pardon.

Wherein something is attempted toward the further clearing of the great, both
Speculative and Practical Truths in these so important Points; for the
Satisfaction of a Learned and Judicious Friend.

I. Touching Guilt of Sin.
Three things in Sin.
1. Power to be Subdued. 2 Filth to be Purged. 3. Guilt to be Pardoned.


Guilt of Sin is twofold. 1. Fundamental, Intrinsecal, Habitual. which is
Desert of Punishment. 2. Formal, Extrinsecal, Actual. which is Oblication to
Punishment.


The first I call Intrinsecal Guilt, because arising from within, from the very
Nature of Sin. And the Second, Extrinsecal Guilt, because arising from without,
from the Penal Constitution of God. As also the First, Habitual, Fundamental
Guilt, because the Foundation of that Penal Constitution or Threatening of God,
which forms the Second, Actual, Formal Guilt.

As the Punishment to which, and Threatening according to which, Sin binds; So
is the Formal, Actual Guilt, or Obligation it self, twofold; 1. Legal. 2.
Evangelical.


1. Legal Guilt, according to Legal unallay'd Threatening, binding over to Legal
Punishment, the mere Wrathful Dispensation of God, as a Judge, aiming at the
Satisfaction of his Justice.

2. Gospel Guilt, according to Gospel allayed Threatening, binding over to
Gospel Chastisement, a mixed Dispensation of the Justice and Mercy of God, as a
Father, aiming as at the Vindication of his Fatherly Authority and Honor, so
at the Correction and Amendment of his Child.

The 1. is the Guilt of Condemned Prisoners out of Christ The 2. is the Guilt
of Justified Persons in Christ


For one of these Guilts, Sin deriveth every where, and but one of them any
where, according to the respective Condition or State of the Person, in whom it
resides, or by whom it is committed.

II. Touching Pardon of Guilt.
As the Guilt of Sin, is its Obligation to Punishment, so is the Pardon of Sin,
the Dissolution of that Obligation; and as the Obligation is twofold, Legal or
Evangelical, so also is the Dissolution or Pardon.

The distinction of Legal or Gospel Pardon, does here manifestly proceed
according to the distinction of the Subject Matter, or thing Pardoned, Legal or
Gospel Guilt of Sin; otherwise for the Original or Rise of it, all (even Legal)
Pardon is of Gospel Grace.

First, Legal-Pardon of Legal Guilt, which is the Dissolution of Legal
Obligation to Legal Punishment for Legal Sin, and is twofold.

1. Fundamental in Christ (as a Common Person) of all the elect before Faith;
which lies in Christ's making full Satisfaction for their Sins, Meriting Faith
for them, and utmost Advantage of such his Satisfaction upon their Faith.

2. Actual of all the Elect in Christ upon their Faith. This Actual Pardon,
being nothing else, but the Actual Possession in their own Persons, of their
Fundamental Pardon in the Person of Christ.

This Actual Pardon of the Legal Guilt of Believers Sins is twofold.

1. Formal, of all their Sins past, removing their Legal Guilt.

2. Virtual, of all their Sins to come, preventing their Legal Guilt.

Formal Pardon takes off Legal Guilt, where once it was.

Virtual Pardon keeps it off, where else it would be.

Formal Pardon takes away all the Actual Legal Guilt, contracted upon the
Person from all Sin, whether inherent in, or committed by him, before his Faith.

Virtual Pardon, all capacity from the Person upon his Faith, not indeed of
having in his Nature, or committing in his Actions, any more Sin (for then
could there be no room for so much as Virtual Pardon), but of contracting any
more such Legal Guilt from any Sin, whether inherent in his Nature, or
committed by him in his Actions, for time to come.

And in this very Point, lying the main stress of the Controversy, consider
briefly (which will much help to clear it) that (not the Nature, not the
Actions, but) the Person (according indeed both to his Nature and Actions) is
the proper Subject of all Law-Obligation, whether of the Precept to Obedience,
or Threatening to Punishment for Disobedience; and therefore must be the proper
Subject also of all Law-Disobligation, or Dissolution of Law-Obligation,
whether for one End, or another. Since then a Person, while out of Christ, is
the unhappy Subject of the most severe and rigorous Obligation, as of the
Precept of the Law to Obedience for his Justification, so of the Threatening of
the Law to Condemnation, and all Legal Punishment for his Disobedience;
Accordingly must a Person, when in Christ, be the happy Subject of the most
gracious Dissolution of the severe and rigorous Obligation, as of the same
Precept of the Law to Obedience (not simply, but) as to Justification; so also
of the same Threatening of the Law (not indeed simply, but) as to Condemnation,
or any Legal Punishment for his Disobedience. And as from this dissolution of
the Legal Obligation of the Threatening, is the Actual, Formal Pardon or
dissolution of the Legal Obligation of such a Persons Sins past (for Sin cannot
be formally Remitted, before it be formally Committed) so from hence must (and
cannot, but) be also the Actual Virtual Pardon, or Dissolution of the Legal
Guilt or Obligation of such a Persons Sins to come.

Yet as the Precept in the hand of Christ still binds to Obedience upon
Gospel-Grounds, and to Gospel-Ends and Purposes (though not for Justification)
so the Threatening in the hand of Christ, still binds (though not to
Condemnation or any Legal Punishment, yet) upon Gospel-Grounds, and for
Gospel-Ends and Purposes, to Gospel-Chastisements for Disobedience in Sins to
come: Which Sins, when they come, as they derive a new Gospel Guilt (though no
new Legal Guilt) upon the Person; so they need a new Gospel-Pardon (though no
new Legal-Pardon, nor indeed are capable of it) therefore.

Secondly, Gospel-Pardon of Gospel-Guilt, is the dissolution of
Gospel-Obligation to Gospel-Chastisement for Gospel-Sin. For as there is Legal
or Gospel-Obedience, according to Legal or Gospel-Precepts; so against such
Precepts is there Legal or Gospel-Sin. The Nature of this Gospel-Pardon will
the better appear, in the manifold Differences of it from Legal Pardon. Such as
these that follow.

1. Gospel-Pardon is an Act of mere Mercy of God as a Father, only upon the
Intercession of Christ, improving therein his Merit with the Father, for
dealing with his Members in this regard also as Children; Gospel-Guilt needing
not for its Gospel-Pardon, any Legal Satisfaction.

Legal-Pardon is a Sentence of Absolution from God as a Judge, both from his
Justice and Mercy, upon both the Merit and Satisfaction of Christ, improved
upon his Intercession for condemned Prisoners of Law, but Elect Prisoners, to
be so made his Members and his Fathers Children.

2. Gospel-Guilt is sometimes wholly pardoned, sometimes but in part, partly
remitted, partly retained. Such was David's guilt of Adultery and Murder, and
such its Pardon; partly remitted, the Lord put away his Sin (the Gospel-Guilt
of his Sin) so that he dyed not in his own Person: And partly retained, so that
he was Chastened for it, in the Death of his Adulterous Issue, 2 Samuel 12. as
well as otherwise by his Son Absalom, there also Threatened.

Legal Guilt is always either wholly Pardoned, or wholly Unpardoned; either all
remitted, or not at all: That having place here, Nil solvitur nisi totum.

3. Gospel Guilt may be remitted, as contracted, successively and often.

Legal Guilt, however contracted, is remitted all together, at once, and but
once.

4. Gospel Guilt, when, and so far as Pardoned, is always Pardoned formally and
in it self; first by Gospel-Transgression redounding upon, and then by
Gospel Grace removed off from the Person.

Legal Guilt is Pardoned, partly Formally, and in it self; as in all Sins
foregoing Justification; partly Virtually, and in the Person; as in all Sins
following Justification. In those, their Legal Guilt so removed from, as if it
never had redounded upon the Person: In these their Legal Guilt so removed from
the Person, as it never can redound upon it: The Person being now a priviledg'd
Person in Jesus Christ, and no more Chargeable with Legal Guilt, than Christ
himself.

For as Personal Union in Christ, everlastingly prevents the resulting of its
proper personality out of his Humane Nature so united, which out of all other
Natures not so united, immediately results; So Mystical Union with Christ
everlastingly prevents the redounding of Legal Guilt upon the person so united,
from his sinful Nature and Actions; which from all other such Natures and
Actions of persons not so united, immediately redounds.

5. Faith is the only Instrumental Means, or Causal Condition of Legal Pardon:
Repentance (Godly Sorrow for Sin, and Amendment of of Life) the Consequents of
this Pardon, as the effect of that Faith.

Repentance (Gospel-Sorrow for Sin, and Return to Child-like Obedience) as well
as Faith, the Means of Gospel-Pardon, or Dissolution of the Obligation of
Gospel-Threatning for Gospel-Sin, to Gospel-Punishment, i. e. Fatherly
Chastisement: Or (in yet plainer English) of avoiding the Chastisements of God
(which are often very severe upon his Children) the main work and Business of
Gospel-Chastisement, being so done to the Hand of God; which is, by execution
of Gospel-Chastisement upon them to reduce his Children into that Gospel-Aw and
Order, wherein by the Gospel-Threatnings of them only, they would not be kept:
And which Gospel-Chastisements He has always in a readiness by Him, in that
Variety, and with that Severity, that Legal Punishments would be altogether as
improper and useless to his mixed Justice and Mercy as a Father, toward the
compassing of his Gospel-Designs and Purposes upon his Children, as
Gospel-Chastisements would be to his simple Justice as a Judge, toward the
Attainment of his Legal Aims and Ends upon his Enemies. Nor are those
Gospel-Chastisements used by Him toward his Children, but when there is, nor
further than there is need (1 Pet. 1. 6.) for the effecting of some such good,
as in an ordinary way of his Providence could not otherwise be brought about.

Some other Differences might be offered, but these being the Principal, will
afford a sufficiently large Prospect into both the Necessity and Nature of
these two so different kinds of Pardon.

III. Touching Prayer for Pardon.
Christ. Desert of Punishment being of the very Nature of Sin it self, (and not
only by the Constitution of God thereabout) altogether inseparable from Sin.
Those in Christ are to pray to God to remove that Sin from them, whose Desert
of Punishment cannot be removed from it; and to spread their Sins before the
Lord in the highest sense of the deepest Demerit of all Legal Punishment; that
so they may put the higher, both Accent upon the Free Grace of God, and
Estimate upon the full Satisfaction of Christ, whereby their Persons are so
fully freed from all Actual Obligation to any of that Legal Punishment, the
whole and utmost whereof their Sins so deeply Deserve.

The Removal of the Actual Formal Christ are to pray for, Acts 8. 22, 23. And
that both Formal, of all their Sins past, and Virtual, of all their Sins to
come: There being as well Promise upon their Faith, of never coming into
Condemnation again, Joh. 5 24. as of being freed from Condemnation at present,
Joh. 3. 18. And even such their Prayer, may prevail as Prayer, though not as
their Prayer; as Gods Ordinance, though not as their Performance; though not as
a Part of Duty in persons out of Christ, yet as a Means of Grace in the hand of
Christ. Otherwise Simon Peter would never have given it in direction to Simon
Magus, when in the Bond of Iniquity; a perfect Scriptural Definition of the
Guilt of Sin.

Christ are not to pray for, as that which is yet to be, or indeed now can be
anew granted to them, (There being no possibility of the Dissolution of an
Obligation, where is none of the Obligation it self, so to be Dissolved) But
they are to praise God through Christ for it; as that which is already, upon
their first believing (and thereby Being) in Christ, fully granted to them,
beyond all Need of Repetition, because beyond all Possibility of Intercision:
Especially when it is not more their Duty in Prayer, to take to themselves the
due Shame (as of the Remainders of the filth and power of Sin still in their
Natures, so) of the Gospel-Guilt of Sin still on their Persons; then to give to
God the due Glory of his Grace (as in the initial purging of the filth of Sin
out of, and subduing the power of Sin, in their Natures, so) in the perfect
Removal of the Legal Guilt of Sin from off their Persons; which seems to have
been the Apostle's very frame and carriage, Romans 7. 24, 25. and 8. 1. Gods
continuance indeed (or non-Revocation) of such his gracious pardon (even till
his pronouncing the Final Sentence of it at the General Judgment) together with
their own continual further renewed Sense and Assurance of such its both Grant
and Continuance, those in Christ are to pray for: There being Need of, Precept
for, and Promise to Prayer for these latter; none at all for those former,
either Formal, or Virtual Pardon to be Repeated.

Gospel-Pardon of Sin, or Dissolution i. e. Fatherly Chastisement, Those in
Christ are to pray for: (as of that Guilt or Penal Obligation, which can alone
in that State be incumbent on them, and on them alone) This not Absolutely, but
Conditionally: And that not only upon Condition of Faith (the only Condition of
Legal Pardon) or only Faith and Repentance together (the joint ordinary, but
not only Condition of Gospel-pardon). But upon such Conditions also, if and so
far as, it may be consistent with Gods Glory, their own, and others good, so
far forth (and no further) it may be pardoned; i. e. That their Heavenly Father
would no further Chasten them his Children for their Sins, then may be
conducing to the aforementioned Ends: And so far sorth, as they have daily
Need of their own to seek, the Precept of Christ for seeking, and the Promise
of Christ, for receiving Gospel-Pardon; So also the Spirit of Christ so to
seek, that they may receive it; that is, not only with such Child like fear of
Chastening, Threatened by an offended Father, but also with such godly Sense of,
and Sorrow for their Offenses themselves, and such Humble Gospel-Confidence
(upon the Conditions specified) of promised Pardon from a Gracious, though
Offended Father, as those out of Christ, do not, cannot seek Legal-Pardon
withal: Even as we see Pardon, not with less Earnestness, but with much other
manner of Affections and Assurance, begged by a Child from a Father, than by a
Prisoner from a Judge.

IV. Arguments proving Directly the Main, and by just Consequence the Whole of
all this. Drawn from

The Legal Guilt of Believers Sins to come, 1. Imputation of Believers Sins to
Christ before eommitted by them.
is in the same Capacity of being Dis-imputed, and pardoned to them, as it was
of being Imputed to and discharged by Christ. All the Legal Guilt of all the
Sins to come of all Believers after Christ, was Legally Imputed to, and
discharged by Christ. Ergo etc. And if the Legal Guilt of both Sins and
Persons, not yet in being, might be Legally Imputed to, and discharged by
Christ; much more may the Legal Guilt of Sins not yet in being, be Legally
Remitted to Persons already Being, and being Believers, Virtually, and in such
Persons, though not Formally, and in such Sins themselves.

The Legal Guilt of their Sins may (at least) as well be Virtually disimputed
to Believers, 2. Imputation of Christ's Satisfaction, to Believers before
wrought by Him.
before committed by them, as the Satisfaction of Christ, Formally Imputed to
Believers, before wrought by Him. This, before wrought by Him, was Formally
Imputed to all Believers before Christ. Ergo, etc. Reason of the Major: For if
the Acts of Moral Causes may be Morally put forth before such Causes are
themselves Actually in Being (as it was in that Case of Christ's Satisfaction
not then wrought, when putting forth its Moral Act, in its Formal Imputation to
the Formal Pardon of the Legal-Guilt of Sins past, to Believers before Christ)
much more may such Moral Impediments be laid in before such Causes are in
Being, as shall effectually hinder the putting forth of such their Acts, when
such Causes come Actually to be (as it is in this Case of Christ's Satisfaction
now wrought, Formally Imputed to the Virtual Pardon of Believers Sins to come,
effectually hindering the putting forth of their Moral Act, the deriving of any
Legal Guilt upon such Persons, when such Sins are come) Or with any who
conceive the Satisfaction of Christ, not yet Formally wrought by Him, could not
be Formally, but only Virtually imputed to Believers, before Christ Incarnate,
Let the Argument run thus.

That which, but Virtually Imputed, was efficacious to the Formal Pardon of the
Legal Guilt of their Sins past, who believed in Christ yet to come, cannot,
being Formally Imputed, be inefficacious to the Virtual Pardon of the Legal
Guilt of their Sins to come, who believe in Christ already come. But the
Satisfaction of Christ, etc. Ergo, etc. And then let the Reason in the Form of
Argument before used, be accordingly applied.

The Sins of Believers are so Remitted to them, Arg. 3. Imputation of Christ's
Satisfaction as wrought for Believers.
as the Satisfaction of Christ for their Sins was Wrought by Him and Imputed to
them. That was not Wrought by Him, and Imputed to them, some parts of it for
some, and other parts for other their Sins; But all of it together for all
their Sins. Ergo, etc. For though the Sufferings of Christ were many, his
Satisfaction was but One, made up of all his Sufferings: And as his Sufferings,
however severally and successively undergone by Him, are yet all together in
their Legal Satisfaction, at once Imputed to Believers; So their Sins, however
(in the Acts of them) severally and successively committed by them, are yet
(through that Satisfaction of those Sufferings so Imputed) all together in
their Legal Guilt, at once Remitted to Believers.

If a Believers Sins past before his Justification needed not many particular
Legal Pardons, Arg. 4. Proportion twixt Sin foregoing and following
Justification, as to any need of many particular Legal Pardons.
but were in his Justification all comprised in one General Act of Formal
Pardon; neither do his Sins to come after his Justification, need many
particular Legal Pardons; but are in his Justification (as to their Legal
Guilt) all as well comprised in one General Act of Virtual Pardon. But, etc.
Ergo, etc. Nay to speak more accurately, Formal and Virtual Pardon, are not
indeed two different Legal Pardons, but only two Different Respects of one and
the same General Legal Pardon, which as it respects Sins foregoing, is Formal;
As Sins following Justification, Virtual Pardon.

Where can be no new Application of Christ's Legal Satisfaction, Arg. 5.
Impossibility of Christ's Legal Satisfaction being often applied.
there can be no new Pardon of Legal Guilt. To the Persons of Believers can be
no new Application (though there may to their Consciences) of Christ's Legal
Satisfaction. Ergo (though there may to their Consciences) there can be to
their Persons no new Pardon of Legal Guilt. Proof of the Minor. Where by the
first Act of Faith, the whole Satisfaction of Christ was wholly Applied, and
never after, either in whole or in part, again disapply'd, there can be no new
Application of it. But, etc. Ergo, etc.

In whose Natures, Sin can never any more recover its Reigning Power, Arg. 5.
Proportion between the Guilt and Power of Sin.
upon their Persons, it can never any more derive its Legal Guilt. In the
Natures of Believers, Sin can never any more Recover its Reigning Power. Ergo,
etc. The Minor is clear from the Apostles Assertion, Romans 6. 14. Sin shall not
have dominion over you. The Major also clear from the Reason of that his
Assertion there rendered, For you are not under the Law, i. e. the Rigorous
unallay'd Threatening of the Law, Ergo, not under Legal Guilt: But under Grace,
i. e. Gospel Grace allaying the Legal into a Gospel-Threatning; Ergo, under
only Gospel-Guilt of Sin. And this, if needful, may be thus further cleared.
The Unsubdu'd Power of Sin in Unbelievers, is a Legal Punishment: Ergo, the
Guilt binding over to it, Legal Guilt. The Subdued Power of Sin in Believers,
only a Gospel-Chastisement. Ergo, the Guilt binding over to it only
Gospel-Guilt. (Both these Enthymems proceed upon the Reason of the 14th.
Argument). And yet further thus; As the Subdued Power of Sin in Believers,
considered under the Notion of Malum Paenae, is only a Gospel-Chastisement, to
which therefore only Gospel-Guilt obliges; So considered under the Notion of
Malum Culpae, it is only Gospel-Sin, Deriving therefore only Gospel-Guilt,
binding over only to Gospel-Punishment.

So far as Believers are freed from Law-Curse for their Sins, Arg. 7. Believers
Exemption from the Curse of the Law.
so far are they freed from Law-Guilt of their Sins. They are wholly freed from
all Law-Curse for all their Sins, even Sins to come, as well as present and
past Sins, Gal. 3. 13. Ergo, etc. Reason of the Major: Because the Commination
forming Obligation to Punishment (as the Command to Obedience), a Soul cannot
be farther under the Obligation of its Commination, than under the Commination
it self.

Those who cannot be Condemned with a Sentence of Law-Condemnation for their
Sins to come, cannot be guilty with Law-Guilt of their Sins to come. Arg. 8.
Believers Freedom from the Sentence of the Law according to the Curse.
Believers, Joh. 5. 24. cannot be Condemned, etc. Compare Psalm. 32. 2. with
Romans 4. 8. both Translations and Originals with Romans 8. 1. and Joh. 5. 24.
Ergo, etc. Reason of the Major. Because Law-Threatning, according to which Sin
derives Law-Guilt, or Obligatito Law-Punishment upon any Persons, is the Rule
of Gods Judgment or Sentence, which accordingly he always exactly passes and
pronounces touching such Persons: He will by no means clear the Guilty, Exodus
34. 7. Numb. 14. 18. Nah. 1. 3. compared with the immediately before cited
Texts.

The Principal can no longer be under any thing of that Law-Obligation, Arg. 9.
Law Relation betwixt Principal and Surety
which was fully satisfied by the Surety, and that Satisfaction fully applied
to the Principal. And so it is between Christ and Believer in this Point: Ergo,
etc. Reason of the Major. Because Principal and Surety (however Physically or
Metaphysically Distinct) are Legally (or in Law-Construction) but one and the
same Person.

The Curse of the Law can have no more to do with Believers in Point of
Condemnation, than the Command of the Law in Point of Justification. Arg. 10.
Proportion betwixt the Commination and Command of the Law, incumbent upon
Believers.
The Command of the Law can have nothing at all any more to do with Believers
in point of Justification; Ergo, etc. Or thus. The Threatenings in the hand of
Christ is tempered and allayed with as much of Gospel-Indulgence to Believers
as the Precept: The Precept in the hand of Christ binds not to Obedience for
Justification in any their Duties to come. Ergo, Neither the Threatening to
Condemnation, or any Legal Punishment, for Disobedience in any their Sins to
come.

The perfect Satisfaction of Christ Imputed to Believers, Arg. 11. Proportion
betwixt Satisfaction and Merit of Christ imputed to Believers
is no more consistent with any their future Obligation to Death and Hell for
their Sins to come, than the perfect Merit of Christ imputed to Believers is
consistent with any their future forfeiture of Heaven and Glory, by their Sins
to come. But etc, Ergo, etc.

The Satisfaction of Christ imputed to Believers is of as much force to prevent
the Legal Guilt of their Sins to come, Arg. 12. Proportionable Power of
Christ's Satisfaction imputed against future and past Sins.
as to Remove the Legal Guilt of their Sins past. But etc. Ergo, etc. And if it
do not keep off such Guilt of their Sins to come, from Redounding, how does it
keep off such Guilt of their Sins past, from Recurring upon their Persons!

Law-Guilt can no more Redound upon the Persons of Believers from any the Acts
of Sin proceeding from them, Arg. 13. Proportion 'twixt Habits and Acts of Sin
in Deriving Guilt.
than from all the Habits of Sin Residing in them, and even Original Sin it
self more deeply rooted in corrupt Nature then the Habits. But etc. Ergo etc.
Nay the Transient Acts of Sin proceeding from Believers, have much less
Fundamental, Habitual Guilt or Demerit in them, than the Indwelling Habits, or
Original Sin, they proceed from: And therefore are much less able to Derive any
Actual Legal Guilt upon their Believing Persons. And this was one main ground
of Comfort the Apostle bore up his believing Soul upon, under the trouble of
all the Habits of Sin in his Nature, Romans 7. 24. that they derived no Legal
Guilt upon his Person, Romans 8. 1.

Such as is the Punishment of a Believers Sin, Arg. 14. Proportion betwixt
Guilt and Punishment of Sin.
before Formally Pardoned, such is the Guilt of his Sin when committed. That is
not; Ergo, this cannot be Legal, but only Evangelical. Reason. Because, Guilt
being a Penal Obligation, and Penal Obligation a Relation of the Person to the
Punishment, This Relation must be such as its Term, the Punishment related to.

A Person cannot be under two cross and contrary Sentences of God together.
Arg. 15. Impossibility of being under two contrary Sentences of God, together.
A Sentence of Justification adjudging him to Heaven and Glory upon the
Righteousness of Christ; And a Sentence of Condemnation adjudging him to Death
and Hell for his own Sins. But so should a Believer be, could any Legal Guilt
Redound upon his Person from his Sins. The Reason of the Major in the 8th.
Argument, having its full force here also.

An Elect Persons Sins to come, Arg. 16. Different State of Pardon of Elect
persons Sins to come, before and after Faith.
are in a better posture and state of Pardon to him in his own Person upon his
Believing, than they were in the Person of Christ only, before his Believing.
They, before his Believing, were Fundamentally pardoned; Ergo, upon his
believing pardoned Actually. Actually-Virtually, though not Formally. Otherwise
something might be Legally laid to the Charge of God's Elect, contrary to that
of the Apostle, Romans 8. 33. Where the Word Elect is to be understood
consequenter (as they call it) of Elect Believing Ones.

The main strength of all (that any otherwise minded may have where-against
mainly to oppose themselves) lies here.

All Obligation to Punishment, is from the Threatening (as all to Obedience from
the Precept) a Threatening, whose own power of Penal, Legal Obligation is
Dissolved, can no more give power of Penal Legal Obligation to Sins to come,
then it can to Sins past. So that in Conclusion, These cannot be Formally
pardoned, where those are not pardoned Virtually.

The Opposite Opinion,
Act and State of Justification, that the Act of Justification is Subject to
much, but the State to no Intercision, will be found altogether incompetent, if
we consider,

1. That the Act of Justification (if we will speak properly) being God's, and the
State ours, The Act cannot be rescinded, where the State of Justification
remains entire: Because God always exactly judges of things, accordingly as
they are in themselves.

2. That the State of Justification cannot remain entire, where the Act is
rescinded: Because things are always exactly in themselves, accordingly as God
judges of them: Insomuch, that whereas the Truth of things is the Measure and
Rule of our Judgment, Gods Judgment is the Rule and Measure of the Truth of
things.

3. That God's Act of Justification, as well Conserveth, as Creates, our State
of Justification. And therefore so strict and necessary is the Dependence of
our Justified State upon his Justifying Act, that the One cannot be more or
less, either Entire or Rescinded, then the Other.

4. That this Answer provides not any Salvo against the Mischief of such
Intercision, as well (if not as much) by our less, as greater Sins: Less Sins
indeed do not waste the Conscience, destroy its Peace, and Dead the Sense of
Justification (wherein the main of that Peace lies) as Greater Sins do. But if
the Greatest Sins of a Believer Rescind his Justification (as they cannot but
do, if they bring him under Legal Guilt, or Obligation to Legal Punishment) his
Least Sins must do it no less than they. Which, either as to State, or but Act
of Justification, one would think no man should be forward to assert.

in and out of Christ, and the two very Covenants themselves, of Works and of
Grace. Preserve but these two States under these two Covenants, both in their
due Distinctions, and the following Notion must in its full Strength and
Evidence, irresistibly prevail to the Final Decision of this Controversy.

Such as is the Law a Person is under, such is his Transgression of the Precept
of that Law, such the Guilt according to the Threatening of that Law, redounding
upon the Person from that Transgression; Such the Punishment that Guilt binds
over to; And such the Pardon of that both Guilt and Punishment.

If the Law or Covenant of Works, the Transgression, Guilt, Punishment, Pardon,
all Legal.

If the Law of Faith or Covenant of Grace, The Law made up into Gospel in the
Hand of a Mediator (for the Law of Nature, or Moral Law, is one and the same
under both these distinct Covenants), The Transgression, Guilt, Punishment,
Pardon, all accordingly Evangelical.

Two only considerable Objections, I apprehend, may be made against this
Doctrine.
This Doctrine throws open a wide Obj. 1.
gap to all Looseness and Licentiousness of Life, as throwing down the greatest
Mound and Bar against Sin, Fear of contracting Legal Guilt, or Obligation to
Legal Punishment.



Christ engaged, upon their Gospel-Repentance, to walk with them in a Covenant
of Fatherly Pardoning Grace and Mercy: Insomuch, that whereas Romans 6. 12. the
Percept makes it their Duty, that Sin should not reign in their mortal bodies;
the Promise ver. 14. makes it their Privilege, that sin should not have
Dominion over them, because not under the Law, but under Grace: And in ver. 15.
the Apostle urging this very Objection, puts it off, as he does elsewhere
also, with the greatest abhorrence of a God forbid.

Relative change of the State and Condition of their Persons from a State of
Sin to a State Grace, perfectly Justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, i. e.
by the Satisfaction and Merit of Christ, imputed to them; pass also at the same
time under an Absolute Change of the merely carnal, sinful Complexion and
Disposition of their Natures, to some Degree of a Spritual Frame and Temper,
Sanctified by the Spirit of their God, 1 Cor. 6. 11. put into them in Habitual
Sanctification; and as to Actual Sanctification, by his Actual Influences, Romans
8. 14. Acting and Leading them, as Children of God, in all the good ways of
God their Father. So that from the Later of those Changes, they have their
Principle and Power; and from the Former, their Argument and Engagement, not to
walk after the Flesh, but after the Spirit, Romans 8. 1. Their Dis-obligation to
Legal Punishment, their Obligation to Gospel-Obedience, and that a powerful
Constraining Obligation also, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15.

Gospel-Faith, Child-like Love, and Fear, have an especial Influence upon, and
Sway in the Souls of such changed ones; to this Purpose

1. Faith, that instates in such Pardoning Grace, is the root of all their
Obedience, as Infidelity is the Root of all others Disobedience: Faith
purifying their Hearts, Acts 15. 9. Faith, whereby they believe, not only the
Promises of God, the Grace and Mercy bound up in them; but the Precepts of God
also Psalm. 119. 66. the Obedience and Duty bound up in them; that these
Precepts are Holy, Just and Good; and that Duty and Service they require,
reasonable Duty and Service; Reasonable for God to enjoin, and Reasonable for
them to perform.

2. Love of Christ, upon consideration of what he has done and suffered to
procure this Pardon for them, which will make his whole Law a Law of Love to
them, and their Observance of it, sweet and easy for them. And if the Woman in
the Gospel, Luke 7. 47 loved Christ the more, the more Sins he forgave her; the
Virtual Pardon of Believers Sins to come, being more, than the Formal Pardon
only of Sins past, will make them Love more, and consequently Sin less, and
obey more.

3. Child-like Fear of Fatherly Chastisements, will impress and preserve more
effectual Dread of Sin, upon the Hearts of Believers, than Slavish Fear of
Judiciary Punishments, will do upon the Minds of Unbelievers: Whereof much
might be said here, if enough had not been said before.



This Doctrine will Destroy Prayer for Pardon of Sin, Obj. 2.
leaving neither Need of, nor Room for it, in Believers.

But this Second Objection has been sufficiently answered in the Third Head of
this Discourse, Answ.
where it is made clearly to appear, that this Doctrine is so far from being
Destructive of, that it is Instructive in, and about, Prayer for Pardon.

FINIS.
THE Righteousness of God through Faith, upon all without Difference who do
believe: In 2 Sermons on Romans 3. 22. By Nathaniel Mather, Preacher of the
Gospel. 1694.

The Conquests and Triumphs of Grace, being a brief Narrative of the Success
which the Gospel has had among the Indians in New England. By Matthew Mayhew.
1695.

Batteries upon the Kingdom of the Devil. By Mr. Cotton Mather Author of the
late Memorable Providence, relating to Witchcrafts and Possessions, and of
early Piety Exemplified.

All Printed for Nath. Hiller, at the Princes-Arms in Leaden-Hall-street
overgainst St. Mary-Axe. 1695.


