A Seasonable DEFENSE OF Preaching: AND THE Plain Way of it.

LONDON: Printed by M. Clark, for H. Brom, at the Gun in St. Paul's
Churchyard.

MDCLXXVIII.

A DIALOGUE.
A. MY Friends, you are well met here; I suppose your business now is walking;
and I am for a turn or two with you.


B. You may well guess so; for you seldom meet us here, in the Church, upon any
other occasion.


A. I wish you had spoken that Penitently; So I am sure you ought to have done.
And if you had come a little sooner, you had learnt that duty from a very good
Sermon.


B. A Sermon! 'Twas never well with the world since we have had so much
Preaching.


A. To the same purpose said the Idolatrous Jews to the Prophet Jeremiah, that
since they had left to burn Incense to the Queen of Heaven, they had wanted all
things, and had never seen good days. All times have afforded matter enough of
complaint, and I must confess there has been a sort of Preaching that has
greatly contributed to the evils of ours: but in this place, and such like,
there is, I hope, no danger of hearing any of those pestilential Doctrines,
that once poisoned the public Air. I am sure the true Primitive Christianity
teaches things that would cure all our maladies were they duly heeded, and put
in practice: I need not tell you how earnestly it every where presses Humility
and Modesty, Patience and Self-denial, Charity and Peace, Mortification to the
world, and Conscientious submission to Governors. These our Ministers preach,
and I suppose you will not say, that such Preaching promotes the evils of the
times; if it do, it is very accidentally, and so, as the Grace of God is turned
into lasciviousness, and the strivings of his Spirit may contribute to men's
greater hardness.


B. I speak not against Preaching; but we have too much on it.


A. We have more reason to thank God for the plenty, than to quarrel at the
abundance. It would be very humorsome and foolish to complain that the Rivers
run with more water than is necessary for our occasions; and 'twould have been
absurd perversencss in the Israelites to have murmured, because more Manna fell
than they could use.


B. Do you not think then that there may be over-doing in this?


A. Yes doubtless; when all religious offices are run into Preaching; when that
excludes the public Prayers, and Catechizing; when private Preaching days are
set apart without Authority, to humor the wantonness of vain people; all these
are over-doing.


B. But is not constant Preaching twice every Sunday, besides occasional weekly
Sermons, too much?


A. It may be too much for the strength and health of the Minister; it may be
too much, where the people will not frequent those afternoon Sermons, or are
prejudiced against them; it may be so in Country Parishes, and where no
remarkable inconvenience arises from the omission of them: But in Cities and
great Towns, (as the times are) they are in a manner necessary; since without
them, people would idle more about, and more would run to the Conventicles; and
'twould occasion the reproach of laziness, on our Ministers, and turn diverse
off from the Church, that are kept in tolerable order by this double diligence.

There is not just so much Preaching set and stated by the Laws of Christ, and
the Church, as must not be exceeded; but so much is due as Edification, Peace
and Order require; now this is more or less, according as circumstances of
times are; and ours are such as make it very behooveful for Ministers to abound
in this work; what is grievous in it is to them, who have much more labor
imposed on them than former times expected, and in stead of being advanced in
proportionable maintenance, and encouragement, that is fallen as much (or more)
than their work is increast. So that it is indeed very hard upon them, but we,
the people, have no reason to complain.


B. But Preaching being so frequent and common, becomes contemptible by it; and
is so much the less heeded.


A. This is too true: and it is a great evil and discouragement to those that
labor in the Word and Doctrine: but what help fo rit? To restrain and put a
stop to the course of Preaching to cure this abuse, would in likelihood be
followed with a train of greater Evils; and as circumstances are, it could not
be done, without manifest danger to the great Interests both of Church and
State. If the regular Clergy should leave frequent Preaching, the
Conventicle-meetings would swallow all: and therefore, upon the whole, whatever
is to be thought of the thing it self, nakedly, and abstractedly considered, it
is not, I think, any matter of just complaint, that there is so much Preaching:
where the fault is not in the quality, the plenty is no grievance.


C. For my part I must confess I seldom hear Sermons, I love the Prayers of the
Church, and I care not much for Preaching.


A. It is a great unhappiness to mankind, that we are so apt to run from one
extreme into another: In the late times (and still among some) Preaching and
Hearing were in a manner all the Religion: and the Prayers of the Church
despised, and excluded; and now, some on the quite contrary, pretend to
magnify the public prayers, but vilify Preaching; and make Hearing nothing.
So that one duty and part of Religion is set up to conflict and destroy
another. And I observe, that usually people of this pretense, do in good
earnest care for neither.

Preaching is an Evangelical Institution, and the Commission given the Apostles
was, that they should go and teach all Nations: and Saint Paul says, 'twas
necessary for him to Preach the Gospel, and woe to him if he did it not; and
that he was not sent to Baptize but to Preach. 1 Cor. 1. 17. viz. not to do the
former chiefly. Faith comes by hearing; and how shall they hear without a
Preacher? This was the way whereby God conveyed his mind unto men in all times.
Noah was a Preacher of Righteousness; and God spoke unto them of old, by the
preaching of the Prophets. I need not Preach more on this plain and well known
Subject.


C. But ours I suppose is not like the Apostolical and Prophetical Preaching.


A. It is not indeed like theirs in respect of the immediate inspiration which
the Prophets and Apostles had, but our Ministers have not. It is not like in
respect of the Authority of an immediate mission, assisted by the miracles they
were enabled to perform; it is not like in respect of the persons Preached to,
who were chiefly Infidels; or the circumstances of the action, without the
settled forms of decency, which now are used, but could not be then. But as to
the matter, and the ends, which are the main things, our Preaching is as theirs
was; our Ministers Preach the same Jesus in the circumstances of his Birth,
Life, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, Mediation, and all the rest; the same
doctrines, duties, encouragements, rewards and punishments: with the same
design of persuading men in order to the glory of God, and the Salvation of
their Souls, as the Apostles, and Primitive Preachers did.


C. All these were necessary to be Preached to men while they continued in
Judaism, or Heathenism; but what need of them now, when they are believed and
entertained in the world?


A. There is still need, and will be so to the worlds end. There are young that
must be initiated, and adult that are to be confirmed; there are weak to be
strengthened; and doubting to be resolved, and settled; there are Pious to be
directed, and Wicked to be reproved; There are Heretics and other Erroneous,
and many who at the bottom are Infidels, that must be confuted, and withstood:
These needs are and will be still, and Preaching is the ordinary means that God
has appointed in his Church to minister to such occasions, so that this was
not a temporary ordinance to serve the first times only, but is of perpetual
necessity and use. And therefore when our Savior delivered the Commission to
the Apostles to teach all Nations, he gave it to them and their successors, and
annexed a promise of his perpetual help, which continues still, and will always,
viz. that he would be with them to the end of the world.


C. Well, well! I think I know as much as the Preacher can tell me; and
therefore shall not trouble my self much with hearing Sermons.


A. No wise man will think you the more knowing for that opinion. You have read
what one that knew a great deal said, See thou a man wise in his own conceit,
there is more hope of a fool than of him, Prove. 26. 12. And another, He that
thinks he knows any thing, knows nothing yet as he ought to know. 1 Cor. 8. 2.
For even Apostles, and the greatest, confessed that they knew but in part, and
saw through a glass darkly. 1 Cor. 13. 9. And Solomon you know has pronounced
roundly against opiniators, saying, That it is the fool that rages, and is
confident, Prove. 14. 16. But if you did know so much, that you were not to be
taught, yet since others do not, and Preaching is necessary for their wants,
you ought to encourage their attendance by your example, though you had no
other reason to hear Sermons: Yea you would have need however to hear on your
own score; For the design of Preaching is not to teach men new things; not
always to inform the understanding in matters before unknown; but sometimes it
gives order and method to our thoughts, which perhaps were perplexed, and so
sets things in their right place, helping us to clearness of conception, which
is a great advantage: It is designed to bring known things to our minds, to
render them present to our thoughts, to awaken confideration, and by that to
excite the affections, and engage the practice. It is not so much our want,
that we do not know our duty, as that we are dead, and cold, and averse to
practice what we are acquainted with; so that it is the business of Preaching
to set before us the proper motives, and considerations to move us to suitable
action. The grand cause of men's sins and neglects is inconsideration, and
Preaching is a means to cure that. And let me ask you, whether you do not
sometimes find your self much moved by what is said, and pressed by another, when
you had had the same things in your mind before, without effect?


C. I cannot deny that; but I see but little good that Preaching does in the
world: Men remain the same after all their hearing.


A. More good, many times, is done than appears; and I doubt not but it is so
in the present case. There are seeds of Picty and Virtue sown in the Soul, that
show themselves not a long while after, till time, further consideration and
occasion bring them forth; many convictions lodged in the consciences of wicked
men, that lie there like fire in a flint, till they are excited, and then they
become means and instruments of repentance: many hints of truths taken without
present emotion, that afterward much influence the understanding and practice,
some habitual fear of God, and love and esteem of religion, planted insensibly
in the mind, that in their season work great effects; and I doubt not but by
these, men that are very bad, are in diverse instances restrained and rendered
less wicked than otherwise they would be. And though I have as deep a sense of
the vileness of the world as most men have, yet I question not but that it
would be very much worse were it not for Preaching; many there are who
publicly own, and show the benefit they receive from it, and it is fit the
River should run on, though but few men, or beasts are refreshed by it.


C. We have indeed read of great effects of Preaching heretofore, as of Jonas
on the Ninevites, and St. Peter's on the three thousand converted at one
Sermon; and Orpheus and others among the Heathens, have done strange things by
the force of their Poetry and Eloquence; but now we see no such things; which
is a plain indication that our Preaching is little worth.


A. It Is an ill measure to judge of the worth of things by their success. The
instances you give are great, but as considerable Preachers as those have not
succeeded, as they did. You know how it was with Noah in reference to the old
world, to whom he preached many years without success on any, besides some of
his own family: Lot, no doubt, exhorted and reproved the Sodomites, but to how
little purpose? The Prophets were earnest and powerful in their Preaching, and
yet few believed their report, but the people continued still a stubborn and
perverse generation. Our Savior preached to many that would neither receive
him, nor his doctrine, notwithstanding the divinity of his person, and the
power of his miracles; And St. Paul, one of the most powerful of Preachers,
after great pains with the Thessalonians seems to fear that he had labored in
vain with them, 1 These. 3. 5. and after much instruction bestowed on the
Hebrews he complains that though for the time, they ought to have been
teachers, they had still need to be taught again which were the Principles of
the Oracles of God. Hebrews 5. 12. So that the want of success is not always
justly chargeable on the Preaching. And ours certainly has as great a subject,
as great ends, as great motives, and as great helps as ever any, bating the
immediate and extraordinary, had.


C. Therefore doubtless the defect is in the Preaching, and our Preachers have
not the way, or ability to use those advantages.


A. Our Preachers are men, and have imperfections; and I confess there are
diverse sorts of Preaching that have no persuasive force in them: But yet many
that have moved much, have been in their persons, knowledge, and other natural
talents as indifferent, as generally our Divines are: and some of our Preaching
is as substantial, plain and forceable, both as to the matter, and manner of
it, a perhaps any Age since the Apostles has yielded; and yet such does not
prevail. There is therefore somewhat more in it than you imagine.


C. Pray what?


A. In order to your information in this matter, I entreat you to consider,
that in all affairs, both of nature and morality, the seemingly greatest and
fittest means, many times, produce nothing; when things mean, and to
appearance, contemptible, work wonders. This might be exemplified in diverse of
the great changes of the world, and is to be seen daily in the variations that
happen in the Spirits, and Actions of particular men. There are certain
dispositions required in the Subject, in order to its being affected, or
altered by the Agent: where those dispositions are, a small matter makes great
impression; but where they are not, the greatest effects nothing: The most warm
Sun, and seasonable showers cause no verdure on a rock; when a few kindly
beams, and favorable drops make the grass shoot in the fruitful meads. There
are analogous preparations and dispositions in the spirits of men, that arise
from the concurrence of many circumstances, the conjunction of which is not
observed: where such are as are proper to incline the subject, mean instruments
work mightily, where they are wanting, the same, yea and those that in
themselves are more potent and forcible, are fruitlesly employed. Now under the
appearance of the same principles, inclinations, humors and appetites, there is
a vast insensible diversity in these unheeded circumstances; so that one is
powerfully moved by that which no way affects another; as we see in a trivial
instance of one man's being inflamed by the passion of love by the sight of an
agreeable beauty, that is nothing taking to another, equally amorous: and the
smallest thing kindles him that is so insensibly disposed, when all the charms
of the same person are lost upon another. I give this instance, not out of
lightness in so serious a matter, but because I cannot at present think of a
better, that so plainly illustrates what I endeavor to represent.


C. This shows indeed how particular men may be sometimes moved by small
things, when the same, and greater, make no impressions elsewhere. But how is
it that multitudes are strongly affected together, as in the case of St.
Peter's three thousand, and the sudden conversion of whole Nations?


A. The persons that were instruments in those wonderful conversions, were
acted by an extraordinary Spirit, which gave them extraordinary assistance, and
prepared the hearts of men for those wonderful changes; and it was not the bare
natural force of their Preaching, and Eloquence, that was the cause of those
mighty operations: So that these are not fair instances in our case.


C. But will you not grant that Preaching has generally affected more in other
of the ordinary Ages of the Church, than it does in this?


A. I must grant it, and think that it scarce ever influenced the people less.


C. Well! and is not the cause of the want of ordinary success, the meanness
and defects of the present preaching.


A. You may gather from what I have been saying that I do not judge so. As in
particular persons, so in public bodies, and in whole Nations there may be a
concurrence of favorable or cross circumstances that either dispose to, or
hinder the effect and influence of Preaching. You remember that in the
beginning of the late unhappy times, the Preaching of the Puritan Ministers
(then so called) did great things, strangely prevailing upon the people; and
there were no doubt considerable changes wrought upon many of their lives by
it, at least, to reformation from open profaneness, and irreligion; which we
have no need to ascribe to their having greater matters to say than were said
before, or since: But there was then a concurrence of many things that disposed
the multitude to be so affected. They were much scared with the noise of
Superstition and Popery, by those who pretended themselves to be the only
Preachers, and defenders of the pure, and Spiritual religion: and people that
are frighted are softened, and rendered very impressible: and then, the pretenses
of those men were very taking, it was all light and mystery, and Spirituality
that they taught, set out by new conceits, and new phrases, by great
earnestness and fervours of mighty zeal, which things especially when they are
new, fill the imagination, and by that work exceedingly upon the affections of
the vulgar. Besides which, the times were troubled, and discontented; men were
angry with their Governors, and dissatisfied with the legal establishments
(which then 'twas part of the power of godliness to oppose) And this begat the
greater opinion of, and affection to those Preachers, and their Doctrines:
Theirs were looked on as the only Soulsaving Sermons, and those conceits
contributed mightily to the success of them: so that they could not choose but
prevail upon warm, imaginative people, so prepared and disposed. But when the
constitutions of the Church were destroyed, and those ways no longer met
opposition, when the novelty of the notions and phrases was over, and the
things began to grow stale, and accustomed to them, then you may remember, that
those moving Preachers affected nothing so much as they had done before: Then
we heard great complaints of the comparative unfrequency of conversions, and
the loss of that warm zeal that the people were acted by in the former season.
Such were the dispositions that contributed to their popularity: But our
Ministers are under the quite contrary disadvantages, so that it is a rare thing
if any of them be very popular, though never so excellent Preachers.


C. Pray what are those disadvantages you speak of?


A. The generality of the people have their phancies prepostest with the
notions, phrases, and ways of those other men, and so are prejudiced, or
indisposed to that Preaching that would instruct them better. Many of them
follow those Teachers into Conventicles, and several that do not, have an
hankring after the Garlic and Onions; and others are cold and indifferent to
such matters one way, or other: The hurt that the irregular leading men did by
their Preaching, has begot in diverse a dislike and disesteem of the thing it
self: and for their sakes also the Persons of our Ministers undergo disrespect
and contempt: Their practices have begot in many an aversion, or at least a
disregard to the Clergy, as such, not distinguishing between the nocent and the
innocent: Atheists, Papists, Phanaticks, the debauched livers, and the covetous
enviers, make it their business to slander, vilify, and expose them. The
preferments that are good raise envy, the vast number of mean and poor
Vicarages beget contempt, and both the one and the other, as ill will can take
occasion, are applied to the whole Order.


C. But do you not think the present Clergy have a great many faults that
deserve the disrespect that is fallen on them.


A. So big a body of men cannot be without faults: but 'twould be too great a
diversion from our present business to discourse what I have to say of that
now, I may take another occasion to talk with you fully about it; I shall only
note at present, that they suffer for others faults as much, or more, than for
their own. Many of the old Romish Priesthood got great possessions by abusing
the credulity of the people at their death; and the contrary humor prevails so
much now, that scarce any thing is given by Will to Clergy or Church uses: even
the little that is left is thought too much, and every one (almost) is nimming,
and catching from them what he can. The Fanatical and Seditious Clergy Preached
us into Rebellion, and many are so set against the whole Order by it, that they
cannot endure any of that gown, though most opposite to those principles and
ways: Now the case being thus as to their faculty and persons, it cannot be
expected that their labors should be very taking; and since there is such an
unhappy conjunction of so many other circumstances to indispose the people to
the present Preaching, it is no wonder our Preachers have not that influence,
and lead not the populace, as some others have done.


C. But the nonconforming Preachers do it still, though the Novelty you spoke
of be over, which is a sign it was not that which occasioned their so great
prevalency, and success.


A. Novelty was one of the concurring circumstances mentioned; that is gone
indeed, but the others are revived, and new added, the fears of Popery, the
opposition to establishments, the discontent, the glory of being thought more
godly, the fancy of persecution, and such like, are as formerly: and there are
over and above, the great excess of Atheism and Profaneness, that the scandals
they have brought on Religion have occasioned; and their pity toward their
Teachers whom they look on as oppressed, by being displaced: These make them
stick close, and to hear their Preachers with more affection, and zeal of
attention, which affords them advantages for fame and applause. But for all
this, though when they declaim against Idolatry, Superstition, Will Worship,
Formality, the people sigh and take on, and seem to be much moved; yet let them
but Preach heartily and home against malice, censoriousness, bitter zeal,
lying, slandering, schism, disobedience to lawful Governors, spiritual pride,
waywardness, fondness toward uncertain opinions, and such like sins of the
parties; they will then find very cold entertainment of their doctrine, and
move no passions by it, but rage and animosity against themselves; and the
consequents, withdrawings from their meetings, and bitter revilings of their
persons. So that indeed their Teachers how powerful soever esteemed have not
power to move them to any thing contrary to their humor, and the corrupt
interest of their party: and therefore I never heard but of one man among them
who durst venture to tell them plainly and honestly their own sins; and him,
though otherwise the most considerable person that goes with them, they worry,
and persecute with their bitterest reproaches and invectives.


D. For my part I think the way for our Ministers to bring the people back
again to our Church, would be to out-preach those Teachers which you so much
condemn.


A. But who shall be judge what sort of Ministers out-preach the other. The
people so disposed and prepossest, as I have shown ours generally are, will
always judge on the side of the men that flatter them, and cant in their
phrases, and stand in opposition to the Government; so that though our
Ministers spoke all like Angels, and all theirs brayed like Asses, those people
would give the power and spirituality on their side. I suppose, you know the
Apologue, the Nightingale and Cuckoo sung, the Ass was judge; The appeal was
made, and the sentence was, That he could not deny but the Nightingale did
well, but for a plain Song he was for the Cuckoo.


D. They will confess indeed that there is not so much Eloquence and fine
language in their Sermons, but they are commended and followed for their
Plainness.


A. Plainness is one of the best characters any Sermon, or other Discourse can
have; and he is the Speaker that has the art to be plain. But one of the
greatest faults I find with those men's Sermons is, that they are not so. They
generally state their doctrines confusedly, in words metaphorical and
ambiguous; and direct to practice mystically, and obscurely in phrases, and odd
schemes of speech, not understood, and scarce intelligible; as has been
sufficiently shown in diverse late Books. These the people having been used to,
by them in the late times, though they understand no meaning in them, yet they
take them to be plain; at least to be so to spiritual understandings, which
they presume their own are. Another part of their Plainness consists in homely
similitudes, and rude and blunt allusions, accommodated to the humor of the
vulgar, who love such familiar Preaching, as they call it, which is indeed a
debasing of Religion, and exposing what they deliver to the scorn of those of a
better relish. Whereas our Ministers represent their doctrines and instructions
in clearness of thought, and simplicity of speech, without nonsensical
mysteries, and words without meaning. This I am sure is so in those that I
hear, and I hope most other regular Ministers endeavor the same.


D. And yet I have heard people complain that they cannot understand those
Ministers.


A. Some would say, they have been so much used to nonsense, that sense is a
hard thing to them: Plainest things may seem difficult to those that are not
accustomed to hear them. Our Ministers find it necessary sometimes to show the
reasonableness of the principles and duties of the Christian religion, for the
assistance of those of more advanced understandings, against the pretenses and
assaults of Atheists and Infidels: and it is impossible so to express all the
matters that concern those great subjects, as that every vulgar head, that has
not been used to thinking, and deep reasoning, should presently take them. No,
these though never so plainly discourst will require manly, exercised minds, or
they will not be received, or comprehended; and Ministers must divide the word
to every one his portion, and not always speak to one sort. If there be any
thing in this complaint, here I am sure is the ground, which the Preachers
cannot help, except they could create understandings for their hearers:
Otherwise they endeavor, profess and practice Plainness: and in those subjects
too, as far as the nature of the thing will bear. Their ornament and all they
pretend as language, is Plainness: and the great fault they accuse the others
of is want of it: you may see in their books against them that they chiefly
reprove, and expose those men for their affectation of mysterious nonsense, and
words without knowledge, that is, for their not being intelligible, and plain.


D. Plain Preaching doubtless is best: and that it may be is the reason that
the most learned men are not the best Preachers; for they speak in a
scholar-like way, and cannot descend to ordinary capacities.


A. I have indeed often heard that spoken as a maxim, but though it has some
show of truth, yet there is much mistake, if not malice against Learning in it.
There are a sort of learned men who have spent most of their time, and pains
upon Languages and Antiquities (things in their kind very good and useful)
others whose chief employment has been School Divinity, and the spinosities of
controversy: and these of each kind, generally get great fame for learning.
But then, perhaps, they do not exercise themselves in Preaching, which is a
faculty very distinct from those studies, and requires proper helps and
endeavors, and therefore it happens, when such Preach, that their Sermons are
dry and harsh, savouring of the crabbedness of their studies and having little
of the genius of moral and practical Divinity: This I know is the case of some,
I say not of all the learned men of those sorts. And this I think is the
occasion of the observation. But then there is another sort of learned men,
whose design has been to study things, to furnish their minds with clear and
right conceptions, to make observations on human nature, the manners and
actions of men, to turn their thoughts, after due preparations, toward
practical Theology, to take parochial charges, and to exercise themselves in
frequent Preaching: And these are by their learning and knowledge enabled to
speak with the most judgment, propriety and plainness. For (as I intimated
before) it requires parts and understanding to be plain. He must think
distinctly and clearly that would teach so: and the true useful learning is the
proper instrument to enable a man for that.


D. But if so much knowledge and understanding is necessary to the constituting
a true and plain Preacher, methinks we should not have so many in that
business: for the maintenance of Ministers is in most places so small, that it
will not afford encouragement for such men; and others that are unqualified
disparage the profession, and do mischief to the public.


A. If I should speak to the thing it self, I should say, that as the
maintenance for Ministers, and the consequents are, possibly a much less number
of Preachers might suffice; But our circumstances must be considered: The
common people count almost nothing else Service, and discharge of duty in
supply of a Cure, but Preaching: and the Dissenters carry all by that, so that
as our affairs are, general indifferent Preaching may be more expedient, than
much better, when more limited and restrained. But as to this, the Governors
of the Church are the best Judges of what is fit, and we are to acquiesce in
what they ordain.


C. I think that neither they, nor we need make so much ado about it, for
Preaching is no part of Divine Worship.


A. I believe you are out in that, for pray what do you call Divine Worship?


C. Prayer, and Thanksgiving, and Sacramental Communion.


A. You name me some of the parts of Worship, but what is the general nature,
and notion of it? Is it not the solemn acknowledging and honoring of God, in
the ways he has appointed?


C. Well! and what then?


A. Then! it follows that Preaching is Worship, and so is hearing. For
Preaching is publishing Gods mind and will, that the people may know his truth,
and obey his laws: and are not his Wisdom, Holiness and Legislative Authority
thereby glorified? If they are not known, how shall they be believed? if not
believed how can they be honored? and how can they be either known or believed
without being published? how can they believe on him of whom they have not
heard, and how can they hear without a Preacher? Romans 10. 14. This is part of
his Homage and Worship, he is sent to Preach the Gospel. And Public Hearing
Gods word preached, is part of the peoples Worship, since thereby we solemnly
acknowledge, that he is our Lord, and that we desire to know how we may
acceptably serve him: That he is our teacher, and we are willing to be
instructed by his word declared and explained by his messengers: That in him is
our supreme happiness, and that we are desirous to know how we may enjoy him;
and all this is doing solemn honor to God our maker, and why this should be
denied to be Worship, I cannot tell.


C. This I have often heard; as I suppose you have also.


A. It is true, but we should not receive every bold saying to the prejudice of
our duty. There are many such that pass for current among those that are
willing to entertain them, that would not bear the trial; and we ought to
examine the things we hear before we admit them.


C. I shall not differ from you in that. But pray don't you think that
Catechizing is better and more useful than so much Preaching?


A. Such comparisons are odious. One duty should not be commended to the
disparagement of an other; each ought to have its place. And indeed Catechizing
is a sort of Preaching; it is but another way of teaching the principles of
Christian Religion; and is no doubt very useful, and much needed: so that the
Pulpit-Preaching should not exclude this, both because the Church has required
it, and because that will enter and make impression one way, that will not
another. And Catechizing has been used in the best ages of the Church with
very good success. This you know our Minister does perform one season of the
Year; till all the youth is gone over that he can get to that exercise: and
during all that time he Preaches also in the afternoon upon some Catechistical
head, in order for the instruction of the Men and Women, as well as Children.
So that as Preaching does not exclude Catechizing, neither does Catechizing
exclude that. (...) is double labor I confess for the Preacher so to do, but
the People (at least in great Towns) will not be contented without the
afternoon Sermon, and a Minister cannot do his duty to the Church, and his
charge, without the other, in fit times. On this occasion I must take notice to
you, that generally the people are very cold, negligent, and wanting to their
children in this matter, in that they do not duly catechize them at home, and
do their parts for the instructing them in the principles of Religion; without
something of this kind, what is done in public will not signify much: And
it is through the want of domestic instruction, that people grow up so much in
ignorance, and are thereby so apt to be blown about by every wind of vain
doctrine; and to be drawn away from the Church by every pretender that whistles
them either to the Church of Rome, on the one hand, or the Sects on the other.


C. But Catechizing you say is Preaching, and what! would you have private men
Preach?


A. Yes, every private Christian may and ought to Preach in this sense. Every
such is a Priest to his own family, that is, it is his duty to teach them the
great things of Religion, according to the best of his skill, and knowledge.
This is one way to provide for our families, and it is the most necessary. Men
had better neglect the getting their Children and Servants Bread and Clothes,
than to omit the care about this greater and more needed provision. It Is noted
to the honor of the holy Patriarch, That he would teach his Children. Timothy
was taught the Scriptures from a youth, and all Parents are required to bring
up their Children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord. Were not this duty
so much neglected, Ministers would find their people more teachable, and less
incapable of the greater and stronger truths that they yet know not; more
tenacious of, and better settled in those that they know already, and more able
to shame, and to resist the attempts of Gainsayers.

Among all the Preaching we have, this is very much needed, and the great
defect that is the occasion of most of our Churchmaladies lies here. We are
very apt to catch at any thing that may fasten a blame on our Ministers, when
there is the least show of neglect on their parts; I wish we could be sensible
of, and reform this great one of our own.


C. But what think you of the Homilies? Are not they very useful, and fit to be
read in Churches, instead of so much other Preaching? For my part I should like
that.


A. The Homilies contain very good, pious, and wholesome instructions and
doctrines; and in due place and time may be used with great profit and
advantage. But I suppose you do not pretend to have them in to exclude all
other Preaching; For that would render the abilities of learned Ministers (as
to this part of their office) useless. There are many occasions which those
discourses make no provision for; and by such a practice the people in all
likelihood would be very much discontented, if not inflamed. I suppose
therefore you mean not that the Homilies should thrust out all other Preaching,
but that in some places and times, they might be profitably used.


C. No, I think it would be well if they were generally enjoined; and such
others added to them as should be thought seasonable, and fit.


A. I have as great a reverence for that Book as you, and as great a sense of
the inconveniences that arise from the defects of many Preachers. But we must
not always judge of things, as they are nakedly in their natures, but
circumstances must be weighed. Public Governors are not only to consider the
goodness, but expediency; and in reference to a due judgment in that, many
extrinsecal matters are to be taken into the account. Now as our case is we
have (blessed be God) plenty of learned and most excellent Preachers (as many I
believe as any Age or Nation ever had) Those have bestowed much time, pains,
and cost for the furnishing themselves with abilities for the Pulpit; and after
all, to suppress their excellent, and useful labors, and to set them upon the
same level with those that can but read, would be a great discouragement to
them, and loss to the Church: it would dishearten and divert young Students in
the Universities, be a great damp upon learning, and in all likelihood, destroy
the glory of those venerable Fountains of Piety and Literature: Besides which,
the People you know are so prejudiced, that it would possess them with rage
against their Governors, and contempt of their Ministers, fill the
Conventicles, and it is to be feared, make our breaches and divisions incurable.
So that certainly you are not in earnest in this, or if you are, I suppose
there are but very few of your mind. I have heard some talk indeed that they
thought it might do well, if only some select men in every Diocese (and those
to be seated in the most eminent places) should be allowed to Preach; and the
fame enjoined to make every year so many Sermons to be delivered to the Bishop,
as in the whole should come to fifty two: besides some for the anniversary
days; that a Volume of those Sermons should be printed yearly. That each
Minister of those not licensed to Preach their own, should have a Copy, and no
more be printed than would suffice for them: That they should read, or recite
one of these by heart, every Sunday, till they should arrive to such Age and
Ability, as to be thought fit to be entrusted with the instructing the people
with their own Sermons. What this would do, and how practicable it is, I shall
not pretend to determine: It looks I confess plausibly enough. But I am no
proposer of new projects; these matters must be left to our Governors; and I
mention this only by the by.


C. You are resolved to have your own opinion in all things we have talked on;
and you shall for me. But notwithstanding all you have said, I shall not be
persuaded to have so good an opinion of Preaching, as you seem to have, till I
have reason to think that the Preachers believe their own Doctrines.


A. By that you seem to intimate that you think they do not: A very hard
thought, that should not be entertained lightly. What any man believes we
cannot tell, but by his professions: and the Clergy make zealous and earnest
profession of the Christian truths; and therefore it is great injustice, and
uncharitableness to judge otherwise of them, except upon clear evidence.
Charity thinks no evil, it makes the best and most candid interpretations of
things, that are capable of wrong construction: But to judge and surmise evil
where there is no appearance of it, this is to exercise a lawless and brutish
force upon the names of men, and to rejoice in iniquity, as the Apostle speaks,
1 Cor. 1. 13. No ones reputation can be safe from any aspersion, if men may
take this lewd liberty of fastening the worst they can fancy on them; so that
except you can make out what you say (which I am sure you cannot) you
manifestly incurr the guilt of being an accuser of the Brethren. To asperse any
private Christian in this manner, is a great sin; how much more is it so to
slander an whole order of public persons, that bear a Sacred Character. For
you do not only injure them in their persons, but mischief others by it, whom
by such reproaches you prejudice against them, and so hinder the good that
otherwise they might do by their labors: On which account the reputation of
Ministers is and ought to be dear to those that are truly honest and
conscientious: and where men love to pickeer, and to find faults with
Ministers; it is a plain case that they have some corrupt byas that sways them
in those Censures.


C. For my part I thank God I have none. But by their fruits ye shall know
them: Their actions preach contrary to their Sermons, and are too plain
indications of the little serious credit they give their own doctrines and
instructions.


A. I hope you do not think that I would patronize any men's vices or
miscarriages: There are too many in all sorts, and where they are in those of
the sacred function they are worst; among whom I cannot deny but there are ill
practices; they are subject to the follies and passions of other men. But then
I must tell you too, that were they Angels in their conversation, they would be
blackned and made vile. For pray consider how many enemies they have on all
sides, that watch for their haltings, and are ready to triumph in any
opportunity to expose them. Many hate them for their Function, more for their
Conformity: The Romanists on the one hand, and the Sects on the other; Those
that have plundered the Church, and those that desire to do it; those that have
devoured, and those that take lickerish notice that they have a morsel left.
These generally are glad of any failing in a conforming Minister; they lie at
catch for such, and when they have got a story, they blow it about with
wondrous diligence: So that where there is a small miscarriage they will
aggravate it, till they have made it a great wickedness; and when it is an
heinous offense; they will impute it to the whole Order. And which is worse,
there are many wicked lewd slanderers ready to asperse the clearest innocence;
and some that make it their business in their debauches to contrive ignominious
Tales of Clergymen, which their Enemies are willing to believe, or at least to
propagate, though they do not. Wherefore considering these, and such like
unhappy circumstances, it is no wonder if the present Clergy suffer much in
their names on this score.


C. But what then, are all the things we heard of lewd and debaucht Clergymen
false, do you think? and are there not many such vile Persons in Holy Orders?


A. I tell you I acknowledge, and lament that there are so many unworthy
persons crept in among the Clergy; and I wish with all my Soul there could be a
remedy found for it. But will you consider how most of them get in; you know
most of the livings of England are in Lay-Patronage, and you cannot be ignorant
what unworthy ways are now frequently taken in the disposal of them: what
Bonds, Contracts and Terms are required, which honest, worthy and ingenious men
will not comply with, but those of no worth or conscience accept. They bring
their Presentations to the Bishops, and are able to give an account of their
learning, as far as the Law requires (which I have heard is much less than will
render a man able and sufficient according to the expectation of our days) They
bring us also a formal Testimonial from those that likely know little of them,
and the Bishop knows nothing at all of what they are, less of what they are
like to prove: But being so qualified, Institution and Induction cannot be
denied by the Law. They get into a cure, and misbehave themselves in it; and
then the blame shall lie on the Bishop, and the disgrace spread upon the whole
Clergy. And generally I observe that those who so infamously, and dishonestly
dispose of the livings in their gift, and by so doing fill the Church with
unworthy and incompetent persons, are the same that clamor about the ill lives
of the Clergy, most.


C. But should not these abuses be rectified?


A. I think some good Laws may be wanted to do this: and let me tell you, those
that complain might contribute to the reforming of the miscarriages.


C. How so?


A. By complaining where, and as they ought: As to inform the Bishop when they
understand of any Simonaical contracts; to tell the Minister his fault when
they know him peccant, and if after that he persist in his vice, to make
public complaint to the Diocesan, that his reformation may be attempted by the
Censures of the Church; or that upon his contumacious persistence, he may be
cast out. If this course was faithfully taken, the evils would be in great part
cured. But the misery on it is, many that clamor do not desire that, but are
rather glad of an opportunity to asperse, and vilify the Clergy; and therefore
they complain for mischief, not for remedy.


C. It may be so with some, but I assure you it is not so with me. But I think
now we have talked enough of this subject.


A. I think so too; and it is time for me to be going homewards.


D. Pray let me say somewhat to you first.


A. I wonder you have been silent so long, what is it?


D. Is it! It is to tell you that you have been very bitter in your Censures of
those godly Ministers, whose Consciences will not give them leave to conform.
And after all you have, or can say, I must tell you they are very powerful
Preachers, and prevail so much, not for I know not what phancies of yours, but
because they Preach Christ, and cry down Sin, which very few of your National
Preachers do.


A. I did not consider that you were so near, else perhaps I might have dealt
more gently with your Friends. In what I have said I have spoke plainly as I
thought, and as I doubt not, the matter clearly is, as all understanding
unprejudiced men, who have been acquainted with their ways, may see; so that
you do me wrong to accuse me of bitterness, as if I had aggravated things
beyond the just and due representation of them, which I assure you was all I
intended.

They are Powerful indeed to move the affections that Ignorance and Enthusiasm,
Pride, Singularity and Faction have begot: Those they stir by the same ways by
which they were produced; they are powerful on the affections of the senseless
inconsidering vulgar, which are mightily transported by blustering and noise,
as the waters are by a Storm, when as soon as the violence is over, they are
still as before: But I do not find that they generally move the intelligent and
judicious, otherwise, than to beget in them scorn of their egregious follies,
and pity of their fond admirers.

But they Preach Jesus Christ you say, which others you think do not: and it is
true they have the name of Christ almost ever in their mouths, and talk as men
transported with the beauties and excellencies of the Lord Jesus: This others
do not so much, and therefore Preach not Christ, you fancy; by which you show
how little you understand what you say, notwithstanding you live under their
powerful Preaching. For to Preach Christ is to declare and press his Doctrines,
Laws, Example, and Sanctions, which I am sure our Ministers (those of them I
hear) constantly and earnestly do: and not to dote upon, and to be always
impertinently and fulsomly repeating of his name. I cannot deny indeed but that
your men also profess his Doctrins and Laws; but yet it is the opinion of some,
that many of those Preachers have so darkened these by their phrases, and so
corrupted them by their false and fanatical conceits, that their Gospel is
quite another thing from the Primitive, Apostolical Christianity; and if so,
they Preach not Christ, but their own dreams. But that is too large a subject
for us to discourse now. That I may obtain your favor, I will allow they
Preach Christ (I wish some do it not out of Strife and Envy) yet certainly they
are not the only men that do it, nor is that fit to be a mark of distinction
between them, and our Ministers.

O but they Preach down Sin, you tell us; and that is powerful Preaching, and by
that they affect the hearts and consciences of their hearers. And it is true
those Teachers cry out against sin in the general, with a great deal of
earnestness, declaring what a vile and odious thing sin is, with wondrous zeal
(I cannot say with so much sense and judgment) but then, they seldom descend
to particulars, except in declaiming against the noted sins of others, and such
as they take their Governors in Church and State, and those of opposite
judgment to them, to be guilty of: So that their common places of invective,
are Idolatry, Will Worship, Superstition, Humane Inventions, Formality,
Persecution, hatred of the Godly, and such like (things of which themselves are
as guilty as any sort of men in the world, though they think not so) But for
the sins with which they are generally, and plainly chargeable (those I
mentioned before) Malice, Deceit, Disobedience, Pride, Covetousness,
Backbiting, Rebellion, Schism, Sacrilege, and other such, we seldom hear them
declaim against those. I do not remember that in ten years, in which I was
capable of observing in the late times, that I ever heard one Sermon from any
of them, upon either of those subjects.


D. You may talk what you please, but for my part, I shall hear those men,
because I find I profit by them, and I cannot by your Parish Minister.


A. That is the continual pretense for leaving our Churches, when people have
nothing else to say. Pray therefore let you and I debate this matter a little.
You don't profit by our own Minister: You do by those other Teachers. As to the
first, let me ask you, whose fault is it that you do not profit? Does not our
Minister Preach the great Truths, and Duties of the Christian Religion? Don't
you observe that he picks out the most suitable, useful and awakening Subjects?
Does he not represent the Doctrines with plainness and distinctness? Does he
not press the duties with earnestness and affection, does he not lay down the
great motives and encouragements, and give us the true practicable directions
to guide us in the performance? (You have heard him often) what say you, can
you deny any of this?


D. I have no great fault I confess to find with the man's Preaching, but yet
methinks I am not so much affected with it, nor can I profit by it.


A. It seems you do not profit, but you cannot tell why; therefore give me
leave to tell you the reason. First, you have no kindness for the Ministers
person, because he conforms, and it may be, is not in all things of the same
opinion with the men you admire.


D. Now you mind me of it, I must tell you he is not Orthodox, nor sound in his
judgment, and that I confess does beget in me some dislike of him.


A. Orthodox is a word by which your men mean one of their own opinions; and of
these they are very fond, and in doting on uncertain points that appertain not
to the foundation, they show themselves very superstitious, and lay ground for
eternal Schism, and even for Skepticism, and Atheism it self. For when disputed
things are adhered to as certain and necessary, Christian Charity will be
destroyed, and all things at last disputed.

But pray what do you make the measure of Orthodoxy? Are not the belief of and
adherence to the Scriptures, the first Fathers and Councils, the old Creeds,
and the Articles of the Church of England (which in the Doctrines your men
pretend to allow) are not these enough to entitle a man Orthodox? and all these
our Minister teaches, and professes.


D. But does he not hold some opinions that are contrary to those grounds of
belief?


A. I do not think he does, and I dare say he thinks he does not. In
extra-essential matters the Pious and the Learned of all sorts have ever been
of different judgments, and are like so to continue to the worlds end. I have
in my time, converst with men of all persuasions, and yet scarce ever met any
two (though of the same general way and Communion, that were in all things of
the same mind: And therefore if our Minister judges otherwise than you or I,
or this or that Divine, in some outpoints of Theology, it is but as every
thinking man else does: and we that hear him constantly know, that he generally
Preaches the great acknowledged Truths, and never troubles his hearers with
private opinions: But zealously and frequently reproves those that disturb the
world with their particular phancies, and declares continually against meddling
in the Pulpit with unnecessary controversies and notions; so that if it were
so, that he had private opinions, you and I need not be concerned about them.


D. Well! but I have heard him Preach Doctrines I did not like.


A. That may be: But I hope you do not take your liking or disliking to be the
standard of Doctrines fit to be Preached or not.


D. Nay, I mean Doctrines that were Erroneous, which was one reason I left his
Ministry.


A. Erroneous! as you thought: you would have your judgment to be the measure
of truth and falsehood. Do you not think you are in some things mistaken?


D. I know I am fallible.


A. And do actually err in many things?


C. It may be so.


A. And yet you stick to all your opinions with that stiffness as if you were
infallible: and condemn every one for erroneous that in the least differs from
you. This let me tell you, is great pride and immodesty, and renders people
very unteachable, when they will not receive or bear any thing but what is just
according to their own fancy, and preconceiv'd opinion; nor be taught to
understand any thing better than they do already, as if their knowledge was
perfect, and their minds had no need of information; when as most commonly such
presumptuous persons are very ignorant, and the knowledge they pretend, is but a
confused heap of vain imaginations, which they picked up by chance, and have no
truth or coherence in them.


D. Every man must judge by the best understanding he has, and so did I, when I
judged your Minister to Preach Erroneous Doctrine.


A. And that you say was one reason of your withdrawing from him?


D. Yes.


A. But did you ever go to him to discourse the matter with him? Perhaps you
mistook his meaning; or it may be he might have made it appear that he was in
the right, and you in the wrong.


D. I did not trouble my self to do that.


A. And yet you withdrew from his Ministry upon it?


D. I did.


A. Then let me tell you, you did a very rash, uncharitable, unchristian
action. We are not, you know, to separate from the conversation of any private
person till we have told him his fault between us and him, though the fault be
plain and apparent: much less may we divide from the Church and our Ministers,
till we have made the matter of offense known; much less may we do it when the
fault is not evident, and certain. It is no small matter to change the Guide
that Gods providence, and our Governors have set over us, and to take others
contrary to the Laws under which we live; it is a thing that before a man does
it he should consider well, for here is at least the appearance of danger. It Is
something to break Laws and disturb Governors, and trouble Ministers, and
offend private Christians; it is something, I say, which a tender Conscience
would not do, without great consideration, and without being fully resolved in
the necessity of it: and how then durst you do it, upon a mislike of your
Ministers Doctrine, when you never did your self or him that right, as to speak
with him about it? and to enquire what satisfaction he could give you in it.
This let me tell you plainly, is an error greater than any you can pretend in
his Doctrines, it is a sin that has a complication of many others, Pride and
Stomach, Self-will, Contempt of your betters, and causeless Disobedience to
your Governors. You have now chosen ways and teachers upon your own head, and
if you happen to be mistaken in your choice (as I much fear you are) this
confident proceeding and bold relying on your own understanding, will render
your sin and folly inexcusable.


D. I perceive you grow angry. Fare you well.


A. Nay, pray stay a little, I am not so much angry as grieved at your ways:
and have a question more to ask you on occasion of what you have told me; and
that is, Whether you are to leave every Minister and Church, as soon as any
thing is said that is really erroneous, in the lesser and unessential matters?


D. Should we not love the truth and fly from errors? I think we ought to
settle where the greatest purity is both in Doctrine and Worship.


A. And upon these terms we shall never settle any where at all. For no Church
pretends it self to be infallible, but the Roman: and there are no particular
men or body of men, but have their actual errors and mistakes. So that
according to this way of proceeding you must have departed from the Preaching
and Communion of the holiest Men, and best Churches of the most ancient, yea
and of all times. In many things we err, as well as offend all.

I have thus spoken to you freely in this matter, I hope you will consider it.
But I have a little more to say of your not profiting under our Minister: I am
yet speaking to the first cause, your prejudice against his person, which in a
manner you confess: Where this is, the Doctrine will not be heeded, be it what
it will; and I have plainly observed this effect in you, when I have seen you
at Church sometimes at Funeral Sermons, or other occasions.


D. What have you observed?


A. I have taken notice, that though the Minister has been speaking of the
greatest matters, in the most pathetical and moving way, yet you have looked
coldly, insensibly, and unconcernedly upon it: whereas I remember when the men
you now follow, preached in public, you used to listen with a very visible and
affectionate attention to all, even the poor, mean, impertinent, and sometimes
senseless things, they delivered; and to be very diligent in penning those
Sermons; when as these you manifestly slight by your carriage, even when they
are full of the weightiest, and most useful truths? And is not this to have the
Faith of Christ with respect of persons? And to come under St. Judes Character
of the Separatists of his time, who had men's persons in admiration? This is not
to honor Ministers for their works sake, but to undervalue and slight their
work for theirs; whereas a Christian should joyfully hear Christ's Truths and
Laws, and affectionately embrace them for their own sake, and his.


D. This I do for all your observations, and so I hope you have done with me.


A. No, I have more causes yet to show of your not profiting under our
Minister: you told me he delivered Doctrines sometimes that you did not like:
He presses the duties of Peaceableness, Modesty of judgment, Candor,
Subjection to Governors, Charity, etc. And reproves the contrary vices, and
these are very proper, and seasonable subjects for the needs of the Age: But
such Doctrines you do not like, your party is wont to call the most modest and
necessary representation of ^hese matters, railing, and re^lecting on the
godly. So that those duties, and their contrary ^ins must not be touched lest
you wound the good People. No; Preach up the comfortable Doctrines of Gods
seeing no sin in ^is chosen, Salvation by Faith without Works, and the
Righteous^ess of Christ covering our Sins, (in the Antinomian sense) Liberty of
Conscience, the Privileges of the Saints, the marks of Regeneration that
comprehend the Party, and exclude all else: the abominations of the Wicked,
that are for the Common Prayer, and Bishops. O these are edifying,
Soul-refreshing Doctrines, these you like, because they flatter you in your
ways: Those tha^ Preach thus, shall have you^ Company, your Ears, you^ Hearts,
and your Purses; when as such as Preach the sound searching Doctrine, you
cannon endure: you vilify their persons, and are prejudiced against their
Preaching, and be it never so powerful and profitable, yo^ can learn nothing
from it, because you will not. Here Is the bottom of your phancied profiting b^
your own Preachers, and not b^ ours. But if a man should as^ you in what
principles of Religion you are better instructed what duties you are excited to
and directed in, that you could not learn from our Ministers I believe you
would be able t^ ^ive but a slender account of ^our profiting in those things,
in which the true proficiency of a Christian does consist. But your profiting
is your being gratified, pleased, and encouraged in the way of opposition, and
separa^ion you are in.


D. I cannot endure to hear ^our wicked and profane discourse, and therefore
once more, fare you well.


A. I know every thing is profane in your account that does not favor your
Fantastical and Schismatical ways. If you are angry at my honest freedom I
must bear it as well as I can, and so, Your Servant.


E. He Will do your errand to the Brotherhood, and publish you for a very carnal
wicked man.


A. That Is their usual way of answering when they are roundly opposed, and of
reforming when they are seriously reproved. I value the favor of any wise and
good man, but for theirs I heed it not.


E. He speaks bitterly against our Ministers, when he is in company where he
can talk at liberty. His common accusation of them is that they Preach for hire.


A. It is fit that he that Preaches the Gospel should live by it. And the
Justice and Piety of our Ancestors have made some provision for them in most
places, settled by our most Fundamental Laws; and what they have out of any man's
Estate on that account, is as much theirs, as the remaining part is his. Here
is the mistake of men that talk thus, They reckon that all they possess is
their own, in which account they are much out: all is their own when their
debts are paid; when they have paid to God the things that are Gods, and to
Caesar the things that are Caesar's; what the Laws have ordained to be paid out
of their Estates to others, is their property, and no man can be called an
hireling for taking what is his own: Nor can Ministers be any more justly
called so for receiving the maintenance the ancient Laws and Government have
allowed them, than Kings for taking Taxes, and other payments from their
Subjects.


E. Ministers have much to do with such people: and many that in words pretend
they love the Church are as troublesome as those. Such as neglect the public
worship, and never come to it, but when they have nothing else to do; now and
then you shall see them drop into the Church by chance, but in their very
coming in they show how little concerned they are, and their whole carriage
after declares their carelessness, and indifferency to those things. So that if
the Minister particularly court and caress them without taking notice of their
indevotion, and other sins, he may chance to have their good word a little
while: but if he do not so, they be ready on all occasions, and without any, to
carp at him; if he omits any of the least circumstances of his duty (or they
fancy so) he shall be sure to hear of their railing, and backbiting of him;
when as the most constant, laborious, and worthy diligence in the work of his
Ministry, and the most laudable performance of all offices public and private,
shall not gain him any jot of interest or favor with them, nor as much as
their good word. The ground of which is because the things he administers to
them are not at all valued, and have no hold upon their affections.


A. Perhaps they may like to hear him Preach a little, while he is new among
them: but when he has resided any time, he grows stale, and cannot affect them
with his Preaching, though constant exercise has never so much improved him in
that faculty.


E. And it is another discouragement to learned and able Ministers that after
all their teaching, people have so little sense and understanding of Divine
matters, as to be most of all taken with the weakest, and most trifling of
those men, that now and then happen to supply their room. I have heard some of
them say that they are extremely glad when their Auditors happen to be pleased
with any true and substantial Preacher; but to hear of their admiring and
applauding those that they, and other judicious men, were ashamed to hear; this
shows their little proficiency, and cannot but be matter of trouble to their
Ministers.


A. And no doubt it is so; not out of envy to those poor retailers of small
wares; but of pity to their follies, and the Peoples want of understanding and
judgment; it would trouble any man to see that he has so far lost his labor,
in all his diligent endeavors to instruct them; to find that they generally
feel not any thing of substantial, practical, awakening truth, but will sit
stupid, and dead under such; when they are pleased, and transported with weak,
affected, superficial stuff, that has no sense, understanding, or life in it.
But it grows late we may have some other opportunity to discourse these matters.


E. Pray before we part let me have a word or two more with you. You have been
asserting and commending Plain Preaching, and you seem to make Plainness the
general Character of all good Sermons, But will not this disoblige the
Ministers from taking pains about them? would it not expose their Preaching to
the disrespect, if not contempt of the People? Will they not think they can
Preach themselves, if it be so plain a business? And will not the Ministerial
office be hereby rendered liable to be usurped by every one that judges he has
abilities for plain instruction?


A. I perceive you have not taken sufficient notice of what has been said in
describing plain Preaching; I do not mean by it, what is slight and vulgar,
what is unthought, unconsider'd; but what is unstrain'd, unaffected; what is
manly, and solid; and so to speak requires learning and study, and improved
faculties. This should be the end of a wise man's pains to conceive things
clearly, and to express them plainly. It asks much less of parts and abilities
to talk mystically in phrases, and hard words, and terms of art (which many
admire, because they do not understand) than it does to speak properly, and
intelligibly; which, though it may seem very easy to be done, yet indeed it
requires most labor, and it is mastery to have gained this ability. A man does
not show his wit or learning, by rolling in metaphors, and scattering his
sentences of Greek and Latin, by abounding in high expressions, and talking in
the clouds, but he is then learned, when his learning has cleared his
understanding, and furnished it with full and distinct apprehensions of things;
when it enables him to make hard things plain; and conceptions, that were
confused, distinct, and orderly; and he shows his learning by speaking good,
strong, and plain sense. So that you see there is no fear of making Learning
unnecessary to good Preaching; there is no fear of excusing Ministers from
taking pains; there is no fear of exposing the office by the plainness I have
commended: and for your objection that this will lay it open to intrusions,
besides the answer contained in what I have said already, I say further, that
the Ministers* function is, blessed be God, secured from such invasions by the
discipline, order, and government of the Church according to the primitive
Apostolical pattern, and rules, and not by the Clergies having the only
abilities to instruct; I doubt not but there are many pious and knowing Laymen,
whose parts and knowledge would enable them for public teaching: but they have
no Authority so to do; and therefore 'twould be a great sin, and folly for them
to attempt it. Every man may not do every thing that he can; there is a
politic as well as natural capacity; the Laws of Government are to be
considered, and observed, and according to them, the abilities of men ought to
be employed, or restrained.


E. You have satisfied me as to that matter, but your plain Preachers do not
take so much pains as exact Preaching would require; for I understand that some
of them Preach Extempore.


A. I know indeed some that Preach without writing; but their Preaching is not
therefore Extempore; Extempore is unthought, not unwritten: and these do not
vent unconsider'd, unpremeditated instructions. No, those I plead for prepare
themselves by previous studies of the Sciences, and Divinity; after which with
much anxiety and thoughtfulness, they settle clear, and coherent conceptions in
their minds, of the Christian doctrines, encouragements, and rules of life;
they have exercised themselves long in laborious* Preaching and it may be
thence have gained the ability of ready, and easi^ expression; they frame the
scheme of every particular Se^mon, and lodge it distinctly i^ their minds; yea
they lay the train of the whole inlargemen^ and settle the consequence o^ each
thing to another, under every head; though they giv^ themselves not the trouble
o^ writing and forming all into se^ words. And if any will condem^ this for
Extempore Preaching think they are very unjust i^ their Censure.


E. If it be so, I shall not mak^ one of those Censurers; nor a^ present give
you further Diversion from your occasions.


A. Therefore, Good Night.


FINIS.

