To the much Honored and Ingenious Francis Willoughby ESQUIRE.
SIR,

It Is likely you will no less wonder at this unexpected sally of my pen; than
at my having presixt your name to a Trifle, that owns no Author. Of the
former, you will receive an account in the Preface. And the latter, if the
considerations following; are not of weight, to atone for; I know you have
goodness enough to pardon, what I have not reason sufficient to excuse, or
vindicate. Well meaning intentions are Apology enough, where candor, and
ingenuity are the Judges. I was not induced then to this Address, because I
thought I could oblige you; Worth describes it self in the fairest Character.
But reflecting upon that delight and satisfaction, that I have received in
discoursing with you on such matters; and knowing that your noble genius is
gratified by such kind of speculations; I thought I could not make more
suitable payment for my content, or better acknowledge the favor I receive in
your acquaintance, then by presenting you a Discourse about Praeexistence; and
giving you a peculiar interest in it, as you have in its Author. Not that I
would suggest, that you are a Favourer of any strange opinions, or hold any
thing in this particular, or any other, that is fit to be discountenanced. But
I know you love to be dealing in high and generous Theories, even where your
self are a dissenter. Nor is it the least evidence of the greatness and
heroic nobleness of your spirit; that amidst the flowing abundance of the
world's blessings with which you are encircled, you can yet dedicate your self
to your beloved contemplations; and look upon the furniture and accomplishments
of the mind, as better riches, than the largest doals of fortune, and the
wealth and Revenues of an ample inheritance. And methinks while most others at
the best, do but use the Donatives of Providence; you enjoy them. And by a
nobler kind of chemistry extract from them a pleasure, that is not to be met
with in all the trivial sports of empty Gallantry. To be reviewing the Recesses
of Nature, and the beauteous inside of the universe, is a more manly, yea
angelick felicity, then the highest gratifications of the senses; an
happiness, that is common to the youthful Epicure, with his Hounds and Horses,
yea your ends are more August and generous, then to terminate in the private
pleasure you take, even in those Philosophical Researches; For you are
meditating a more general good, in those careful and profound inquiries you are
making into Animals, and other concerning affairs of nature, which I hope one
day the world will be advantaged by. But I must not engage in an Encomium, in
which I cannot be just, but I must be troublesome. For your modesty is no more
able to bear it, then my Pen can reach. Wherefore I shall dismiss your eyes
from this tyresome Attendance; and only beg, that you would assure your self
that no man is more your servant, then

The Author of Lux Orientalis.

THE PREFACE.
IT is none of the least commendable indulgencies of our Church, that she
allows us a latitude of judging in points of Speculation. And ties not up men's
consciences to an implicit assenting to opinions, not necessary or Fundamental;
which favorable and kind permission, is questionless a great obligation upon
the ingenious, submissively to receive and observe her pious appointments for
peace and order. Nor is there less Reason in this parental indulgence, then
there is of Christian charity and prudence; since to tie all others up to our
opinions, and to impose difficult and disputable matters under the Notion of
Confessions of Faith and fundamentals of Religion, is a most uncharistian piece
of Tyranny, the foundation of persecution, and very root of Antichristianisme.
So that I have often wondered, that those that heretofore would have forced all
men to a compliance with their darling notions, and would have made a prey of
them, that could not bow down before the Idol of their new-framed Orthodoxy;
should yet have the face to object persecution and unchristian Tyranny to our
Church Appointments; when themselves under a deep and crimson guilt of those
very same miscariages, which they endeavor to affix upon those more innocent
constitutions. For is it not a far more blameable and obnoxious imposition to
srame systems of disputable opinions, and to require their admittance into our
Creeds, in the place of the most sacred, necessary, and fundamental verities;
Than it is to appoint some harmless orders of circumstance and ceremony, which
in themselves are indifferent and innocent. And let any equal man be judge,
which is the greater superstition, either to idolize and place religion in
things of dispute and mere opinions; or conscienciously to observe the
Sanctions of that Authority we are bound to obey. But how all those ill applied
reproaches of the Church of England, recoyle upon those that discharge them, I
have fully proved in a Discourse on this subject, which in its due time may see
the Light. But for the present I go on with what I was about; Therefore I say,
it is a most commendable excellency in our Ecclesiastical Constitutions, which
with all due regard ought to be acknowledged; That they in some few matters of
opinion, but such, as are of important concernment, or very meridian truths,
which I mention not to this purpose, as if men might therefore indulge
themselves in what conceits and dangerous opinions soever their phancies might
give birth to; This were an unpardonable abuse of that noble and ingenious
Liberty that is afforded us. But that they might see the beauty of those well
tempered Constitutions; and that the mouth of obloquy might be stopped that
slanders our Church, as if it yielded no scope at all for free inquiry; when I
dare say there is not a Church in Christendom, that in this regard is less
Criminal. As for the opinion of Praeexistence, the subject of the following
Papers, it was never determined against by ours, nor any other Church that I
know of; And therefore I conceive is left as a matter of School Speculation,
which without danger may be problematically argued on either hand. And I have
so great confidence in all true Sons of our common Mother to think, that they
will not fix any harsh and severe censures, upon the innocent Speculations of
those, though possibly they may be Errors, who own the Authority, Articles,
Canons, and Constitutions of that Church which they are so deservedly zealous
for. Therefore let me here premonish once for all, that I intend no Innovation
in Religion, or disturbance of our established and received Doctrines, by any
thing I have undertaken in this little Treatise; But only an innocent
representation of an Ancient and Probable opinion, which I conceive may
contribute somewhat toward the clearing and vindicating the Divine Attributes,
and so representing the ever blessed Deity, as a more fit object of Love and
Adoration, then the Opinions of the World make him. And what ever may be
thought of the thing it self, or the manage of this affair, I Am (...) the end
and design is concerning and important, and deserves at least a favorable
construction of the undertaking. For there is nothing more for the interest of
religion, then that God be represented to his creatures as amiable and lovely,
which cannot be better done, then by clearing up his providence and dealings
with the sons of men, and discovering them to be full of Equity, Sweetness and
Benignity, so that though I should be mistaken in the opinion which I endeavor
to recommend, yet I expect the candor of the ingenious being betrayed into an
error, if it be one, by so pardonable an occasion. If it be excepted against
this undertaking, that the Doctrine of Praeexistence has in a late Discourse
been purposely handled; besides what the learned D. More has written of it;
and therefore that this labor may seem a superfluous, unnecessary Repetition.
I answer, that that very Treatise, viz the Account of Origin, made some such
thing as this, expedient. For though the proof and management of this affair be
there unexceptionable, as far as the Author is by his design engaged; yet, he
being consined to the reasons of Origin, and to the answering such objections,
as the Fathers urged against him; has not so fully sta^ed and cleared the
business, but that there was room for af^er-undertakers. And it is a ^reat
disinterest to so strange and ^nusual a Doctrine as this, to be (...) partially
handled: since so long, it will not be understood, and consequently be but
exposed to contempt and ignominy. Nor can we hope that the world will be so
favorable to a Paradox, or take so much pains for the understanding of that
which they think a gross absurdity, as to collect those Principles that are
scattered up and down the writings of that great and excelent Restorer of the
Platonic Cabbala, and accomodate them to the interest of this opinion. So that
I thought that till the Reasons, Answers, Principles, and particular State of
the Hypothesis were brought all together to talk of Praeexistence in arnes^
were but to make a man's self ridiculous, and the Doctrine, the common Ludibrium
of fools and ignorants. And yet I must confess my self to be so much a
contemner of the half witted censurers of things they know not, that this
Reason alone could not have moved my pen the breadth of a letter; But some
ingenious friends of mine, who were willing to do their maker right, in a due
apprehension of his Attributes and Providence having read the Letter of
Resolution, and thence being induced to think favorably of Praeexistence, were
yet not fully satisfied in the proof, nor able to give stop to those
objections, which their imperfect knowledge of the Hypothesis occasioned:
wherefore they desired me to draw up a more full and particular Account of that
Doctrine, which they had now a kindness for, and which wanted nothing more to
recommend it to them, but a clear and full representation. For their
satisfaction then, I drew up the following Discourse, intending at first, that
it should go no further then their hands, whose interest in mine affections had
commanded it; but they being more then I could well pleasure with written
Copies, and perceiving others of my acquaintance also, to whom I owe regard and
service, to be in the like condition with these; I was induced to let this
Little Trifle tread a more public Stage; and to speak my mind to them from the
Press.

If further reason be expected for mine undertaking a business in which others
have been engaged, I would desire them to consider what an infinite of books
are written upon almost all subjects can be named. And I am confident, if they
turn 'ore Libraries, they will find no theme, that is of any consideration, less
traced then this is. So that no body has reason to call it a Crambe, who
considers, that there are multitudes, even of Scholars that have never seen or
heard of any thing of this nature; And there is not, that I know of, any one
book extant in any language besides this, that purposely, solely, and fully
treats of Praeexistence. Wherefore who ever condemns this as a superfluous
engagement, if he will be just, must pass the same censure upon well nigh
every Discourse the Press is delivered of, for he will meet with few written on
lesshandled subjects. I might urge also if there were need on it, that various
representations of the same thing, fit the variety of phansyes and gusts of
perusers; and that may have force and prevalence to persuade in one for me,
which signifies nothing in another. But it is enough; he that will judge me on
this account, must pass the same award on every Sermon he hears, and every
Book he looks on; And such a censure will do me as little hurt, as him good,
that passes it.

Besides this exception, it is not unlikely that some may object, that I use
Arguments that have already been pleaded in behalf of this opinion; which
rightly understood, is no matter of disrepute; since every one else does it
that deals in a subject formerly written of. And I would have him that
commenceth such a charge against me, to consult diverse Authors who have
handled the same subject; and if he find not the same Arguments and Reasons
infinitely repeated every where, let him call me plagiary, and spare not. It Is
true therefore I have not baulk't the reasons of Origin, Dr. More, or the
Author of the Letter of Resolution, because they had been used already; but
freely own the assistance of those worthy Authors; however I think I have so
managed, fortified, and secured them against exceptions, especially the most
considerable, that I may reasonably expect a pardon, yea and an interest in
them also. For it is the backing of an argument that giv's it force and
efficacy; which I have done to the most weighty of them, at my proper cost and
charges. Nor should I have been faithful to my cause, had I omitted any thing
that I thought confirmed it, upon any pretense whatever; since possibly this
discourse may fall into the hands of some, who never met with those other
Authors. And my design being a full proof, defense, and explication of
Praeexistence, it had been an unpardonable defect to have permitted those
weighty reasons by which it is learned Assertours have enforced it. If any yet
should criminat me (as I know some did the account of Origin,) for using many
of the same words, and some of the same phrases and expressions, that those
others; who have writ about those matters have made use of; I am not very
careful to answer them in this matter; and I doubt this engagement against
those little seruples, will be importunate to the judicious. For no body blames
the frequent usage of words of Art; or those which the first Masters or
Restorers of any Doctrine have been wont to express their notions by since that
such words and expressions are best understood, as have by custom or the
Authority of some great Authors been appropriated to such Doctrines, as they
have employed them in the service of. And should every man that writes on any
subject, be obliged to invent a new, all the terms he has need of, and
industriously to shun those proper, expressive words and phrases that are
fitted to his hands, and the business he is about; all things will be filled
with impertinency, darkness and confusion. It must be acknowledged then, that
most of the peculiar words and phrases that either I, or any body else that
will speak properly and intelligibly in this matter, make use of, are borrowed
from the judicious and elegant contriver of them, the profound Restorer and
Refiner of almost-extinct Platonism: whose invention has been so happy in this
kind, that it has served up those notions in the most apposite, significant,
comprehensive and expressive words that could well be thought of, where fore
'twere an humoursome piece of folly for any man that deals in these matters
industriously to avoid such terms and expressions as are so adopted and fitted
to this purpose, and so well known among those that are acquainted with this
way of Learning; when without vanity he could not think to be better surnish't
from his own fancy. If in the following papers I have ufed any expressions of
others, which these considerations will not warrant; I must beg pardon for my
memory which does not use to be so serviceable. And where I writ this
Discourse, I had not one of my books within my reach, that treated of this, or
indeed any other subject. Nor am I at leisure now to examine, them and this, to
see whether I can find any such coincidences; which a man's fancy dealing
frequently in such matters, might insensibly occasion. If any there be, let
those that find them out, pardon them, as the slips of a too officious
imagination^ or however else they treat them, they shall not much difplease the
Author. And now that this Discourse may pass with less control among those
that shall light on it, I find my self engaged to speak a little to a double
sort of Readers, who are like to be offended at my design and averse to the
Doctrine asserted in these Papers, And (1) some will boggle at Praeexistence,
and be afraid to entertain it, upon an apprehension that the Admission of this
opinion will disorder and change the Frame of orthodox Divinity, which, were
there cause for such a jealousy, were but a commendable caution; but there is
hope this may prove but a panick fear, or such a needless terror as surpriseth
children in the dark, when they take their best friends for some bugbear that
would carry them away, or hurt them. For it is but supposing (as I have some
where intimated in the discourse it self) that God created all souls together
as he did the Angels That some of them sinned and fell with the other Apostate
spirits; and for their disobedience were thrust into a state of silence and
insensibility; That the Divine goodness so provided for them, that they should
act a part again in terrestrial bodies, when they should fitly be prepared for
them; And that Adam was set up as our great Protoplast and Representative, who
had he continued in Innocence and Integrity, we had then been sharers in that
happiness which he at first was instated in; but by his unhappy defection and
disobedience we lost it; and became thus miserable in our New life in these
earthly bodies. I say the Doctrine of Praeexistence thus stated, is in nothing
that I know of, an enemy to common Theology: all things hence proceeding as in
our ordinary Systems; with this only difference, that this Hypothesis cleares
the di^ine Attributes from any shadow of harshnesse or inequality, since it
supposes us to have sinned and deserved all the misery we suffer in this
condition before we came hither; whereas the other which teaches, that we
became both guilty and miserable by the single and sole offense of Adam, when
as we were not then in being; or as to our souls, as much as potentially in our
great Progenitour; bears somewhat hardly upon the repute of the Divine
perfections. So that if the wary Reader be afraid to venture upon the
Hypothesis, that I have drawn up at the end, (which I confess I would not give
him the least encouragement to meddle with) yet, without danger he may admit of
Praeexsistence as accommodated to the Orthodox Doctrine. Nor should I indeed
have meddled with the other scheam, which is built upon the Principles of mere
reason and philosophy; but that those friends who drew the rest of the
Discourse from me, engaged me to give them an Account of the Philosophical
Hypothesis. In which, I know I have not in every particular, followed the mind
of the Masters of the Origenian Cabbala; but kept my self to the conduct of
those Principles, that I judged most rational; though indeed the things wherein
I differ, are very few and inconsiderable. However for that reason I thought
fit, to entitle no body to the Hypothesis that I have made a draught of, least
I should have affix't on any one, what he would not have owned. But for the
main, those that understand it, know the Fountain; and for others, it is no
great matter if they be ignorant. Now if any one judge me to be a proselyte to
those opinions, because I call them not all to naught, or damn those, that have
a favor for them; I know not how to avoid the doom of their severe
displeasure; having said as much in the place where I treat of those matters,
to purge my self of such a suspicion as I thought necessary to clear me, in
the opinion of any competently ingenuous. As for others, let me say what I can,
I shall be what their wisdoms think fit to call me; And let that be what it
will, I am very well content to bear it. I Will only add to take off the ground
of this uncharitable jealousy, that among thefavourers of Praeexistence, I know
none that are adharers to those opinions; and therefore for me to have
declaimed against any, on this account, had been a piece of Knight-Errantry;
And those Donns that do so make Giants of the Wind-mills of their own
Imaginations.

But, (2) There are another sort of Readers that I have a word to say to, who
contemn and laugh at every thing that their narrow noddles comprehend not.
This I confess is a good easy way of confutation; and if we may take every
fool's smile for a Demonstration, Praeexistence will be routed. But the best
on it is, to call things by their right names, this is but a vulgar childish
humor arising from nothing but a fond doting on the opinions we were first
instructed in. For having made those the standard of truth and solidity, those
praepossest decerners presently conclude every thing that is a stranger to
their ears and understandings, and of another stamp from their
Education-receptions, false and ridiculous; just like the common people, who
judging all customs and fashions by their own, account those of other nations
absurd, and barbarous. It Is well for those smiling Confuters, that they were
not bred in Mahumetism, for then without doubt they would have made sport of
Christianity. But since they are so disposed, let them laugh at the opinion I
have undertaken for, till they understand it; I know who in the judgment of
wise men will prove Ridiculous. It was from this very principle that the most
considerable truths, that ever the world was acquainted with, were to the
Jews, a stumbling block, and to the Greeks, foolishness; and 'twas such a
spirit as reigns in these children of self-confidence, that called S. Paul a
babbler. And methinks till these narrow scul'd people could boast themselves
infallible, and all their opinions, an unerring Canon, common modesty and
civility should teach them better manners, then at first dash to judge that a
ridiculous absurdity; which the greatest and wisest sages that enlightened the
ancient world, accounted so sound and and probable a Conclusion. Especially it
being a matter not determined against, but rather countenanc't in Scripture, as
will appear hereafter. But opiniative ignorance is very weak and immoral. And
till those slight and vulgar decerners, have learned that first principle of
true wisdom, To judge nothing till they thoroughly understand it, and have
weighed it in the balance of impartial Reason; it is to no purpose to spend
ones breath upon them.

Courteous Reader, in the Authors absence, you are desired to correct the
Printers Errors.

Lux Orientalis.
CHAP. I. The opinions proposed concerning the original of Souls.
IT has always been found a matter of discouraging difficulty, among those
that have busied themselves in such Injuiries, To determine the Soul's
original. ^nsomuch that after all the contests and disputes that have been
about it, many of the wisest Inquisitors have concluded it undeterminable; or,
if they have sat down in either of the 2 opinions, viz. of it is immediate
Creation, or Traduction (which of later ages have been the only competitors);
they have been driven to it, rather from the absurdities of the opposite
opinion, which they have left; then drawn by any rational alliciency in that
which they have taken to. And indeed, if we do but impartially consider the
grand inconveniences which each party urges against the others Conclusion, it
would even tempt one to think, that both are right in their opposition and
neither in their assertion. And since each side so strongly oppugns the other
and so weakly defends it self, it is a shrewd suspicion that they are both
mistaken. Wherefore if there be a third that can lay any probable claim to the
truth, it deserves to be heard to plead its cause; and, if it be not chargeable
with the contradictions or absurdities either of the one or other, to be
admitted.

Now though these later ages have concluded the matter to lie between immediate
Creation, and seminal Traduction; yet I find that the more ancient ^imes have
pitched upon Praeexistence, as more likely than either; For the plato^nists,
Pythagoreans, the Chald^an Wise men, the Jewish Rabbis, and some of the most
learned and ancient Fathers were of this opinion. Wherefore I think we owe so
much at least to the Mentory of those grave Sages, (...) to examine this
Doctrine of theirs, and if neither of the later Hypotheses can ease our anxious
minds, or free themselves from absurdities; and this Gray Dogma fairly clear
all doubts, and be obnoxious to no such contradictions; I see no reason but we
may give it a favorable admittance: Till something else appear more concinnous
and rational. Therefore let us take some account of what the 2 first opinions
allege one against another, and how they are proved by their promoters and
defendants: now, if they be found unable to withstand the shock of one another
opposition; we may reasonably cast our eyes upon the third, to see what force
it brings to vouch its interest, and how it will behave it self in the
encounter.

CHAP. II. Daily creation of Souls is inconsistent with the Divine Attributes.
THe first of these opinions that offers it self to Trial is, that God daily
creates humane souls, which immediately are united unto the bodies that
Generation has prepared for them. Of this side are our later Divines, and the
generality of the Schoolm^n. But not to be born down by Authoritys, Let us
consider what reason stands against it. Therefore,

(1) If our Souls came immediately out of the hands of God when we came first
into these bodies, Whence then are those enormously brutish inclinations, that
strong natural proclivity to vice and impiety, that are exstant in the children
of men? All the works of God bear his image, and are perfect in their kind.
Purity is his nature, and what comes from him, proportionably to its capacity
partakes of his perfections. Every thing in the natural world bears the
superscription of his wisdom and goodness; and the same fountain cannot send
forth sweet waters and bitter. Therefore it is a part of our alleagiance to our
Maker to believe, that he made us pure and innocent and if we were but just
then framed by him when we were united with these terrestrial bodi^s, whence
should we contract such degenerate propensions? Some tell us, that this
impu^ity was immediately derived from the bodies we are unired to; But, how is
it possible, that purely passive insensible Matter should transfuse habits or
inclinations into a Nature that is quite of an other Make and Quality? How can
such a cause produce an effect so disproportionate? Matter can do nothing but
by motion, and what relation has that to a moral contagion! How can a Body
that is neither capable of sense nor sin, infect a soul, as soon as it is unied
to it, with such vicious debauched dispositions?

But others think to evade by saying, That we have not these depravities in our
natures, but contract them by custom, education, and evil usages. How then
comes it about, that those that have had the same care and industry used upon
them; and have been nurtured nuder the same d scipline and severe oversight, do
so vastly and even to wonder differ in their inclinations? How is it that those
that are under continual temptations to vice, are yet kept within the bounds of
virtue, and sobriety? And yet that others, that have strong motives and
allurements to the contrary, should violently break out into all kinds of
extravagance and impiety? Sure, there is some what more in the matter than
those general causes, which may be common to both; and which many times have
quite contrary effects.

(2) This Hypothesis, that God continually creates humane souls in these
bodies, consists not with the honor of the Divine Attributes. For,

(1) How stands it with the goodness and benignity of that God, who is Love, to
put pure and immaculate spirits, who were capable of living to him and with
him, into such bodies as will presently desile them, deface his image, pervert
all their powers and faculties, incline them to hate what he most loves, and
love what his soul hates; and that, without any knowledge or concurrence of
theirs, will quite mar them as soon as he has made them, and of dear
Children, render them rebels or enemies, and in a moment from being like
Angels transform them into the perfect resemblance of the first Apostates,
Devils?

Is this an effect of those tender mercies that are over all his works? And (2)
Has that Wisdom that has made all things to operate according to their
natures, and provided them with what ever is necessary to that end, made
myriads of noble Spirits capable of as noble operations, and presently plunged
them into such a condition wherein they cannot act at all according to their
first and proper dispositions, but shall be necessitated to the quite contrary;
and have other noxious and depraved inclinations fatally imposed upon their
pure natures Does that wisdom, that has made all things in number, weight,
and measure, and disposed them in such exact harmony and proportions, use to
act so ineptly? And that in the best and noblest pieces of his Creation? Does
it use to make and presently destroy? To frame one thing and give it such or
such a nature, and then undo what he had done, and make it an other? And if
there be no such irregular methods used in the framing of inferior Creatures,
what reason have we to suspect that the Divine Wisdom did so vary from its
self in its noblest composures?

And (3), Is it not a great affront to the Divine Justice, to suppose, as we
are commonly taught, that as soon as we are born, yea, and in the Womb, we are
obnoxious to eternal wrath and torments, if our Souls are then immediately
created out of nothing? For, To be just is to give every one his due; and how
can endless unsupportable punishments be due to innocent Spirits, who but the
last moment came righteous, pure, and immaculate out of their Creators hands;
and have not done or thought any thing since, contrary to his will or Laws, nor
were in any the least capacity of sinning.

I, but the first of our order, our General head and Representative, sinned,
and we in him; thus we contract guilt as soon as we have a being, and are
liable to the punishment of his disobedience. This is thought to solve all, and
to clear God from any shadow of unrighte^sness. But what ever truth there is in
the thing it self, I think it cannot stand upon the Hypothesis of the souls
immediate Creation nor yet justify God in his proceedings. For, (1) If I was
then newly created when first in this body; what was Adam to me, who sinned
above 5000 years before I came out of nothing? If he represented me, it must be
as I was in his Loins, that is, in him as an effect in a cause. But so I was
not, according to this Doctrine; for my soul ownes no Father but God, its
immediate progenitour. And what am I concerned then in his sins, which had
never my will or consent, more then in the sins of (...), or Julius Caesar?
Nay, than in the sins of Beelzebub or Lucifer? And for my body, it is most
likely, that never an Atom of his, ever came at me; or, if any did, he was no
cause on it. Besides, that of it self is neither capable of sense, sin, guilt,
nor punishment: or, (2) Admitting that we become thus obnoxious as soon as in
the body, upon the account of his default, How does it comport with the divine
Justice, in one moment to make such excellent creatures, and in the next to
render them so miserable, by thrusting them into a condition, so fatally
obnoxious; especially since they were capable of living and acting in bodies
more perfect, and more accommodate to their new undesiled natures. Certainly,
could they have been put to their choice whether they would have come into
being upon such terms, they would rather have been nothing for ever. And God
does not use to make his creatures so, as that, without their own fault, they
shall have cause to unwish themselves.

Hitherto in this second general Arg. I have dealt against those that believe
and assert the original depravity of our natures: which those that deny, may
think themselves not pinch't by or concern^d in; Since they think they do no
such dishonor to the divine Attributes, while they assert, that we were not
made in so deplorable and depraved a condition, but have so made our selves by
our voluntary aberrations. But neither is this a fit Plaster for the sore,
supposing our souls to be immediately created and so sent into these bodies.
For still it seems to be a diminutive and disparaging apprehen^on of the
infinite and immense Goodness of God, that he should detrude such excellent
creatures as our souls into a state so hazardous, wherein he sees it to be ten
thousand to one, but that they will corrupt, and defile themselves, and so make
themselves miserable here, and to eternity hereafter. And certainly, be we as
indifferent naturally to good and evil as can be supposed; yet great are the
disadvantages to virtue that all men unavoidably meet with, in this state of
imperfection.

For considering, that our infant and growing age is an age of sense, in which
our appetites, and passions are very strong, and our reasons weak, and scarce
any thing but a chain of imaginations, it is I say great odds, but that we
should be carried to inordinacy, and exceed the bounds the divine laws have set
us. So that our lower powers of sense and passions using to have the head, will
grow strong and impetuous; and thus it is an hundred to one but we shall be
rooted in vice, before we come to the maturity of our reasons, or are capable
of the exercise of virtue. And woeful experience teaches us, that most men run
so far before they consider whither they are agoing, that the care and
diligence of all their lives after, will scarce reclaim them. Besides, the far
greatest part of the world are led into wickedness and all kinds of
debauchery, by corrupt and vicious education. And it is not difficult to observe
what an inormous strength, bad education has to deprave and pervert well
disposed inclinations. Which things considered, this way also methinks reflects
a Disparagement on the Divine Attributes: Since by creating souls daily and
putting them into such bodies, and such parts of the world as his infinite
Wisdom sees will debauch them, and pervert them from the ways of
righteousness and happiness, into those of vice and misery; he deals with
them less mercifully then a parent among us would with his Offspring. And to
suppose God to have less goodness then his degenerate creatures, is to have
very narrow apprehensions of his perfections, and to (...) him of the honor
due to his Attributes.

(3) It has been urged with good probability by great and wise Sages, that
it is an unbecomming apprehension of the Majesty on high, to suppose him
assistant to unlawful and unclean coitions, by creating a soul to animate the
impure foetus. And to think, It is in the power of brutish lust to determine
Omnipotence to create a Soul, whenever a couple of unclean adulterers shall
think fit to join in their bestial pleasures; is methinks to have a very mean
apprehension of the divine Majesty and Purity. This is to make him the worst of
Servants by supposing him to serve his creature's vices, to wait upon the
vilest actions, and to engage the same Infinite Power that made the world for
the perfecting what was begun by dissolute wantons. This Argument was used of
old by pious and learned Origin, and has been employed in the same service
since, by his Modern defendents. But I foresee an evasion or two, that possibly
with some may stand for an answer, the removal of which will clear the
business.

It may be pretended that God's attending to create souls for the supply of
such generations, is but an act of his justice, for the detection, and
consequently punishment, of such lawless offenders; which therefore will be no
more matter of disparagement then the waiting of an Officer of justice to
discover and apprehend a Malefactor.

But this Subterfuge cannot elude the force of the Argument, for it has no
place at all in most adulteries; yea great injustice and injury is done many
times by such illegitimate births; the child of a stranger being by this means
admitted to carry away the inheritance from the lawful offspring. Besides, God
uses not ordinarily to put forth his Almighty power to discover secret
miscarriages, except sometimes for very remarkable and momentous ends, but
leaves hidden iniqui^es to be the objects of his own castigations. And if
discovery of the fault be the main end of such creations, methinks that might
be done at a cheaper rate, that should not have brought so much inconvenience
with it, or have exposed his own innocent and harmless offspring to
undeserved Reproach and Infamy.

But further it may be suggested, that it is no more indecent for God to create
souls to furnish those unlawful Generations, then it is that a man should be
nourisht by meat that he has unlawfully come by, or that the Cattle which he
has stolen should engender with his own. But the difference of these instances
from the case in hand is easily discernable; in that the nourishment and
productions spoken of, proceed in a set orderly way of natural causes, which
work fatally and necessarily without respect to moral circumstances; And there
is no reason, it should be in the power of a sinful creature to engage his
Maker to pervert or stop the course of nature, when he pleases. But in the
case of creating souls, God is supposed to act by explicit and immediate Will,
the suspending of which, in such a case as this, is far different in point of
credit and decorum, from his altering the settled Laws he has set in the
Creation, and turning the world upsidedown.

I might further add (4ly), That it seems very incongruous and unhandsome to
suppose, that God should create a souls for the supply of one monstrous body.
And of such prodigious productions there is mention in History. That Is a
remarkable instance in Sennertus, of a Monster born at Emmaus with two hearts,
and two heads; the diversity of whose appe^ites, perceptions and affections,
testified that it had two souls within that bi-partite habitation. Now, to
conceive the most wise Maker and Contriver of all things, immediately to create
two souls, for a single body, rather then suffer that super-plus of matter
which constitutes the monstrous excrescence to prove effoete and inanimate, is
methinks a derogatory apprehension of his wisdom, and supposes him to act
more ineptly in the great and immediate instances of his power, than in the
ordinary course of nature about less noble and accurate productions. Or, if it
be pretended, that Souls were sent into them while the bodies were yet
distinct, but that after wards they grew into one: This, I say will not heal
the breach that this Hypothesis makes upon the divine Wisdom; it ^acitely
reflecting a shameful oversight upon Omniscience, that he should not be aware
of the future coalescence of these bodies into one, when he made souls for
them; or at least, it is to suppose him, knowingly to act ineptly. Besides, that
the rational soul is not created till the body, as to the main strokes of it at
least, is framed, is the general opinion of the Assertours of daily creation;
So that then there is no room for this evasion.

And now one would think that an opinion so very obnoxious, and so liable to
such grand inconveniences, should not be admitted but upon most pressing
reasons and ineludable demonstrations. And yet there is not an argument that I
ever heard of from reason to enforce it, but only such as are brought from the
impossibility of the way of Traduction, which indeed is chargeable with as
great absurdities, as that we have been discoursing of. It Is true, several
Scriptures are pressed for the service of the cause; but I doubt much against
their intent and inclination. General testimonies there are to prove that God
is the Father and Creator of Souls, which is equally true, whether we suppose
it made just as it is united to these bodies, or did praeexist, and was before
them; But that it is just then created out of nothing when first it comes into
these earthly bodies, I know not a word in the inspired Writings that speaks
it. For that saying of our Savior, My Father works hitherto, and I work, is
by the most judicious understood of the works of preservation and providence.
Those of creation being concluded within the first Hebdomade, accordingly as is
expressed in the History, that God on the seventh day rested from all his works.
Nor can there an instance be given of any thing created since, or is there any
pretended, but that which has been the subject of our inquiry; which is no
inconsiderable presumption, that that was not so neither; since the divine way
of working is not pari^ color or humoursome, but uniform, and consonant to the
laws of exactest wisdom. So that for us to suppose that God, after the
completing. of his Creation, and the laws given to (...) things for their
action, and continuanc^ to be every moment working in a quit^ other way in one
instance of beings, tha^ he does in all besides; is methinks a some what odd
apprehension, especially when no Reason urges to it, and Scripture silent. For
such places as this [ the (...) of the Spirits of all flesh, the Father (...)
Spirits. The spirit returns to God (...) gave it. The souls which I have mad^
We are his offspring. Who forms (...) spirit of man within him, and the like
signify no more, but that our souls (...) a nearer relation to God then our
bodies as being his immediate workmanship made without any creature-interposal
and more especially regarded by him But to infer hence, that they (...) then
produced when these bodies (...) generated, is illogicall and inconsequen^ So
that all that these Scriptures will ser^ for, is only to disprove the Doctrine
(...) Fraduction, but makes not a tittle for the ordinary Hypothesis of Daily
Creation against Praeexistence.

CHAP. III. (2) Traduction of souls is impossible, the reasons for it weak and
frivolous, the proposal of Praeexistence.
THus then we have examind the first way of stating the Soul's original, that
of continual Creation; and finding no sure resting place for our inquiry here,
we remove to the second.

The way of Traduction or seminal Propagation. And the adherers to this
Hypothesis are of 2 sorts, viz. either such as make the soul to be nothing but
a purer sort of matter, or of those that confess it wholly spiritual and
immaterial. He dispatch the former, briefly strike at the root of their
misconceit of the souls production, and show it cannot be Matter, be it as pure
as can be conceived.

Therefore (I) If the soul be matter, then whatever perceptions or
apprehensions it has, or is capable of, they were let in at the senses. And
thus the great Patron of the Hypothesis states it, in his Leviathan, and other
writings. But now clear it is that our Souls have some conceptions, which they
never received from external sense; For there are some congenite implicit
Principles in us, without which there could be no sensation; since the images
of objects are very small and inconsiderable in our brains, comparatively to the
vastness of the things which they represent, and very unlike them in multitudes
of other circumstances, so that 'twere impossible we should have the sensible
representation of any thing, were it not that our souls use a kind of Geometry,
or mathematick Inference in judging of external objects by those little hints
it finds in material impressions. Which Art and the principles thereof were
never received from sense, but are presupposed to all sensible perceptions.
And, were the soul quite vold of all such implicit notions, it would remain as
senseless as a stone for ever.

Besides, we find our minds fraught with principles logical, moral,
metaphysical, which could never owe their original to sense otherwise, then as
it gives us occasions of using them. For sense teaches no general
propositions, but only affords singulars for Induction; which being an
Inference, must proceed from an higher principle that ownes no such dependence
on the senses as being found in the mind, and not derived from any thing
without. Also we find in our selves mathematical notions, and build certain
demonstrations on them, which abstract from sense and matter. And therefore
never had them from any material power but from something more sublime and
excellent. But this Argument is of too large a consideration to be treated of
here and therefore I content my self with those brief Touches, and pass on.

(2) If the soul be matter it is impossible it should have the sense of any
thing: for either the whole image of the object must be received in one point
of this sensitive matter; a thing absurd at first view, that such variety of
distinct and orderly representations should be made at once upon a single atom;
or the whole image is impressed upon every point, and then there would be as many
objects as there are points in this matter; and so every thing would be
infinitely multiplied in our delusive senses. Or finally, every part of the
soul must receive a proportionable part of the image; and then, how could those
parts communicate their perceptions to each other, and what should perceive the
whole? This Argument is excellently managed by the great Dr. H. More, in whose
writings this fond Hypothesis is fully triumphed over, and defeated. Since
therefore the very lowest degree of perception, single and simple sense, is
incompatible to (...) body or matter, we may safely conclude, that the higher
and nobler operations of imagining, remembering, reasoning, and willing must
have a cause and source that is not Corporeal. Thus therefore those that build
the souls traduction upon this ground of its being only body and modified
matter, are disappointed in the foundation of

But (2) Another sort of assertors of traduction teach the Soul to be spiritual
and incorporeal, and affirm that by a virtue derived from the first
benediction, it can propagate its like; one soul emitting another as the body
does the matter of Generation. The manner of which spiritual production uses
to be illustrated by one candles lighting another; and a man's begetting a
thought in another mind, without diminishing of his own. This is the most
favorable representation of this opinion, that I can think on. And yet, if we
nearly consider it, it will appear most absurd and unphilosophical For if one
soul produce another, it is either out of nothing or something praeexistent. If
the former, it is an absolute creation, which all philosophy concludes
impossible for a Creature. And if it be pretended that the Parent does it not
by his proper natural virtue but by a strength imparted by God in the first
blessing, Increase and multiply, so that God is the prime agent, he only the
instrument: I rejoin, that then either God has thereby obliged himself to put
forth a new and extraordinary power in every such occasion, distinct from his
influence in the ordinary course of nature: Or else (2) he only concurres by
his providence, as he does to our other natural actions, we having this Ability
bestowed upon our very natures. He that asserts the first, runs upon all the
rocks that he would avoid in the former Hypothesis of continual Creation, and
God will be made the cause of the sin and misery of his spotless and blameless
creatures; which absurdities he cannot shun by saying, that God, by interposing
in such productions, does but follow the rules of acting, which he first made
while man was innocent. For certainly infinite goodness would never have tied
up it self to such Laws of working, as he foresaw would presently bring
unavoidable inconvenience, misery, and ruin upon the best part of his
workmanship. And for the second way, it supposes God to have no more to do in
this action then in our eating and drinking. Consequently, here is a creation
purely natural. And ^methinks if we have so vast a power to ^ring the ends of
contradictorys together, ^omthing out of nothing, (which some deny to
Omnipotence it self) it is much we cannot conscrve in being our creature (...)
produced, nor our own intimate selves, since conservation is not more then
creation. And it is much, that in other thing we should give such few specimens
of so vast an ability; or, have a power so divine and excellent, and no faculty
to discern it by.

Again (2) if the Soul be immediately produced out of nothing, be the agent who
it will, God or the Parent, it will be pure and sinlesse. For, supposing our
parents to be our Creators; they make (...) but as natural agents, and so can
only transmit their natural qualities, but not their moral pravities. Wherefore
there can no better account be given from this way how the soul is so debauched
and infected as soon as it comes into the body, (...) in the former, and
therefore it fails in the main end it is designed for.

Thus we see then that the traduction of the soul supposing it to be produced
out of nothing, cannot be defended.

Nor does the second general way, yield any more relief to this Hypothesis. For
if it be made of any thing praeexistent, it is either of matter or spirit. The
former we have undermined and overthrown already, in what was said against
those, that hold it to be body. And if it be made out of any spiritual
substance, it must be the soul of the parent, (except we will revive the old
enthusiastic conceit of its being a particle of the divine essence) which
supposition is against the nature of an immaterial being, a chief property of
which, is to be indiscerpible. Nor do the similitudes I mentioned in the
proposal of the Hypothesis, at all fit the business; for one candle lights
another, by separable emissions that pass from the flame of that which is
kindled, to the ^ieke of the other. And flame is a body whose parts are in
continual flux, as a ^iver. But the substance of the soul is stable, permanent,
and indivisible, which quite makes it another case. And for a man's informing
another mind with a thought which he had not conceived, it is not a production
of any substance, but only an occasioning him to exertan operation of his mind
which he did not before. And therefore makes nothing to the illustrating, how a
soul can produce a soul, a substance distinct and without it self; Thus we see
how desperate the case of the soul's original is in the Hypothesis of
Traduction also. But yet to let it have fair play, we will give it leave to plead
it is cause; and briefly present what is most material in its behalf.

There are but two reasons that I can think of, worth a naming (1) A man begets
a man, and a man he is not without a soul, therefore it is pretended that the
soul is begotten. But this argument is easily detected of palpable sophistry,
and is as if one should argue, a man is mortal therefore his soul is mortal,
or is fat and lusty therefore his soul is so. The absurdity of which kinds of
reasoning lies in drawing that into a strict and rigorous affirmation, which is
only meant according to vulgar speech, and is true only, in some remarkable
respect or circumstance. Thus we say, A man begetts a man, because he does the
visible and only sensible part of him; The vulgar, to whom common speech is
accommodate, not taking so much notice of what is past the ken of their senses.
And therefore Body in ordinary speaking is often put for Person as here man for
the body. Sometimes the noblest part is used for the whole, as when it is said
70 souls went down with Jacob into Egypt; therefore such arguments as the
assertours of traduction make use of, which are drawn from vulgar schemes of
speech, argue nothing but the desperateness of the cause, that needs such
pitiful sophistries to recommend it. Such are these proofs which yet are some
of the best I meet with, The seed of the woman shall break the serpents head;
66 souls descended out of Jacobs loins; Adam begat a son in his own likeness,
and such like. According to this rate of arguing the scripture may be made
speak any thing that our humoursome phancies please to dictate. And thus to
rack the sacred writings, to force them whether they will or no to bring
evidence to our opinions; is an affront to their Authority that is next to the
denying on it. I might add (2) that begetting also has a latitude, and in
common speech signifies not a strict and philosophical production; So that a
man begets a man, though he only generates the body, into which fitly prepared
descends a soul. And he that does that upon which another thing necessarily
follows, is said to be the cause of both.

(2) The adherents to traduction use to urge, that, except the whole man soul
and body be propagated, there is no account can be given of our original
defilement. And scripture gives evident testimony to that early pollution; for
we are said to be conceived in sin, and transgressors from the Womb.

We have already seen that indeed the way of daily creating souls, cannot come
off but with vilely aspersing the divine attributes. And it has been hinted,
that neither can Traduction solve the business: for if the Parent beget the
soul out of nothing, it will be as pure and clean as if God himself were it is
immediate creator; for though a clean thing cannot come out of an unclean,
when any thing of the substance of the producent is imparted to the effect; yet
where it is made out of nothing the reason is very different, Yea, the soul in
all the powers that are concerned in this production is now as clean and pure
as ever 'twas; for it is supposed to do it by a capacity given, at its first
creation while pure and innocent; in which respect it is not capable of moral
contagion; this being an ability merely natural and plastic, and not at all
under the imperium or command of the will the only seat of moral good and
evil. Or, if our souls are but particles and decerptions of our parents, then
I must have been guilty of all the sins that ever were committed by my
Progenitors ever since Adam; and by this time, my soul would have been so
depraved and debauched, that it would be now brutish, yea diabolical. Thus then
we see, that even upon this reason it is necessary, to pitch upon some other
Hypothesis, to give an account of the pravity of our natures; which both these
fayl in the solution of. And, since the former committs such violence upon the
honor of the divine Attributes, since the latter is so contrary to the nature
of things, and since neither can give any satisfaction in the great affairs of
providence and our natures, or have any encouragement from the Sacred Volume;
It Is I think very excusable for us to cast our eyes abroad, to see if there be
no other way, that may probably unriddle those mysteries, and relieve the minds
of anxious and contemplative inquirers. In which search, if we light on any
thing that does sweetly accord with the Attributes of God, the nature of
things, and unlocks the intricacies of Providence; I think we have found, what
the two former opinions aim at, but cannot make good their pretenses to. And
may salute the truth with a joyful (...). Wherefore from the modern
disputants, let us look toward the ancient Sages, those eastern Sophi, that
have filled the world with the same of their wisdom; And since our inquiries
are benighted in the west, let us look toward the East; from whence it is
likely the desired light may display it self, and chase away the darkness that
covers the face of those theories. Therefore it was the opinion of the Indian
Brachmans, the Persian Magi, the Egyptian Gymnosophists, the fewish Rabbis,
some of the Grecian Philosophers, and Christian Fathers, that the souls of men
were created all at first; and at several times and occasions upon forfeiture
of their better life and condition, dropped down into these terrestrial bodies.
This the learned among the Jews made a part of their Cabbala, and preten to
have received it from their great Lawgiver, Moses: which Hypothesis, if it
appear but probable to an impartial inquiry, will even on that account be
preferrible to both the former, which we have seen to be desperate.

CHAP. IV. ( Praeexistence) Praeexistence cannot be disproved. Scripture says
nothing against it. It Is silence is no prejudice to this Doctrine, but rather
an Argument for it, as the case stands. Praeexistence was the common opinion
of our Savior's times. How, probably, it came to be lost in the Christian
Church.
THerefore let us see what title it can show for our assent, or whether it can
prove it self worthy of the Patronage of those great Authors that have owned it.

(1) Then, Whether this Doctrine be true or no, Im'e confident it cannot be
proved false: for if All souls were not made together, it must be, either
because God could not do it; or because he would not, for the first, I suppose
very few have such narrow conceptions of the divine power, as to affirm that
omnipotence could not produce all those beings at first, which apart he is
supposed to create daily; which implies no contradiction, or as much as
difficulty, to be conceived; and which de facto he has done in the case of
Angels. Or, if inconsistence with any Attribute should be pretended, that
shall be proved quite otherwise hereafter; And the amicable consistence of this
Hypothesis with them, yea the necessity of it, from this very consideration of
the divine Attributes, shall be argued in the process.

Therefore, whoever concludes that God made not all souls of old, when he
produced the world out of nothing, must confess the reason of this assertion
to be, because he would not. And then I would ask him, how he came to know what
he affirms so boldly? Who acquainted him with the Divine Counsels? Is there a
word said in his revealed will to the contrary? or, has he by his holy penmen
told us that either of the other ways was more suitable to his beneplaciture?
Indeed, it is very likely that a strong and ready fancy, possessed with a
persuasion of the falsehood of this Hypothesis, might find some half phrases in
scripture, which he might suborne to sing to the tune of his imagination. For,
in such a Miscellaneous piece as the Bible is, it will not be difficult for a
man that is strongly resolved against an opinion, to find somewhat or other that
may seem to him to speak the language of his fancy; And therefore it shall go
hard, but that those whom their education or prejudice have engaged against
this Hypothesis, will light on some obscure pieces of texts, and broken
sentences or other, that shall seem to condemn what they disapprove of. But I
am securely confident, that there is not a sentence in the sacred volume, from
end to end, that ever was intended to teach, that all souls were not made of
old; or that, by a legitimate consequence, would infer it. And if any there
be that seem to look another way, I dare say they are collateral, and were
never designed by the divine Authors for the purpose they are made to serve, by
the enemies of Praeexistence. Wherefore not to conceal any thing that with the
least show of probability can be pretended from the sacred volume in
discountenance of the Doctrine of Praeexistence, I Will bring into view whatever
I know to have the least face of a Testimony to the contrary, in the divine
Revelations. That so, when it shall appear that the most specious Texts that
can be alleged, have nothing at all in them to disprove the souls
praeexistence, we may be secure that God has not discovered to us in his
written will, that 'twas not his pleasure to create all souls together.

Therefore (I), It may be pretended, that the Doctrine of Praeexistence
comports not with that innocence and integrity in which the Scripture
determines Adam to have been made. Since it supposes the descent into these
bodies to be a culpable lapse from an higher and better state of Life, and this
to be a state of incarceration for former delinquencies. To this I answer.

(1) No one can object any thing to purpose against Praeexistence from the
unconceiveablenesse of it, until he know the particular frame of the
Hypothesis, without which, all impugnations relating to the manner of the
thing, will be wide of the mark, and but little to the business. Therefore, if
the objectour would have patience to wait till we come to that part of our
undertaking, he would find that there was but little ground for such a scruple.
But however to prevent all cavillings, in this place i will show the invalidity
of this objection. Wherefore,

(2) There is no necessity from the Doctrine of Praeexistence to suppose Adam a
delinquent, before his noted transgression in a terrestrial body: for
considering, that his body had vast advantages above ours, in point of beauty,
purity, and serviceablenesse to the soul, what harshness is there in conceiving
that God might send one of those immaculate Spirits that he had made, into such
a Tenement, that he might be his steward in the affairs of this lower Family;
and an overseer, and ruler of those other creatures that he had ordered to have
their dwelling upon earth. I am sure, there is no more contrariety to any of
the Divine Attributes in this supposition, then there is in that, which makes
God to have sent a pure spirit, which he had just made, into such a body. Yea,

(3) Supposing that some souls fell, when the Angels did (which the process of
our discourse will show to be no unreasonable supposition) this was a merciful
provision of our Maker, and a generous undertaking for a Seraphick and
untainted Spirit. For by this means, fit and congruous matter is prepared for
those souls to reside and act in, who had rendered themselves unfit to live and
enjoy themselves in more refined bodies. And so those spirits that had sinned
themselves into a state of silence and inactivity, are by this seasonable
means, which the divine Wisdom and Goodness has contrived for them, put once
more into a capacity of acting their parts anew, and coming into play again.
Now if it seem hard to any to conceive how so noble a spirit in such an
advantageous body, should have been imposed upon by so gross a delusion, and
submit so impotently to the first temptation; He may please to consider, that
the difficulty is the same, supposing him just then to have been made; if we
grant him but that purity and those great perfections both of will, and
understanding, which orthodox theology allows him.

Yea again (4) I might ask What inconvenience there is in supposing, that Adam
himself was one of those delinquent souls, which the divine pity and
compassion had thus set up again; that so, so many of his excellent creatures
might not be lost and undone irrecoverabiy: but might act anew, though upon a
lower stage in the universe: A due consideration of the infinite foecundity and
fullness of the divine goodness will, if not warrant, yet excuse such a
supposition.

But now if it be demanded, What advantage Adam's standing had been to his
posterity, had he continued in the state of innocence; and how sin and misery
is brought upon us by his Fall, according to this Hypothesis: I answer, that
then among many other great privileges, he had transsmitted downwards by way
of natural generation that excellent and blessed temper of body; which should
have been like his own happy crasis. So that our apprehensions should have been
more large and free, our affections more regular and governable; and our
inclinations to what is good and virtuous, strong and vigorous. For we cannot
but observe in this state, how vast an influence the temper of our bodies has
upon our minds; both in reference to intellectual and moral dispositions. Thus,
daily experience teaches us, how that, according to the ebb or flow of certain
humors in our bodies, our wits are either more quick, free, and sparkling, or
else more obtuse, weak, and sluggish. And we find that there are certain clean
and healthy dispositions of body which make us cheerful, and contented; others
on the contrary ^orose, melancholy, and dogged. And it is easy to observe how
age or sickness sowres, and crabbs our natures. I might instance in almost
all other qualities of the mind, which are strangely influenc^ and modifyed
according to the body's constitution. But none will deny so plain a truth; and
therefore I forbear to insist further on it. Nor need I mention any more
advantages; so many, and such great ones, being consequent upon this. But our
great Protoplast and representative, falling through his unhappy disobedience,
besides the integrity and rectitude of his mind, he lost also that blessed
constitution of Body, which would have been so great a privilege to his off
spring: so that it became now corrupt, weak, and indisposed for the nobler
exercises of the soul; and he could transmit no better to us, then himself was
owner of. Thus we fell in him, and were made miserable by his transgression. We
have bodies conveyed to us, which strangely do bewitch and betray us. And thus
we all bear about us the marks of the first apostasy. There are other sad
effects of his defection, but this may suffice for my present purpose. Thus we
see how that the derivation of original depravity from Adam is as clear in this
Hypothesis, as can be pretended in either of the other. And upon other Accounts
it seems to have much the advantage of both of them. As will appear to the
unprejudiced in what is further to be discoursed of.

Finally, therefore, If the urgers of the Letter of Genesis of either side,
against this Hypothesis, would but consider, That the souls that descend
hither, for their praevarication in another state, lie in a long condition of
silence and insensibility, before they appear in terrestrial bodies; each of
them then might, from the doctrine of Praeexistence thus stated, gain all the
advantages which he supposes to have by his own opinion, and avoid all those
absurdities which he sees the other run upon. If the Assertours of daily
Creation think it clear from Scripture that God is the Father of Spirits, and
immediate maker of souls, they will find the same made good and assented to in
this Hypothesis. And if they are unwilling to hold -- any thing contrary to the
Nature of the soul, which is immortal and indiscerpible, the Doctrine of
Praeexistence amicably closes with them in this also.

And if the Patrons of Traduction would have a way, how sin and misery may be
propagated from our first Parent without aspersing the divine Attributes, or
affirming any thing contrary to the phenomenon of Providence, and Nature; this
Hypothesis will clear the business; It giving us so fair an Account how we all
dye in Adam, without blotting the Wisdom, Justice, or Goodness of God, or
affirming any thing contrary to the Appearances of Nature.

I have been the longer on this Argument, because it is like to be one main
objection; And we see it is so far from prejudicing, that it is no
inconsiderable evidence of the truth of Praeexistence.

And now, besides this that I have named, I cannot think of any Arguments from
Scripture against this Doctrine, considerable enough to excuse a mention of
them. However, if the candid Reader will pardon the impertinency i will present
to view what I find most colorable.

Therefore (2), It may be some are so inadvertent as to urge against our souls
having been of old, that, Sacred writ says We are but of Yesterday; which
expression of divine Scripture, is questionless to be understood of our
appearance on this stage of Earth. And is no more an Argument against our
Praeexistence, then that other phrase of his, Before (...) go hence, and Be no
more, is against our future existence in an other state after the present life
is ended. Nor will it prove more the business it is brought for, then the
expression of Rachels weeping for her Children because they were not, will
infer, that they were, absolutely nothing. Nor can any thing more be made.

(3) Of that place in Ecclesiastes, Yea better is he than both they, (meaning
the dead and living) which has not yet been; since, besides that it is a like
scheme of speech with the former, it seems more to favor, then discountenance
Praeexistence for what is absolutely nothing can neither be worse, nor better.
Moreover, we coming from a state of silence and inactivity when we drop into
these bodies, we were before, as if we had not been; and so there is better
ground in this case, for such a manner of speaking, then in mere
nonappearance; which yet scripture phraseth a Not being.

And now I cannot think of any place in the sacred volume more that could make
a tolerable plea against this Hypothesis, of our souls having been before they
came into these bodies; except

(4) Any will draw a negative Argument from the History of the Creation,
concluding that the Souls of men were not made of old, because there is no
mention there, of any such matter. To which I return briefly, That the same
Argument concludes against the being of Angels of whose creation there is no
more said in the first story then of this inferior rank of spirits, souls.
The reason of which silence is commonly taken to be, because Moses had here to
do with a rude and illiterate people, who had few or no apprehensions of any
thing beyond their senses, and therefore he takes notice to them of nothing but
what was sensible and of common observation. This reason is given also why
minerals were omitted. 'Twere an easy matter, to show how the outward cortex,
the Letter of this History is adapted to mean and vulgar apprehensions, whose
narrowness renders them incapable of sublimer speculations. But that being more
then needs for our present purpose, I shall forbear to speak further of it.

I might (2) further add, that great and learned Interpreters tell us, that
all sorts of spirits, angels, and souls are symbolically meant by the creation
of heaven, and light. And, if it were directly in the way of our present
business, it might be made appear to be no improbable conjecture. But I
refer him that is curious in this particular to the great Restorer of the
ancient Cabbala, the Learned Dr. H. More in his conjectura Cabbalistica.

And now from the consideration of the silence of the first History, we descend
to the last and most likely to be urged scruple, which is to this purpose.

(5) We are not to step beyond the divine Revelations, and since God has made
known no such Doctrine as this, of the Souls Praeexistence any where in his
word, we may reasonably deny it, or at least have no ground to embrace it. This
is the most important objection of all the rest, and most likely to prepossess
timorous and wary inquirers against this Hypothesis; wherefore I conceive that
a full answer to this doubt, will prevent many scrupulous Haesitations, and
make way for an unprejudiced hearing of what I have further to alledg in the
behalf of this opinion And

(1) I wish that those that urge Scripture silence to disprove praeexistence
would consider, how silent it is both in the case of Daily Creation, and
Traduction, we have seen already that there is nothing in Sacred writ to
warrant either, but only such Generals from which the respective Patrons of
either Doctrine would infer their own conclusion, though indeed they all of
them with better right and congruity prove Praeexistence.

(2) I suppose those that argue from Scripture-silence in such cases mistake
the design of Scripture, which is not to determine points of speculation, but
to be a rule of Life and Manners. Nor does it otherwise design the teaching of
Doctrinals, then as they have a tendency to promote the divine life,
righteousness, and Holiness. It was never intended by it is inspired Authors
to fill our Heads with notions, but to regulate our disorderly appetites and
affections, and to direct us the way to a nobler happiness. Therefore those
that look for a systeme of opinions in those otherways-designed writings, do
like him that should see for a body of natural Philosophy, in Epictetus his
moralls, or Seneca's Epistles.

(3) Christ and his Apostles spoke and writ as the condition of the persons
with whom they dealt administered occasion, as did also the other Penmen.
Therefore doubtless there were many noble theories which they could have made
the world acquainted with, which yet for want of a fit occasion to draw them
forth were never upon Record. And we know, few speculative truths are delivered
in Scripture, but such as were called forth by the controversies of those
times: And Praeexistence was none of them, it being the constant opinion of the
Jews, as appears by that Question, Master, was it for this man's sin or his
Fathers, that he was born blind, which supposes it of the Disciples also.
Wherefore

(4) There was little need of more teaching of that, which those times were
sufficiently instructed in: And indeed, as the case stands, if
Scripture-silence be Argumentative, 'twil be for the advantage of
Praeexistence; since it being the then common opinion, and the disciples
themselves being of that belief it is very likely, had it been an error, that
Savior Savior or his Apostles would have witnest against it. But there being
not a word let fall from them in disapprooval of that opinion, though sometimes
occasions were administered (as by the Question of the Disciples, and some other
occurrences) it is a good presumption of the soundness of it.

Now that Praeexistence was the common opinion of the Jews, in those times
might be made good with full and convictive evidence, were it worth our labor
to insist much upon this Inquiry; but this being only a by consideration, a
brief touch of it will suffice us. One of the great Rabbis therefore, Mr. Ben
Israel in his Problems de Creatione, assures us, that Praeexistence was the
common belief of all wise men among the Jews, without exception. And the Author
of the Book of Wisdom, who certainly was a Jew, probably Philo, plainly
supposes the same Doctrine in that Speech, For I was a witty Child, and had
agood Spirit, wherefore the rather being good, I came into a body un^filed. As
also did the disciples in their forementioned Question to our Savior; For
except they supposed, that he might have si^ned before he was born, the
Question had been senseless and impertinent. Again, when Christ (...) them,
whom men said he was they answered, that some said John the Baptist, others
Elias, others Jeremias or one of the Prophets, which sayings of theirs suppose
their belief of a Metempsychosis and consequently of Praeexistence. These, one
would think, were very proper occasions for our Savior to have rectified his
mistaken followers, had their supposition been an error, as he was wont to do
in cases not more considerable. Therefore if the enemies of Praeexistence will
needs urge scriptures supposed silence against it; they have no reason to take
it amiss if I show them how their Argument recoyls upon themselves, and
destroies their own cause, instead of their Adversaries.

(5) Besides, there were doubtless many Doctrines entertained by the Apostles
and the more learned of their followers, which were disproportioned to the
capacities of the generality, who hold but little Theory.

There was strong meat for the more grown and manly Christians, as well as milk
for babes, and weaker constitutions. Now Scripture was designed for the benefit
of the most, and they could little understand, and less make use of a
speculation so remote from common conceit, as Praeexistence. Among us, wise men
count it not so proper to deal forth deep and mysterious points in Divinity to
common and promiscuous Auditories. Wherefore the Apostles and others of their
more improved and capable disciples might have had such a Doctrine among them,
though it were never expressly defined in their public writings. And the
Learned Origin and some other of the Ancients affirm that Praeexistence was a
Cabbala which was handed down from the Apostolic ages, to their times; and we
know those were early, and had therefore better advantages of knowing the
certainty of such a Tradition, then we at so vast a distance. Nor need any
wonder how it came at length to be lost, or at least kept but among a few, who
considers the grossnesse of succeeding ages, when such multitudes could swallow
the dull and coorse Anthropomorphite Doctrines; much less, if he reflects upon
that black night of barbarick ignorance which spread it self over this western
world, upon the incursion of those rude and unciviliz'd Nations that 'ore-ran
the Empire: out of which darkness, 'twas the work of some Centuries to recover
the then obscured region of Civility and Letters. Moreover, it would allay the
admiration of any one inquisitive in such researches, when he shall have taken
notice of the starting up and prevailing of School Divinity in the world, which
was but Aristotle's Philosophy theologiz'd. And we know that Philosophy had the
luck to swim in the general esteem and credit, when Platonis^ and the more
ancient wisdom, a branch of which, Praeexistence was; were almost quite sunk
and buried. So that a Theology being now made, out of Aristotelian principles,
it is no wonder that Praeexistence was left out, nothing being supposed to have
been said of it, by the great Author of that Philosophy; and his admiring
sectators were loath to borrow so considerable a Theory, from their Masters
neglected Rival, Plato.

But (...) at once to remove this stone of offense out of the way, I think
Scripture is not so silent in this matter as is imagined. And I Am confident,
more can be said from those divine writings in behalf of Praeexistence, then
for many opinions, that it is opposers are very fond of, and think to be there
evidently asserted. And had this been a commonly received Doctrine, and men's
wits as much exercised for the defense on it, as they have been for the common
dogmata, I nothing doubt, but that Scriptures would have been heaped up in
abundance for it is justification, and it would have been thought to have been
plainly witnest to, in the inspired volume. For, as men's phancies will readily
furnish them with a proof of that, of whose truth they are strongly
prepossessed; So, on the contrary, they will be very backward to see any evidence
of that which is strange to them, and which has always been reputed an
Absurdity. But my Scriptureevidence is not so proper for this place, I
intending to make it an Argument by it self. Therefore if the urger of this
objection, will but have a little patience till I come so far on the way of my
discourse, I hope he may be satisfied that Praeexistence is not such a stranger
to scripture as he conceits it.

CHAP. V. Reasons against Praeexistence answered. Our forgetting the former
state is no argument to disprove it: nor are the other Reasons that can be
produced, more conclusive. The proof of the possibility of Praeexistence were
enough, all other Hypotheses being absurd and contradictious. But it is proved
also by positive Arguments.
NOw therefore to proceed, let us look back upon our progress, and so enter on
what remains; we have seen, that God could have created all souls at first had
he so pleased, and that he has revealed nothing in his written Will to the
contrary. And now if it be found also, that he has not made it known to our
Reasons that 'twas not his will to do so, we may conclude this first
particular, That no one can say, that the Doctrine of Praeexistence is a
falshhood. Therefore let us call to Account the most momentous reasons that can
be laid against it, and we shall find that they all have not weight enough in
the least to move so rational and solid an opinion.

(1) Then, it is likely to be urged, that had we lived and acted in a former
state, we should doubtless have retained some remembrance of that condition;
But we having no memory of any thing backwards before our appearance upon this
present stage, it will be thought to be a considerable praesumption, that
Praeexistence is but a fancy.

But I would desire such kind of reasoners to tell me, how much they remember
of their state and condition in the womb, or of the Actions of their first
infancy. And I could wish they would consider, that not one passage in an
hundred is remembered of their grown and riper age. Nor does there scarce a
night pass but we dream of many things which our waking Memories can give us
no Account of; yea old age and some kinds of diseases blot out all the images
of things past, and even in this state cause a total oblivion. Now if the
Reasons why we should lose the remembrance of our former life be greater, then
are the causes of forgetfulness in the instances we have produced, I think it
will be clear, that this Argument has but little force against the opinion we
are inquiring into. Therefore if we do but reflect upon that long state of
silence and inactivity that we emerged from, when we came into these bodies;
and the vast change we under-went by our sinking into this new and unwonted
habitation, it will appear to the considerate, that there is greater reason why
we should have forgotten our former Life, then any thing in this. And if a
disease or old age can raze out the memory of past actions, even while we are
in one and the same condition of Life, certainly so long and deep a swoon as is
absolute insensibility and inertnesse, may much more reasonably be thought to
blot our the memory of an other Life, whose passages probably were nothing like
the transactions of this.

And this also might be given as an other Reason of our forgetting our former
state, since usually things are brought to our remembrance by some like
occurrences. But

(2) Some will argue, If this be a state of punishment for former misearriages
how comes it about then, that it is a better condition then that we last came
from viz. the state of silence and insensibility. I answer, That if we look
upon our present terrestrial condition an an effect of our defection from the
higher Life, and in reference to our former happiness lost by our own default,
it is then a misery, and a punishment. But if we compare our now-being with the
state of inactivity we were delivered from, It may then be called an After-Game
of the divine Goodness, and a Mercy. As a Malefactor, that is at first put
into a dark and disconsolate dungeon, and afterward is removed to a more
comfortable and lightsome prison, may acknowledge his remove to be a favor and
deliverance compared with the place he was last confined to; though with
respect to his fault and former liberty, even this condition is both a mulct
and a misery. It is just thus in the present case, and any one may make the
application.

But it will be said, (3) If our souls lived in a former state did they act in
bodies, or without them? The former they will say is absurd, and the latter
incongruous and unlikely; since then all the powers the soul has to exert in a
body, would have been idle and to no purpose. But (1) the most that can be
argued from such like objections, is, that we know not the manner of the thing;
and are no Arguments against the assertion it self. And were it granted that
the particular state of the soul before it came hither is inconceivable, yet
this makes no more against it, then it does against it is after-condition; which
these very objectors hold to be so, as to the particular modus. But (a) Why is
it so absurd that the soul should have actuated another kind of body, before it
came into this? Even here it is immediately united to a purer vehicle, moves and
acts the grosser body by it; And why then might it not in its former and purer
state of Life have been joined only to such a refined body, which should have
been suitable to its own perfection and purity? I Am sure, many, if not the
most of the Ancient Fathers thought Angels themselves to be embodyed, and
therefore they reputed not this such a gross absurdity. But an occasion
hereafter will draw our pen this way again, and therefore I pass it to a third
return to this objection.

(3) Therefore, though it were granted that the soul lived afore-times without
a body, what greater incongruity is there in such a supposition, then that it
should live and act after death without any union with matter or any body
whatsoever, as the objectors themselves conceive it does? But all such
objections as these will fly away as mists before the sun, when we shall come
particularly to state the Hypothesis. And therefore I may be excused from
further troubling my self and the Reader about them here. Especially since, as
has been intimated, they prove nothing at all, but that the objectors cannot
conceive what manner of state that of Praeexistence was, which is no prejudice
to the opinion it self; that our souls were extant before these earthly bodies.

Thus then I hope I have clearly enough made good that all souls might have
been created from the beginning; for ought any thing that is made known, either
in the Scriptures or our reasons to the contrary. And thereby have removed
those prejudices that would have stood in the way of our conclusion. Wherefore
we may now without control, from our proof of, That it may be so, pass on to
enquire, whether indeed it is so; and see, whether it may as well be asserted,
as defended.

And truly considering that both the other ways are impossible, and this third
not at all unreasonable, it may be thought needless to bring more forces into
the field to gain it the victory, after its enemies are quite scattered and
defeated. Yet however, for the pomp and triumph of truth, though it need not
their service we shall add some positive Arguments, whereby it may appear, that
not only all other ways are dangerous and unpassable, and this irreproveable;
but also that there is direct evidence enough to prove it solid and rational.
And I make my first consideration of this kind, a second Argument.

CHAP. VI. A second Argument for Praeexistence drawn from the consideration of
the Divine Goodness, which always does what is best.
(2) THen, whoever conceives rightly of God, apprehends him to be infinite and
immense Goodness, who is always shedding abroad of his own exuberant
fullness: There is no straightness in the Deity, no bounds to the ocean of
Love. Now the divine Goodness referrs not to himself, as ours extends not unto
him. He acts nothing for any self-accomplishment, being essentially and
absolutely complete and perfect. But the object and term of his goodness is
his creatures good and happiness, in their respective capacities. He is that
infinite fountain that is continually overflowing; and can no more cease to
shed his influences upon his indigent dependents then the sun to shine at noon.
Now as the infinite Goodness of the deity, obliges him always to do good, so
by the same reason to do that which is best; since to omit any degrees of good
would argue a defect in goodness, supposing wisdom to order, and power to
execute. He therefore that supposes God not always to do what is best, and
best for his Creatures (for he cannot act for his own Good) apprehends him to
be less good then can be conceived, and consequently not infinitely so. For
what is infinite, is beyond measure and apprehension.

Therefore to direct this to our purpose, God being infinitely good and that to
his Creatures, and therefore doing always what is best for them, methinks it
roundly follows that our souls lived and enjoyed themselves of old before they
came into these bodies. For since they were capable of living and that in a
much better and happier state long before they descended into this region of
death and misery; and since that condition of life and self-enjoyment would
have been better, then absolute not-being, may we not safely conclude from a
due consideration of the divine goodness, that it was so? What was it that
gave us our being, but the immense goodness of our Maker? And why were we
drawn out of our nothings but because it was better for us to be, then not to
be? Why were our souls put into these bodies, and not into some more squallid
and ugly; but because we are capable of such, and it is better for us to live in
these, then in those that are less suitable to our natures? And had it not been
better for us, to have enjoyed our selves and the bounty and favors of our
Maker of old, as did the other order of intellectual creatures; then to have
layn in the comfortless night of nothing till 'tother day! Had we not been
better on it to have lived and acted in the joyful regions of light and
blessedness with those spirits that at first had being, then just now to jump
into this sad plight, and state of sin and wretchedness.

Infinite Power could as well have made us all at once, as the Angels, and
with as good congruity to our natures we might have lived and been happy
without these bodies, as we shall be in the state of separation: since
therefore it was best for us, and as easy for our Creator so to have effected
it, where was the defect, if it was not (...) (...) not this to (...) his
goodness! and to straight-lace the divine beneficence. And does not the
contrary Hypothesis to what I am pleading for, represent the God of Love as
less good and bountiful, then a charitable mortal, who would neglect no
opportunity within his reach of doing what good he could to those that want his
help and assistance?

I confess, the world generally have such narrow and unbecomming apprehensions
of God, and draw his picture in their imaginations so like themselves, that few
I doubt will feel the force of this Argument; and mine own observation makes me
enter the same suspicion of its success that some others have who have used
it. It Is only a very deep sense of the divine goodness can give it any
persuasive energy. And this noble sentiment there are very few that are possessed
of. However to lend it what strength I can, I shall endeavor to remove some
prejudices that hinder it is force and efficacy; And when those spots and scum
are wiped away that mistake and inadvertency have fastened on it, 'twill be
illustrious by its own brightness.

CHAP. VII. This first Evasion, that God acts freely, and his mere will is
reason enough for his doing, or forbearing any thing, overthrown by four
Considerations. Some incident Evasions, viz. that Gods wisdom, or his glory,
may be contrary to this display of the divine goodness, in our being made of
old, clearly taken off.
(1) THerefore, will some say, God works freely, nor can he be obliged to act
but when he pleases. And this will and pleasure of his is the reason of our
beings, and of the determinate time of our beginning. Therefore if God would
not that we should have been made sooner, and in a better state of life, his
will is reason enough and we need look no further. To this evasion, I thus
Reply.

(1) It Is true indeed, God is the most Free Agent, because none can compel him
to act, none can hinder him from acting. Nor can his creatures oblige him to
any thing. But then

(2) The divine liberty and freedom consists not in his acting by mere
arbitrarious will as disujnct from his other Attributes. For he is said to act
according to the counsel of his own will. So that his wisdom and goodness are
as it were the Rules whereby his will is directed. Therefore though he cannot
be obliged to act by any thing without himself, yet he may by the Laws of his
own essential rectitude and perfection. Wherefore I conceive he is said, not to
be able to do those things (which he might well enough by absolute power) that
consist not with his ever blessed Attributes. Nor by the same reason can he
omit that which the eternal Law of his most perfect nature ob^geth him to. The
sum is, God never Acts by mere will or groundless humor, that is a
weakness in his imperfect creatures; but according to the immutable Rules of
his ever blessed essence. And therefore,

(3) It Is a derogation from his infinite Majesty to assert any thing contrary to
his Goodness upon pretense of his will and pleasure. For whatever is most
suitable to this most blessed Attribute, and contradicts no other, that be sure
he wills. Wherefore

(4) If it be better, and more agreeable to the divine goodness that we should
have been in an happier state, before we came into these bodies, Gods will
cannot then be pretended to the contrary, especially it having been proved
already, that he has no way revealed any such will of his) but rather it is
demonstratively clear that his will was, it should be so. Since as God never
acts in the absence of his wisdom and goodness, so neither does he abstain
from acting when those great Attributes require it.

Now if it be excepted again (2) That it is true that this Hypothesis is most
suitable to the divine goodness and the consideration of that alone would
infer it. But how know we but his Wisdom contradicts it. I return briefly,
That if it be confessed to be so correspondent to, and inferrible from one
Attribute, and cannot be proved inconsistent with another, my business is
determined. Therefore let those that pretend an inconsistence, prove it. (2)
The wisdom of God is that Attribute and essential perfection, whereby the
divine actions are directed to their end, which is always good, and best:
Therefore to do that which is best cannot thwart the divine wisdom, but
always includes and supposes it. Whence it follows, that what so comports
with goodness, cannot stand opposite to Wisdom. Wisdom in God being indeed
nothing else but goodness, contriving and directing for the creature's good
and happiness. For we must remember, what was said above, that what is
infinitely full and perfect, can have no ends for any self-advantage; and
therefore the ends of the divine wisdom are something without himself, and
consequently the good and perfection of his creatures. So that unless it can
be proved to have been contrary to ours, or any other creatures good, that we
should have been extant as soon as the Light, it cannot be concluded to have
any contradiction to the divine wisdom.

But it will be said again (3) Gods glory is his great end, for the promoting
of which his wisdom directs all his Actions; and consequently, that which may
be best for the creature, may not be so conducive to the divine Glory, and
therefore not agreeable with his wisdom.

Now though I think the world has a very mistaken apprehension of Gods glory,
yet I shall not here engage in more controversies, then I must needs. It Is
enough for my present purpose to intimate; That Gods glory is no by-end or
self-accumulation, nor an addition of any thing to Him which he was not
eternally possessed of; nor yet is it any thing that stands in opposition to the
good of his creation: But the display and communication of his excellencies;
among the which, his goodness is not the least considerable, if it be not that
most divine and fundamental Attribute which gives perfection to all the rest.
So that we may assure our selves, that when ever his goodness obliges him to
action, his glory never stands in opposition. For even this is his glory to
communicate to his creatures sutably to his own absolute fullness, and to act
according to the direction of his essential perfections, yea, though we should
state his glory to consist alone, in the honor and renown of his Attributes,
yet even then the Hypothesis of our having been made in the beginning will
accumulate to his praises, and represent him to his creatures as more
illustrious; since it is a more magnificent apprehension of his goodness, and
cleares his other Attributes from those stains of dis-repute that all other
suppositions cast upon them. And though his glory should consist, as too many
fondly imagine, in being praised and red by his creatures, even on this account
also it would have obliged him to have made us all of old, rather then opposed
it; since, then, his excellencies had been sung forth by a more numerous Quire,
in continual Hallelujahs. Now if it should be urged, that God made all things
for himself, and therefore is not obliged to consult the good of his creatures
in all his Actions. I rejoin, that God's making all things for himself, can
argue no more then his making all things for his own ends, viz. the ends of
goodness. Besides, the best Critics make that place to speak no more but
this, That God orders all things according to himself; that is, according to
the rules of his own nature and perfections.

Thus then we see that for God to do that which is best for his creatures, is
neither contrary to his will and pleasure, his wisdom, nor his glory, but most
consonant to all of them. And therefore since the Praeexistence of Souls, is so
agreeable to the divine goodness, and since nothing else in the Deity
opposes, but rather sweetly conspires with it, methinks this argument were
enough to conclude it. But yet there are other Ev^sions which would elude this
Demonstration, I shall name the most considerable and leave it to the judicious
to determine, whether they can disable it.

CHAP. VIII. A second general evasion, viz that our Reasons cannot tell what God
should do, or what is best, overthrown by several considerations. As is also a
third, viz. that by the same Argument God would have been obliged to have made
us impeccable, and not liable to Misery.
WHerefore the second general evasion is, That our Reasons cannot conclude what
God (...), there being vast fetches in the divine wisdom which we comprehend
not, nor can our natural light determine what is best. I answer (1) Our Savior
himself, who was the best Judge in the case, teaches us, that the Reason of a
man may in some things conclude what God will do in that saying of his, If ye
being evil, know how to give good things to your Children, much more shall
your Father which is in Heaven give his Spirit to them that ask him. Plainly
intimating, that we may securely argue from any thing that is a perfection in
our selves, to the same in God. And if we, who are imperfectly good, will yet
do as much good as we can, for those we love and tender; with greater
confidence may we conclude, that God who is infinitely so, will confer upon
his creatures whatever good they are capable of. Thus we see our Savior ownes
the capacity of reason in a case that is very near the same that we are dealing
in.

And God himself appeals to the reasons of men to judge of the righteousness
and equity of his ways. Ye men of Israel and inhabitants of Jerusalem, judge
between me and my vineyard, which place I bring to show that mere natural
reason is able to judge in some cases what is fit for God to do, and what is
suitable to his essence and perfections. And if in any,

Methinks (2) its capacity in the case before us should be owned as soon as in
any. For if reason cannot determine and assure us, that a blessed and happy
Being is better then None at all; and consequently, that it was best for our
souls to have been, before they were in this state of wretchedness; and thence
conclude, that it was very congruous to the divine goodness to have made us in
a former and better condition; I think then (1) That it cannot give us the
assurance of any thing, since there is not any principle in metaphysics or
geometry more clear then this, viz. (...) an happy Being, is better than
absolute Not-being. And if our reasons can securely determine this, it is as
much as we need at present. Or if this be not certain, how vain are those
Learned men that dispute whether a state of the extremest misery a creature is
capable of, and that everlasting, be not better then Nonentity. (2) If we
cannot certainly know that it had been Better that we should have exsisted in a
life of happiness, proportioned to our natures of old, then have been mere
nothing, till some few years since; we can never then own or acknowledge the
divine goodness to us in any thing we enjoy. For if it might have been as good
for us not to Be, as to Be, and happily; Then it might have been as good for
us to have wanted any thing else that we enjoy, as to have it: and
consequently, we cannot own it as an effect of God's goodness that he has
bestowed any blessing on us. For if Being be not better, then Not-being, then
it is no effect of goodness that we are; and if so, then it is not from
goodness that we have any thing else, since all other things are inferior to
the good of Being. If it be said, It had been better indeed for us, to have
lived in a former and happier state; but, it may be, it had not been so for the
universe; and the general good is to be preferred before that of particulars.

I say then, and it may serve for a (3) answer to the general objection. If we
may deny that to be done by almighty goodness, which is undoubtedly best for a
whole species of his creatures, merely on this account, that, for ought we
know, it may be for the advantage of some others, though there be not the least
appearance of any such matter; we can never then argue any thing from the
divine goodness. It can never then be proved from that glorious Attribute, that
he has not made some of his creatures on purpose that they might be miserable;
nor can it be concluded thence, that he will not annihilate all the pure and
spotless angels; both which I suppose, any sober inquirer will think
congruously deducible from the divine goodness. And if to say, for ought we
know, It may be best for some other creatures, that those should be miserable,
and these annihilated, be enough to disable the Argument; on the same account
we shall never be able to prove ought from this, or any other Attribute. I
might add,

(2) There is not the least colorable pretense for any such suspicion. For,
would the world have been too little to have contained those souls, without
justling with some others? or, would they by violence have taken any of the
privileges of the other intellectual creatures from them? If so, how comes it
about that at last they can all so well consist together? And, could other
creatures have been more disadvantag'd by them, when they were pure and
innocent, then they will at last, when they are so many of them debauched and
depraved?

(3) If this be enough to answer an Argument, to say, for ought we know, it may
be thus and thus, when there is not the least sign or appearance of any such
thing, then nothing can ever be proved, and we are condemned to everlasting
Skepticism. We should never for instance, from the order, beauty, and wise
contrivance of the things that do appear, prove there is a God, if it were
sufficient to answer, That things are indeed so made in this earth, on which we
are extant; but, it may be, they are framed very odly, ridiculously, and
ineptly in some other worlds, which we know nothing of. If this be answering,
any thing might be answered. But there is yet another objection against mine
Argument from the divine goodness which looks very formidably at a distance,
though when we come near it, we shall find, it will not bear the trial. And it
may thus be urged.

(3) If the goodness of God always obliges him to do what is best, and best
for his Creatures, How is it then, that we were not made impeccable, and so not
obnoxious to misery? Or how does it consist with that overflowing goodness of
the Deity, that we were let to lie in a long state of silence and
insensibility, before we came into these bodies? This seems a pressing
difficulty, but yet there is hopes we may dispatch it. Therefore,

(1) Had we been made impeccable, we should have been another kind of creatures
then now; since we had then wanted the (...) or liberty of will to good and
evil, which is one of our essential Attributes. Consequently, there would have
been one species of beings wanting to complete the universe; and it would have
been a slurre to the divine goodness not to have given being to such creatures
as in the id^ were fairly possible; and contradicted no other Attribute. Yea,
though he foresaw that some would sin, and make themselves miserable, yet the
foreseen lapse and misery of those, was not an evil great enough to
overbalance the good the species would reap by being partakers of the divine
goodness in the land of the living; Therefore however, 'twas goodness to give
such creatures being. But it will be urged upon us, If Liberty to good and evil
be so essential to our natures, what think we then of the blessed souls after
the resurrection; are not they the same creatures, though without the liberty
of sinning? To return to this; I think those that affirm, that, the blessed
have not this natural liberty as long as they are united to a body, and are
capable of resenting it is pleasures, should do well to prove it. Indeed they
may be morally immutable and illapsable: but this is grace, not nature; a
reward of obedience, not a necessary annex of our Beings. But will it be said,
why did not the divine goodness endue us all with this moral stability? Had
it not been better for us to have been made in this condition of security, then
in a state so dangerous? My return to this doubt will be a second Answer to the
main objection.

Therefore Secondly, I doubt not, but that it is much better for rational
creatures, that this supreme happiness should be the Reward of virtue, rather
then (...) upon our natures. For, the procurement of that which we might have
mist of, is far more sensibly gratifying, then any necessary and unacquired
enjoyment; we find a greater pleasure in what we gain by industry, art, or
virtue, then in the things we were born to. And had we been made secure from
sin, and misery from the first moment of our Being, we should not have put so
high a rate and value upon that privilege.

(3) Had we been at first established in an impossibility of lapsing into evil;
Then many choice vertu's, excellent branches of the divine Life had never been
exercised, or indeed have been at all. Such are Patience, Faith, and Hope; the
objects of which are, evil, futurity, and uncertainly. Yea,

(4) Had we been so fixed in an inamissible happiness from the beginning, there
had then been no virtue in the world; nor any of that matchless pleasure which
attends the exercise thereof. For virtue is a kind of victory, and supposes a
conflict. Therefore we say, that God is good and holy, but not virtuous. Take
away a possibility of evil, and in the creature there is no moral goodness.
And then no reward, no pleasure, no happiness.

Therefore in sum (5ly), The divine goodness is manifested in making all
creatures sutably to those Id^as of their natures, which he has in his
All-comprehensive Wisdom. And their good and happiness consists in acting
according to those natures, and in being furnished with all things necessary for
such actions. Now the divine Wisdom is no arhitrary thing, that can change, or
alter those settled immutable idaea's of things that are there represented. It
lopps not off essential Attributes of some beings, to inoculate them upon
others: But, distinctly comprehending all things, assigns each Being it is
proper nature, and qualities. And the Divine goodness, according to the wise
direction of the eternal intellect, in like distinct and orderly manner
produces all things: viz. according to all the variety of their respective
ideaas in the divine wisdom. Wherefore as the goodness of God obliges him not
to make every planet a (...) star, or every star, a sun; So neither does it
oblige him to make every degree of life, a rational soul, or every soul, an
impeccable Angel. For this were to tie him to contradictions. Since therefore,
such an order of Beings, as rational and happy, though free, and therefore
mutable, creatures, were distinctly comprehended in the divine Wisdom; It was
an effect of God's Goodness, to bring them into being, even in such a
condition, and in such manner, as in their eternal idaeas they were represented.

Thus then we see, it is not contrary to the infinite plenitude of the divine
goodness that we should have been made peccable and liable to defection. And
being thus in our very essential constitutions lapsable; 'twas no defect in the
goodness of our Maker that he did not interpose by his absolute omnipotence to
prevent our actual praevarication and Apostasy. Since his goodness obliges
him not to secure us upon any terms whatever, but upon such, as may most
promote the general good and advantage. And questionless, 'twas much better
that such, as would wilfully depart from the laws of their blessed natures, and
break through all restraints of the divine commands, should feel the smart of
their disobedience; then that providence should disorder the constitution of
nature to prevent the punishment, which they drew upon themselves: Since those
apostate spirits, remain instances to those that stand, of the divine justice,
and severity against sinners, and so may contribute not a little to their
Security. And for that long night of silence, in which multitudes of souls are
buried before they descend into terrestrial matter, it is but the due reward of
their former disobedience; for which, considering the happy circumstances in
which they were made, they deserved to be nothing for ever. And their
re-instating in a condition of life and self-injoyment after so highly culpable
delinguencies, is a great instance of the overflowing fullness of the divine
compassion and benignity.

Thus then we see, That Gods making us lapsable and permitting us to fall, is
no prejudice in the least to the infinite faecundity of his goodness, and his
making all things best. So that mine Argument for Praeexistence bottomn'd on
this Foundation, stands yet firm and immovable, notwithstanding the rude
assault of this objection. From which I pass to a fourth.

CHAP. IX. A (4th) Objection against the Argument from God's goodness viz. That
it will conclude as well that the World is infinite and eternal, Answered. The
conclusion of the second Argument for Praeexistence.
THerefore fourthly, it will be excepted, If we may argue from the divine
goodness, which always does what is best, for the Praeexistence of Souls; then
we may as reasonably thence conclude, that the world is both infinite and
eternal, since an infinite communication of goodness is better then a Finite.
To this, because I doubt I have distressed the Readers patience already, I answer
briefly.

(1) Every one that believes the infiniteness of Gods goodness is as much
obliged to answer this objection, as I am. For it will be said, infinite
goodness does good infinitely, and consequently the effects to which it does
communicate are infinite. For if they are not so, it might have communicated to
more, and thereby have done more good then now it is supposed to do, and by
consequence now is not infinite. And to affirm that goodness is infinite,
where what it does and intends to do is but finite, will be said to be a
contradiction, since goodness is a relative term, and in God always respects
somewhat ad extra. For he cannot be said to be good to himself, he being a
nature that can receive no additional perfection. Wherefore this Objection
makes no more against mine Argument, then it does against the infinity of the
divine goodness, and therefore I am no more concerned in it then others. Yea
(2ly.) the Scripture affirms that which is the very strength of mine Argument,
viz. That God made all things best; Very Good, says our Translation: but the
Original, (...); and (...) is a particle of the Superlative. And therefore
every one that owns it is sacred Authority is interested against this objection.
For it urges, it had been far more splendid, glorious, and magnificent for God
to have made the universe commensurate to his own immensity; and to have
produced effects of his power and greatness, where ever he himself is, viz. in
infinite space and duration, then to have confined his omnipotence to work only
in one little spot of an infinite (...) capacity, and to begin to act but
'tother day. Thus then the late creation, and finiteness, of the world, seem to
conflict with the undoubted oracle of truth as well as with mine Argument,
meant, and therefore the objection drawn thence is of no validity. (3) Those
that have most strenuously defended the orthodox doctrine against the old
opinion of the eternity and infinity of the world, have asserted it to be
impossible in the nature of the thing. And sure the Divine benignity obliges
him not to do contradictions; or such things, as in the very notion of them,
are impossible. But in the case of Praeexistence, no such thing can be
reasonably pretended, as above has been declared; and therefore there is no
escaping by this Evasion neither. Nor can there any thing else be urged to this
purpose, but what whoever believes the infinity of the divine bounty will be
concerned to answer; And therefore 'twill make no more against me, then against
a truth on all hands confessed. Let me only add this, That it is more becoming
us, to enlarge our apprehensions of things so, as that they may suit the Divine
Beneficence, then to draw it down to a compliance with our narrow schemes, and
narrow modells.

Thus then I have done with the Argument for Praeexistence drawn from the
Divine goodness. And I have been the longer on it, because I thought 'twas in
vain to propose it, without taking to task the principal of those objections,
that must needs arise in the minds of those that are not used to this way of
arguing. And while there was no provision made to stop up those Evasions, that
I saw this Argument obnoxious to; the using of it, I was afraid, would have
been a prejudice, rather then a furtherance of the cause I engaged it in. And
therefore I hope the ingenious will pardon this so necessary piece of
tediousness.

CHAP. X. A third Argument for Praeexistence, from the great variety of men's
speculative inclinations; and also the diversity of our Genius's, copiously
urged. If these Arguments make Praeexistence but probable, it is enough to gain
it the victory.
BUt now I proceed to another Argument. Therefore, Thirdly, If we do but
reflect upon what was said above, against the souls daily Creation, from that
enormous pravity which is so deeply rooted in some men's natures, we may thence
have a considerable evidence of Praeexistence. For as this strong natural
propensity to vice and impiety cannot possibly consist with the Hypothesis of
the souls coming just out of Gods hands pure and immaculate; so does it most
aptly suit with the doctrine of its praeexistence: which gives a most clear and
apposite account of the phenomenon. For let us but conceive the souls of men
to have grown degenerate in a former condition of life, to have contracted
strong and inveterate habits to vice and Iewdnesse, and that in various manners
and degrees; we may then easily apprehend, when some men's natures had so
incredibly a depraved tincture, and such impetuous, ungovernable,
irreclaimiable inclinations to what is vicious; while others have nothing near
such wretched propensions, but by good education and good discipline are
mouldable to virtue. This shows a clear way to unriddle this amazing mystery,
without ^lemishing any of the divine Attributes, or doing the least violence to
our faculties.

Nor is it more difficult to conceive, how a soul should awaken out of the
state of inactivity we speak of, with those radical inclinations that by long
practice it had contracted, then how a Swallow should return to her old trade
of living after her winter sleep and silence; for those customs it has been
addicted to in the other state, are now so deeply fastened and rooted in the
soul, that they are become even another nature.

Now then, if Praeexistence be not the truth, it is very strange that it should
so exactly answer the Phenomenon of our natures, when as no other Hypothesis
does any whit tolerably suit them. And if we may conclude that false, which is
so correspondent to all appearances, when we know nothing else that can yield
any probable account of them, and which is not in the least repugnant to any
inducement of belief, we then strangely forget our selves when we determine any
thing. We can never for instance, conclude the Moon to be the cause of the flux
and reflux of the Sea, from the answering of her approaches and recesses to its
ebbs and swellings. Nor at this rate can the cause of any thing else be
determined in nature.

But yet besides. (2) we might another way enforce this Argument, from the
strange difference and diversity that there is in men's wits and intellectual
craseis, as well as in the dispositions of their wills and appetites. Even the
natural tempers of men's minds are as vastly different, as the qualities of
their bodies. And it is easy to observe in things purely speculative and
intellectual, even where neither education or custom have interposed to
sophisticate the natural (...) that some men are strangely propense to some
opinions, which they greedily drink in, as soon as they are duly represented;
yea and find themselves burdened and oppressed, while their education has kept
them in a contrary belief: when as others are as fatally set against these
opinions, and can never be brought favorably to resent them.

Every soul brings a kind of sense with it into the world, whereby it tastes
and relisheth what is suitable to its peculiar temper. And notions will never
lie easily in a mind, that they are not fitted to; some can never apprehend
that for other then an Absurdity, which others are so clear in, that they
almost take it for a First principle. And yet the former has all the same
evidence as the latter. This I have remarkably taken notice of, in the opinion
of the extension of a spirit. Some that I know, and those inquisi^ve, free and
ingenuous, by all the proof and evidence that is, cannot be reconciled to it.
Nor can they conceive any thing extended but as a Body. Whereas other deep and
impartial searchers into nature, cannot apprehend it anything at all, if not
extended; but think it must then be a mathematical point, or a mere nonentity.

I could instance in other speculations, which I have observed some to be
passionate Embracers of upon the first proposal; when as no arguments could
prevail on others, to think them tolerable. But there needs no proof of a
manifest observation.

Therefore before I go further, I would demand, whence comes this mere
notional or speculative variety: were this difference about sensibles, yea or
about things depending on the imagination, the influence of the body might then
be suspected for a cause. But since it is in the most abstracted Theories that
have nothing to do with the grosser phantasmes; since this diversity is found
in minds that have the greatest care to free themselves from the deceptions of
sense, and intanglements of the body, what can we conclude, but that the soul
it self is the immediate subject of all this variety, and that it came
praejudiced and prepossest into this body with some implicit notions that it
had learnt in another? And if this congruity to some opinions, and aversene^e
to others be congenial to us, and not advenient from any thing in this state,
it is me thinks clear that we were in a former. For the soul in its first and
pure nature has no idiosynerasies, that is, has no proper natural
inclinations which are not competent to others of the same kind and condition.
Be sure, they are not fatally determined by their natures to false and
erroneous apprehensions. And therefore since we find this determination to one
or other falsehood in many, if not most in this state, and since it is very
unlikely it is derived only from the body, custom, or education, what can we
conceive on it, but that our souls were tainted with these peculiar and wrong
corruptions before we were extant upon this stage of Earth.

Besides, it is easy to observe the strange and wonderful variety of our
geniusses; one man's nature inclining him to one kind of study and employment,
another to what is very different. Some almost from their very cradles will be
addicted to the making of figures, And in little mechanical contrivances;
others love to be riming, almost as soon as they can speak plainly, and are
taken up in small essays of Poetry. Some will be scrawling pictures, and others
take as great delight in some pretty offers at Music and vocal harmony.
Infinite almost are the ways in which this pure natural diversity does discover
it self. Now to say that all this variety proceeds primarily from the mere
temper of our bodies, is me thinks a very poor and unsatisfying Account. For
those that are the most like in the temperayr, complexion of their bodies, are
yet of a vastly differing Genius. Yea they that havebeen made of the same clay,
cast in the same mould, and have layn at once in the same natural bed, the
womb; yea whose bodies have been as like as their state and fortunes, and their
education and usages the same, yet even they do not unfrequently differ as much
from each other in their genius and dispositions of the mind, as those that in
all these particulars are of very different condition. Besides there are all
kind of makes, forms, dispositions, tempers, and complexions of body, that are
addicted by their natures to the same exercises and employments: so that to
ascribe this to any peculiarity in the Body, is me seems a very improbable
solution of the Phenomenon. And to say all these inclinations are from custom
or education, is the way not to be believed, since all experience testifies the
contrary.

What then can we conjecture is the cause of all this diversity, but that we
had taken a great delight and pleasure in some things like and analogous
unto'these, in a former condition? which now again begins to put forth it
self, when we are awakened out of our silent recess into a state of action.
And though the employments, pleasures and exercises of our former life, were
without question very different from these in the present estate; yet it is no
doubt, but that some of them were more confamiliar and analogous to some of our
transactions, than others, so that as any exercise or employment here is more
suitable to the particular dispositions that were praedominant in the other
state, with the more peculiar kindness is it regarded by us, and the more
greedily do our inclinations now fasten on it. Thus if a Musician should be
interdicted the use of all musical instruments, and yet might have his choice
of any other Art or profession, it is likely he would betake himself to Limning
or Poetry; these exercises requiring the same disposition of wit and genius, as
his beloved Music did. And we in like manner, being by the fate of our
wretched descent hindered from the direct exercising our selves about the
objects of our former delights and pleasures, do yet as soon as we are able,
take to those things which do most correspond to that genius that formerly
inspired us.

And now it is time to take leave of the Arguments from Reason that give
evidence for Praeexistence. If any one think that they are not so
Demonstrative, but that they may be answered, or at least evaded; I pray him to
consider how many demonstrations he ever met with, that a good wit, resolved in
a contrary cause, could not shuffle from the edge of. Or, let it be granted,
that the Arguments I have alleged are no infallible or necessary proofs; yet
if they render my cause but probable, yea but possible, I have won what I
contended for. For it having been made manifest by as good evidence as I think
can be brought for any thing, that the way of new creations is most
inconsistent with the honor of the blessed Attributes of God: And that the
other of Traduction is most impossible and contradictious in the nature of
things: There being now no other way left but Praeexstence, if that be probable
or but barely possible, it is enough to give it the victory. And whether all
that has been said prove so much or no, I leave to the indifferent to
determine. I think he that will say it does not, can bring few proofs for any
thing, which according to his way of judging will deserve to be called
Demonstrations.

CHAP. XI. Great caution to be used in alleging scripture for our speculative
opinions. The countenance that Praeexistence has from the sacred writings both
of the old and new Testament; Reasons of the seeming uncouthnesse of these
allegations. Praeexistence stood in no need of Scripture Proof.
IT will be next expected, that I should now prove the Doctrine I have
undertaken for, by Scripture evidence, and make good what I said above, That
the divine oracles are not so silent in this matter as is imagined. But truly I
have so tender a sense of the sacred Authority of that Holy volume, that I dare
not be so bold with it, as to force it to speak what I think it intends not; A
praesumption, that is too common among our confident opinionists, and that has
ocsion'd great troubles to the Church, and disrepute to the inspired writings.
For, for men to ascribe the odd notions of their overheated imaginations to
the spirit of God, and eternal truth, is me thinks a very bold and impudent
belying it. Wherefore I dare not but be very cautious what I speak in this
matter, nor would I willingly urge Scripture as a proof of any thing, but what
I am sure by the whole tenor of it, is therein contained: And would I take the
liberty to fetch in every thing for a Scripture-evidence, that with a little
industry a man might make serviceable to his design: I doubt not but I should
be able to fill my Margent with Quotations, which should be as much to purpose
as have been cited in general CATECHISMS and CONFESSIONS of FAITH, and that in
points that must forsooth be dignified with the sacred title of FUNDAMENTAL.
But Reverend ASSEMBLIES may make more bold with Scripture then private persons;
And therefore I confess I Am so timorous that I durst not follow their
example: Though in a matter that I would never have imposed upon the belief of
any man, though I were certain on it, and had absolute power to enjoin it. I
think the only way to preserve the reverence due to the oracles of Truth, is
never to urge their Authority but in things very momentous, and such as the
whole current of them gives an evident suffrage to. But to make them speak
every trivial conceit that our sick brains can imagine or dream of, (as I
intimated) is to vilisie and deflowre them. Therefore though I think that
several Texts of Scripture look very fairly upon Praeexistence, and would
encourage a man that considers what strong Reasons it has to back it, to
think, that very probably they mean some thing in savor of this Hypothesis;
yet He not urge them as an irrefutable proof, being not willing to lay more
stresse upon any thing then 'twil bear. Yea I am most willing to confess the
weakness of my Cause in what joint soever I shall discover it. And yet I must
needs say, that who ever compares the Texts that follow, with some particulars
mentioned in the answer to the objection of Scripturesilence, will not choose
but acknowledge that there is very fair probability for Praeexistence in the
written word of God, as there is in that which is engraven upon our rational
natures. Therefore to bring together here what Scripture says in this matter,

1. ^e lightly touch an expression or two of the old Testament, which not
improperly may be applied to the business we are in search of. And me thinks
God himself in his posing the great instance of patience, Job, seems to
intimate somewhat to this purpose, viz. that all spirits were in being when the
Foundations of the earth were laid: when says he, the morning stars sang
together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy. By the former very likely
were meant the Angels, and it is not improbable but by the latter may be
intended the blessed untainted souls. At least the particle All me thinks
should comprize this order of spirits also. And within the same period of
discourse, having questioned Job about the nature and place of the Light, he
Adds, I know that thou wast then born, for the number of thy days are many, as
the Septuagint render it. And we know our Savior and his Apostles have given
credit to that Translation by their so constant following it. Nor does that
saying of God to Jeremias in the beginnning of his charge seem to intimate
less, Before I formed thee in the belly I knew thee, and before thou came
out of the womb, I gave thee wisdom; as reads a very creditable version. Now
though each of these places might be drawn to another sense, yet that only
argues that they are no necessary proof for Praeexistence, which I readily
acknowledge; nor do I intend any such matter by alleging them. However I hope
they will be confessed to be applicable to this sense; and if there be other
grounds that persuade this Hypothesis to be the truth, it is I think very
probable that these Texts intend it favor. which whether it be so or no, we
have seen already.

2. For the Texts of the New Testament that seem to look pleasingly upon
Praeexistence, I shall as briefly hint them as I did the former. And me thinks
that passage of our Saviors prayer, Father, Glorify me with the same glory I
had with thee before the world began, sounds somewhat to this purpose.

The glory which he prays to be restored to, seems to concern his humane nature
only; for the divine could never lose it. And therefore it supposes that he
was in his humanity existent before: And that his soul was of old before his
appearance in a Terrestial body. Which seems also to be intimated by the
expressions of his coming from the Father, descending from Heaven, and
returning thither again, which he very frequently makes use of. And we know the
Divinity that fills all things, cannot move to, or quit a place, it being a
manifest imperfection, and contray to his Immensity.

I might add those other expressions of our Savior's taking upon him the form
of a servant, of rich for our sakes becoming poor, and many others of like
import, all which are very clear if we admit the doctrine of Praeexistence, but
without it somewhat perplex and intricate: since these things, applied to him
as God, are very improper and disagreeing, but appositely suit his Humanity, to
which if we refer them, we must suppose our Hypothesis of Praeexistence. But I
omit further prosecution of this matter, since these places have bin more
diffusely urged in a late discourse to this purpose.

Moreover the Question of the Disciples, Was it for this man's sin, or for his
Fathers that he was born blind? and that answer of theirs to our Saviors
demand, whom men said he was; in that some said he was John the Baptist, some
Elias, or one of the Prophets; both which I have mentioned before; do clearly
enough argue, that both the Disciples and the Jews believed Praeexistence. And
our Savior says not a word to disprove their opinion. But I spoke of this
above.

Now how ever uncouth these allegations may seem to those that never heard
these Scriptures thus interpreted; yet I am confident, had the opinion of
Praeexistence been a received Doctrine, and had these Texts been wont to be
applied to the proof on it, they would then have been thought to assert it, with
clear and convictive evidence. But many having never heard of this Hypothesis,
and those that have, seldom meeting it mentioned but as a silly dream o^
antiquated absurdity, it is no wonder that they never suspect it to be lodged in
the Sacred volumne, so that any attempt to confirm it thence, must needs seem
rather an offer of wit then serious judgment. And the places that are cited to
that purpose having been freequently read and heard of, by those that never
discerned them to breath the least air of any such matter as Praexistence,
their new and unexpected application to a thing so little thought of, must needs
seem a wild fetch of an extravagant imagination. But however unconclusive the
Texts alleged may seem to those a strong prejudice has shut up against the
Hypothesis; The learned Jews, who where persuaded of this Doctrine, thought it
clearly enough contained in the Old Volume of holy writ, and took the
citations, named above, for current Evidence. And though I cannot Warrant for
their Judgment in things, yet doubtless they were the best judges of their
own Language. Nor would our School-Doctors have thought it so much a stranger
to the New, had it had the luck to have been one of their opinions, or did they
not too frequently apply the sacred Oracles to their own fore-conceived notions.

But whether what I have brought from Scripture prove any thing or nothing,
it is not very material, since the Hypothesis of Praeexistence stands secure
enough upon those Pillars of Reason, which have their Foundation in the
Attributes of God, and the Phenomenon of the world. And the Right Reason of a
Man, is one of the Divine volums, in which are written the indeleble Ideas of
eternal Truth: so that what it dictates, is as much the voice of God, as if in
so many words it were clearly expressed in the written Revelations. It is enough
therefore for my purpose, if there be nothing in the sacred writings contrary
to this Hypothesis; which I think is made clear enough already; And though it
be granted that Scripture is absolutely silent as to any assertion of
Praeexistence, yet we have made it appear that its having said nothing of it,
is no prejudice, but an advantage to the cause.

CHAP. XII. Why the Author thinks himself obliged to descend to some more
particular Account of Praeexistence. It Is presumption positively to determine
how it was with us of old. The Authors design in the Hypothesis that follows.
NOw because inability to apprehend the manner of a Thing is a great prejudice
against the belief on it; I find my self obliged to go a little further then
the bare proof, and defense of Praeexistence. For though what I have said, may
possibly induce some to think favorably of our conclusion, That The souls of
men were made before they came into these bodies; yet whil they shall think that
nothing can be conceived of that former state, And that our Praeexistent
condition cannot be represented to Humane understanding, but as a dark black
solitude: it must needs weaken the persuasion of those that are less
confirmed, and fill the minds of the inquisitive with a dubious trouble and
Anxiety. For searching and contemplative Heads cannot be satisfied to be told,
That our souls have lived and acted in a former condition, except they can be
helped to some more particular apprehension of that stare; How we lived and
acted of old, and how probably we fell from that better life, into this Region
of misery and imperfection.

Now though indeed my charity would prompt me to do what I can for the relief
and ease of auy modest inquirer; yet shall I not attempt to satisfy punctual
and eager curiosity in things hidden and unsearchable. Much less shall I
positively determine any thing in matters so Lubricous and uncertain. And
indeed considering how imperfect our now state is, how miserable shallow our
understandings are, and how little we know of our present selves, and the
things about us, it may seem a desperate undertaking to attempt any thing in
this matter. Yea, when we contemplate the vast circuits of the Divine wisdom,
and think how much the thoughts and actions of Aeternity and omniscience are
beyond ours, who are but of Yesterday, and know nothing, it must needs
discourage Confidence it self from determining, how the Economy of the world
of life was ordered, in the day the Heavens and Earth were framed. There are
doubtless infinite ways and methods according to which the unsearchable wisdom
of our Maker could have disposed of us, which we can have no conceit of; And we
are little more capable of unerringly resolving our selves now, how it was with
us of old, then a child in the womb is to determine, what kind of life it shall
live when it is set at liberty from that dark enclosure. Therefore let shame
and blushing cover his face that shall confidently affirm that 'twas thus or
thus with us in the state of our Fore-Beings.

However, to show that it may have been that our Souls did Praeexist, though we
cannot punctually and certainly conclude upon the Particular State, I shall
presume to draw up a conceivable Scheame of the Hypothesis; And if our narrow
minds can think of a way how it might have been, I hope no body will deny that
the divine wisdom could have contrived it so, or infinitely better than we can
imagine in our little modells.

And now I would not have it thought that I go about to insinuate or represent
any opinions of mine own, or that I am a votary to all the notions I make use
of, whether of the Ancient, or more modern Philosophers. For I seriously
profess against all determinations in this kind. But my business only is, by
some imperfect hints and guesses to help to apprehend a little how the state of
Praeexistence might have been, and so to let in some beams of ancient and
modern light upon this immense darkness. Therefore let the Reader if he please
call it a Romantic scheam, or imaginary Hypothesis, or what name else best
fits his fancy, and he will not offend me; Nor do I hold my self concerned at
all to vindicate the truth of any thing here that is the fruit of mine own
invention or composure; Though I confess I could beg civilityes at least for
the notions I have borrowed from great and worthy Sages. And indeed the
Hypothesis as to the main, is derived to us from the platoni^s: though in their
writings it is but Gold in Oar, less pure and perfect: But a late great Artist
has excellently refined it. And I have not much work to do, but to bring
together what he up and down has scattered, and by a method-order, and some
connexions and notions of mine own, to work it into an entire and uniforme mass.

Now because the Frame of the particular Hypothesis is originally
Philosophical, I shall therefore not deprave it by mingling with it the
opinions of modern Theologers, or distort any thing to make it accommodate to
their dogmata, but solely and sincerely follow the light of Reason and
Philosophy. For I intend not to endeavor the late alteration of the ordinary
systeme of Divinity, nor design any thing in this place but a representation
of some harmless philosophical conjectures: In which I shall continually guide
my self by the Attributes of God, the Phenomenon of the world, and the best
discoveryes of the nature of the Soul.

CHAP. XIII. [7] Pillars on which the particular Hypothesis stands.
NOw the Fabric we are going to build, will stand like as the House of wisdom
upon seven Pillars; which I shall first crect and establish, that the
Hypothesis may be firm and sure like a House that has Foundations. Therefore
the first Fundamental Principle I shall lay, is

[1] All the Divine designs and Actions are laid and carried on by pure and
Infinite Goodness.
And methinks this should be owned by all for a manifest and indisputable
Truth; But some odd opinions in the world are an interest against it, and
therefore I must be fain to prove it. Briefly then, Every rational being Acts
toward scme end or other; That end where the Agent Acts regularly and wisely,
is either some self-Good or accomplishment, or it is the good and perfection of
some thing else, at least in the intention. Now God being an absolute and
immense fullness, that is incapable of any the least shadow of new perfection,
cannot act for any good that may accrue to his immutable self; and
consequently, what ever he acts, is for the good of some other being: so that
all the divine actions are the communications of his perfections, and the
Issues of his Goodness; which, being without the base alloy of self-interest,
or partial fondness, and not comprised within any bounds or limits, as his
other perfections are not, but far beyond our narrow conception, we may well
call it pure and Insinite benignity. This is the original and Root of all
things, so that this blessed ever blessed Attribute being the Spring and
Fountain of all the Actions of the Deity, his designs can be no other but the
contrivances of Love for the compassing the good and perfection of the
universe. Therefore to suppose God to act or design any thing that is not for
the good or his creatures, is either to fancy him to act for no end at all, or
for an end that is contrary to his benign Nature. Finally therefore, the very
notion of Infinite fullness is to be communicating and overflowing; And the most
congruous apprehension that we can entertain of the Infinite and eternal Deity,
is to conceive him as an immense and all glorious Sun, that is continually
communicating and sending abroad its beams and brightness; which conception of
our Maker, if 'twere deeply imprinted on us, would I am confident set our
apprehensions right in many Theoryes, and chase away those black and dismal
notions which too many have given harbor to. But I come to erect the second
Pillar.

[2] Then, There is an exact Geometrical justice that runs through the
universe, and is interwoven in the contexture of things.
THis is a result of that wise and Almighty Goodness that praesides over all
things. For this Justice is but the distributing to every thing according to
the requirements of its nature. And that benign wisdom that contrived and
framed the natures of all beings, doubtless so provided that they should be
suitably furnished with all things proper for their respective conditions.

And that this Nemesis should be twisted into the very natural coustitutions of
things themselves, is methinks very reasonable; since questionless, Almighty
wisdom could so perfectly have formed his works at first, as that all things
that he saw were regular, just, and for the good of the universe, should have
been brought about by those stated Laws, which we call nature; without an
ordinary engagement of absolute power to effect them. And it seems to me to be
very becoming the wise Author of all things so to have made them in the
beginning, as that by their own internal spring and wheels, they should orderly
bring about what ever he intended them for, without his often immediaie
interposal. For this looks like a more magnificient apprehension of the Divine
power and Praeexistence, since it supposes him from everlasting ages to have
foreseen all future occurrences, and so wonderfully to have seen and
constituted the great machina of the world that the infinite variety of motions
therein, should effect nothing but what in his eternal wisdom he had concluded
fit and decorous: But as for that which was so, it should as certainly be
compast by the Laws he appointed long ago, as if his omnipotence were at work
every moment. On the contrary to engage gods absolute and extraordinary power,
in all events and occurrences of things, is me seems to think meanly of his
wisdom; As if he had made the world so, as that it should need omnipotence
every now and then to mend it, or to bring about those his destinations, which
by a shorter way he could have effected, by his instrument, Nature. Can any one
say that our supposition derogates from the Divine concourse or Providence? For
on these, depend continually both the being and operations of all things, since
without them they would cease to act, and return to their old nothing. And
doubtless God has not given the ordering of things out of his own hands; but
holds the power to alter, innovate, or change the course of nature as he
pleases. And to act by extraordinary, by absolute omnipotence, when he thinks
fit to do so.

The sum of what I intend, is, that Gods works are perfect; and as his
goodness is discovered in them, so is his Justice wrought into their very
essential constitutions: so that we need not suppose him to be immediately
engaged in every event and all distributions of things in the world, or upon
all occasions to exercise his power in extraordinary actions, but that he
leaves such managements to the Economy of second causes. And now next to this,
(for they are of kin) I raise The third Pillar.

[3] Things are carried to their proper place and state, by the congruity of
their natures; where this fails, we may suppose some arbitrary managements.
THe Congruity of things is their suitableness to such or such a state or
condition; And it is a great Law in the Divine and first constitutions, that
things should incline and move to what is suitable to their natures. This in
sensibles is evident in the motions of consent and sympathy. And the ascent of
light, and descent of heavy bodies, must I doubt when all is done, be resolved
into a principle that is not merely corporeal. Yea supposing all such things to
be done by the Laws os Mechanics, why may we not conceive, that the other rank
of beings, spirits, which are not subject to corporeal motions, are also
disposed of by a Law proper to their natures, which since we have no other name
to express it by, we may call congruity. We read in the sacred History that
Judas went to his place; And it is very probable that spirits are conveyed to
their proper (...) (...) (...), as (...) (...) the (...) (...), or a (...)
descends. The place^ifts would have the Soul of the world (...) be the great
Infor^ment of all such (...) (...), as also of the phenomina, that ^e beyond
the powers of ^asser, And it is no unlikely (...): But I have (...) need to
engage further about this (...) not yet to speak more of this first part of my
Principle, since i^ so nearly depends on what was said in be behalf of the
former maxi^. Yet of the (...) we need a would or two.

When therefore we cann^ give Accoun^ of things either by the (...) of (...) or
concen^able (...), (as likely some things relating to the States of Spirits,
and immaterial beings can be resolved by neither) I say then, we may have
recourse to the Arbitrary managements of those invisible Ministers of Equity
and Justice, which without doubt the world is plentifully stored with. For it
cannot be conceived that those active spirits are idle or unimploy'd in the
momentous concerns of the univers^ Yea the sacred volumne gives evidence o^
their interposals in our affairs. I shall need mention but that remarkable
instance in Da^iel, of the endeavors of the Prince of Persia, and of Grecia,
to hinder Michael, and the other Angel, that were engaged for the affairs of
F^les; Or if any would evade this, what think they o^ all the apparitions of
Angels in the ol^ Testament, of their Pitching their Tents about us, and being
Ministering Spirits for our good. To name no more such passages; Now if those
noble Spirits will engage themselves in our trifling concernments, doubtless
they are very sedulous in those affairs that tend to the good and perfection of
the Universe. But to be brief; Iadvance.

The Fourth Pillar. (4) The Souls of men are capable of living in other bodies
besides Terarestial; And never Act but in some body or other.
FOr (...) when I consider how deeply (...) this state we are immersed in the
body, (...) can ^ne thinks searce imagine, that presently upon the quitting
on^e, we shall ^e stripped of all corporetry, for this would ^e such a jump as is
seldom or never made in nature; since by almost all i^ances that come under
our observation his manifest, that she ^seth to act by due and orderly
gradations, and takes no precipition leaps from one extreme to another. It Is
very probable therefore, that (...) our immediately next state we shall ^ave
another vehicle. And then, 2. (...) that our Souls are immediately (...) to
(...) more (...) and s^bile body (...), then this gross outside; It Is (...)
thinks a good presumption, that we shall not be strip^ and divested of our
inmar^ stole also, when we leave this dull eart^ behind us. Especially 3. if we
take notic^ how the highest and noblest faculties and operations of the Soul
are helped on by somewhat that is corporeal, and that i^ imployeth the bodily
Spirits in it is subli^ mest exercises; we might then be perswa^ ded, that it
always (...) some body o^ other, and never Acts without one. An^ 5. since we
cannot conceive a Soul to Live or Act that is insensible, and sinc^ we know not
how there can be senc^ where there is no union with matter, we should me seems
be induced to think, tha^ when it is (...) from all body, it is (...) and silent.
For in all se^sations there is corporeal motion, as all Philosophy and
Experience testifies: And these motions b^ come sensible representations, by
virtue of the union between the (...) and it is confeder (...) (...), So that
when it is loos^ and (...)-(...) from any body whatsoever it will be
unconcerned in all (...) (...) (...), (being a (...) (...)) and ^o sense or
perceptions will be conveyed by them.

Nor will it make any thing at all against this Argument to urge, that there
are (...) and purely unembodyed Spirits in the Universe, which live and act
without relation to any body, and yet these are not insensible: For what they
know, and (...) they know we are very incompetent judges of, they being a sort
of Spirits specifically distinct from out order And therefore their faculties
and operations are of a very diverse consideration from ours. So that for us to
deny what we may reasonably argue from the contemplation of our own ^atures,
because we cannot comprehend the natures of a species of creatures that are far
above us, is a great mistake in the way of reasoning.

Now how strange soever this principle may seem to those, whom customary
opinions have seasoned with an other ^e lief, yet considering the Reasons I
have alleged, I cannot forbear concluding it very probable; and if it prove
hereafter serviceable for the helping us in some concerning Theories, I think
the most wary and timorous may admit it, till upon good grounds they can
disprove it.

The Fifth Pillar. (5) The soul in every state has such a body, as is fittest
for those faculties and operations that it is most inclined to exercise.
It Is a known Maxim, That every thing that is, is for its operation; and the
contriver and maker of the world has been so bountiful to all beings, as to
furnish them with all suitable and necessary requisites for their respective
actions; for there are no propensities and dispositions in nature, but some way
or other are brought into actual exercise, otherwise they were mere nullities,
and impertinent appendices. Now for the employment of all kinds of faculties,
and the exerting all manner of operations, all kinds of instruments will not
suffice, but only such, as are proportioned and adapted to the exercises they
are to be used in, and the agents that employ them. It Is clear therefore, that
the soul of man, a noble and vigorous agent, must be fitted with a suitable
body, according to the Laws of that exact distributive justice that runs
through the Universe; and such a one is most suitable, as is fittest for those
exercises it propends to, for the body is the souls instrument, and a necessary
requisite of action: Whereas should it be otherwise, God would then have
provided worse for his worthiest creatures, then he has for those that are of
a much inferior rank and order. For if we look about us upon all the creatures
of God, that are exposed to our Observation, we may seal this Truth with an
infallible Induction; That there is nothing but what is fitted with all
sutaeble requisites to act according to its nature. The Bird has wings to waft
it aloof in the thin and subtle air; the Fish is furnished with fins, to move
in her liquid element; and all other Animals have instruments that are proper
for their peculiar inclinations: So that should it be otherwise in the case of
Souls, it would be a great blot to the wise managements of Providence, and
contrary to its usual methods; and thus we should be dis-furnish't of the best
and most convictive argument that we have to prove that a Principle of exactcst
wisdom has made and ordered all things.

The Sixth Pillar. (6) The Powers and Faculties of the Soul, are either (1)
Spiritual, and Intellectual: (2) Sensitive: Or, (3) Plastic.
NOw 1. by the intellectual powers I mean all those that relate to the soul, in
its naked and abstracted conception, as as it is a spirit, and are exercised
about immaterial Objects; as, virtue, knowledge, and divine love: This is the
plate^nical N^s, and that which we call the mind The two other more immediately
relate to its espo^sed matter: For 2. The sensitive are exen^ised about all the
objects of sense, and are concerned in all such things as either gratify, or
disgust the body. And 3. the Plastic are those faculties of the soul, whereby
it moves and forms the body, and are without sense or Animalversi^: The
exercise of the former, I call the Higher life; and the operations of the
latter, the Lower s and the life of the body. Now that there are exercised
faculties belonging to our natures, and that they are exercised upon such and
such objects respectively, plain experience (...), and therefore I may be
excused from going about to prove so universally acknowledged a truth:
Wherefore I pass to

The Seventh Pillar. (7) By the same degrees that the higher powers are
invigorated, the lower are consopited and abated, as to their proper exercises,
and e contra.
1. THat those Powers should each of them have a tendency to action and in
their turns be exercised is but rational to conceive, since otherwise they had
been superfluous. And 2. that they should be inconsistent in the supremest
exercise and inactuation, is to me as probable. ^or the Soul is a finite and
limited being, and therefore cannot operate diverse ways with equal intention
at once. That as, cannot at the same time employ all her faculties in the
highest degree of exercise that each of them is capable of. For doubtless did
it engage but one of those alone, the operations thereof would be more strong
and vigorous, then when they are conjunctly exercised, their Acts and Objects
being very diverse. So that I say, that these faculties should act together in
the highest way they are capable of, seems to be contrary to the nature of the
Soul. And I am sure it comports not with experience, for those that are endowed
with an high degree of exercise of one faculty, are seldom if ever as well
provided in the rest. It Is a common and daily observation, that those that are
of most heightened and strong Imaginations, are defective in Judgment, and the
faculty of close reasoning. And your very large and capacious Memories, have
seldom or never any great share of either of the other persections. Nor do the
deepest Judgments use to have any thing considerable either of Me^wry, or
Fancy. And as there are fair instances even in this state of the inconsistence
of the faculties in the highest exercise; so also are there others that suggest
unto us.

3. That by the same degrees that some (...) fail in their strength and vigeur,
others gain and are improved. We know that the shutting up of the senses, is
the letting loose and enlarging of the Fancy. And we seldom have such strong
imaginations waking, as in our dreams in the silence of our other faculties. At
the Sun recedes, the Moon and Stars discover themselves, and when it returns
they draw in their baffled beams, and hide their heads in obsurity. But to urge
what is more close and pressing; It is an unerring remarque, that those that
want the use of some one natural part or faculty, are wont to have very liberal
amends made them by an excelelncy in some others. Thus those that nature has
deprived of fight, use to have wonderfully tenacious memories. And the deaf and
damb have many times a strange kind of sagacity, and very remarkable mechanical
ingren^ities: Not to mention other instances, for I Will say no more then I must
needs. Thus then experience gives us encouraging probability of the truth of
the Theorem asserted. And in its self ^ts very reasonable; for (as we have
seen) the Soul being an active nature, is always propending to this exercising
of one faculty or other, and that to the utmost it is able, and yet being of a
limited capacity, it can employ but one in height of exercise at once; which
when it loses and abates of it is strength and supreme (...); some other, whole
improvement was all this while hindered by this it is ingr^ssing Rival must by
consequence beg^n now to display it self, and awaken into a more vigorous
(...): so that as the former loses, the (...) proportionably gains.

And indeed it is a great instance of the divine (...), that our faculties are
made in ^o regular and equilibrium (...) order. For were the same powers still
^ppermost in the greatest height of (...), and so ^nakerably constituted, there
would want the beauty of variety, and the other faculties would never act to
that pitch of perfection that they are capable of. There would be no Liberty of
Wi^, and consequently no H^mare Nature. O^ if the Higher Powers might have
lessen^d, and fayl^d without a proportionaable iner^ense of the (...), and they
likewise have been remitted, without any advantage to the other faculties, the
Soul might then at length fall into an irrecoverable recesse and inactivity.

But all these inconveniences are avoided by supposing the principle we have
here insisted on; And it is the last that I shall mention.

Briefly then, and if it may be more plainly, the higher faculties are those,
whereby the Soul acts toward spiritual and immaterial objects: and the lower
whereby it acts toward the body. Now it cannot with equal vigor exercise it
self both ways together; and consequently the more it is taken up in the higher
operations, the more promp't and vigorous it will be in these exercises, and
less so about those that concern the body, and e Converso.

Thus when we are very deeply engaged in intellectual contemplations, our
outward senses are in a manner (...) up and cramped: And when our senses are
highly exercised and gratified, those operations monopolize and employ us. Nor
is this less observable in relation to the plastic. For fr^quent and severe
Meditations do much mortify and weaken the body; And we are most nourisbt in
our sleep in the silence of our senses. Now what is thus tr^e in respect of
acts and particular exercises, (...) as much so in states and habits. Moreover,
it is apparent that the Plastic is then most strong and vigorous when our other
faculties are wholly unimployed, from the state of the womb. For (...) when she
is at her Plastic work ceal^th all other operations. The same we may take
noti^ of, in silk worms and other insects, which lie as if they were dead and
insensible, while their lower powers are forming them into another appearance.
All which things put together, give good evidence to the truth of our Axiom.

I Will conclude this with one Remark more, to prevent mistake; Therefore
briefly; As the Soul always acts by the body; so in its highest exercises it
uses some of the inferi^r powers; which, therefore must operate also. So that
some sen^ces, as ^ghs and somewhat analogous to hearing may be employed in
considerable degree even when the highest life is most predominant; but then it
is at the command and in the services of those nobler powers; wherefore the
sensitive life cannot for this cause be said to be invigour^ed, since it is
under servitude and subjection, and its gusts and pleasures are very weak and
staccid. As this is the reason of that clause in the principlo, ( as to their
proper exercises.)

Having thus laid the Foundation, and (...) the Pillars of our building, I now
come to advance the Superstructure.

CHAP. XIV. A Philosophical Hypothesis of the Souls ^aexistence.
THe Eternal and Almighty goodness, the blessed spring and roo^ of (...)
things, made all his (...), in the best, happiest, and most perfect condition,
that their respective natures rendered them capable of, By Axiom the first; and
therefore they were then constituted in the inactuation and exercise of their
noblest and most perfect powers. Consequently, the souls of men, a considerable
part of the divine workmanship, were at first made in the highest invigouration
of the spiritual and intellective faculties which were exercised in virt^e, and
in blissful contemplation of the supreme Deity; wherefore now by axiom 6 and 7,
the ignobler and lower powers, or the life of the b^ily, were languid and
rei^iss.

So that the most te^uious, pure and simple matter being the fi^test instrumens
for the most vigorous and spiritual faculties according to Principle 2, 4, and
5. The soul in this condition was united with the most (...) and athereal
matter that it was capable of inacting; and the inferior powers, those relating
to the body, being at a very low ebb of exercise, were wholly subservient to
the superior, and employed in nothing but what was serviceable to that higher
life: So that the senses did but present occasions for divine love, and objects
for contemplation; and the plastic had nothing to do, but to move this passive
and ^asie body, accordingly as the concerns of the higher faculties required.
Thus then did we at first live and act in a pure and ethereal body; and
consequently in a place of light and blessedness, by Principle 3d. But
particularly to describe and point at this paradisaical residence, can be done
only by those that live in those serene regions of lightsom glory: Some
Philosophers indeed have adventured to pronounce the place to be the Sun that
vast O^b of splendour and brightness; though it may be it is more probable, that
those immense tracts of pure and quiet ether that are above Saturn, are the
joyous place of our ancient celestial abode: But there is no determination in
matters of such lubricous uncertainty where ever it is, it is doubtless a place
and state of wonderful bliss and happiness, and the highest that our natures
had fitted us to.

In this state we may be supposed to have lived in the blissful exercise of
virtue, divine love and contemplation, through very long Tracts of Duration.

But though we were thus unconceivably happy, yet were we not immutably so; for
our highest perfections and noblest faculties being but finite, may after long
and vigorous exercise, somewhat abat^ and remit in their sublimest operations,
and Adam may fall a sleep; In which time of remission of the higher powers, the
lower may advance and more livelily display themselves then they could before,
by Axiom 7; for the soul being a little slackt in its pursuits of immaterial
objects, the lower powers which before were almost wholly taken up and employed
in those high services, are somewhat more releast to follow a little the
tendencies of their proper natures. And now they begin to convert toward the
body, and warmly to resent the delights and pleasures thereof; Thus is Eve
brought forth, while Adam sleeps. The lower life, that of the body is now
considerably awakened, and the operations of the higher, proportionably abated.
However, there is yet no anomy or disobedience, for all this is but an innocent
exercise of of those faculties which God has given us to employ, and as far as
is consistent with the divine laws, to gratify. For it was no fault of ours
that we did not uncessantly keep our spiritual powers upon the most intense
exercises that they were capable of exerting; we were made on for purpose
defatigable, that so all degrees of life might have their exercise; and our
maker designed that we should feel and taste the joys of our congenite bodies,
as well as the pleasures of those seraphick aspires and enjoyments.

And me thinks it adds to the felicity of that state, that our happiness was
not one uniform piece, or continual repetition of the same, but consisted in a
most grateful variety, viz. in the pleasure of all our faculties, the lower as
well as the higher; for those are as much gratified by suitable exercises and
enjoyments a^ ^hese; and contequently according to their proportion capable of
as great an happiness: Nor is it any more derogation from the divine goodness,
that the noblest and highest life was not always exercised to the height of its
capacity, then that we were not made all Angels, all the Planets so many Suns,
and all the variety of the creatures formed into one Species: Yea, as was
intimated above, it is an ^astance of the divine benignity, that he produced
things into being, according to the vast plenitude of Forms that were in his
all knowing mind; and gave them operations suitable to their respective
natures; so that it had rather seemed a defect in the divine dispensations, if
we had not had the pleasure of the proper exercise of the lower faculties as
well as of the higher. Yea, me thinks, it is but a reasonable reward to the
body, that it should have its delights and gratifications also, whereby it will
be fitted for further serviceableness. For doubtless it would be in time spent
and exhausted were it continually employed in those high and less proportioned
operations.

Wherefore God himself having so ordered the matter, that the inferior life
should have its turn of invigouration; it can be no evil in us, that that is
executed which he has so determined, as long as we pass not the bounds that he
has set us. Adam therefore was yet innocent, though he joyed in his beloved
Spouse, yea, and was permitted to feed upon all the fruits of this Paradise,
the various results of corporeal pleasure, as long as he followed not his own
will and appetites contrarily to the divine commands and appointments.

But at length unhappily the delights of the body betray us, through our over
indulgence to them, and lead us captive to anomy and disobedience. The sense of
what is grateful and pleasant by insensible degrees gets head over the
apprehension of what is just and good; the Serpent and Eve prove successful
tempters; Adam cannot withstand the inordnate appetite, but feeds on the
forbidden fruit, viz. the dictates of his deba^chea will, and ^sual pleasure.
And thus now the body is gotten uppermost, the lower faculties have greater
exercise and command then the higher, those being very vigorously awakened, and
these proportionably shrunk up, and consopited; wherefore by Axiom 3. and 5.
the soul contracts a less pure body, which may be more accommodate to sensitive
operations; and thus we fall from the highest Paradise the blissful regions of
life and glory, and become Inhabitants of the Air.

Not that we are presently quite divested of our Etherial state, as soon as we
descend into this less perfect condition of life, for retaining still
considerable exercises of the higher life, though not so ruling and vigorous
ones as before, the soul must retain part of its former vehicle, to serve it as
its instrument, in those its operations: For the ^herial body contracts
crasiness and impurity, by the same degrees as the immaterial faculties abate
in their exercise; so that we are not immediately upon the expiring of the
highest congruity wholly stripped of all remains of our celestial bodies, but
still hold some portion of them, within the grosser vehicle, while the spirit,
or higher life is in any degree of actuation.

Nor are we to suppose that every slip or indulgence to the body can detrude us
from our athereal happiness; but such a change must be wrought in the soul, as
may spoil its congruity to a celestial body, which in time by degrees is
effected: Thus we may probably be supposed to have fallen from our supreme
felici^ie.

But others of our order have made better use of their enjoyments, and the
indulgences of their Maker; and though they have had their periga's as well as
their Apoge's: I mean their Verges toward the body and its joys, as well as
their aspires to nobler and sublimer objects, yet they kept the station of
their natures, and made their orderly returns, without so remarkable a
defection: And though possibly some of them may sometimes have had their slips,
and have waded further into the pleasures of the body then they ought to have
done, yet partly by their own timely care and consideration, and partly by the
divine assistance, they recover themselves again to their condition of
primigenial innocence. But we must leave them to their felicity, and go on with
the History of our own descent. Therefore after we are detraded from our
^therial condition, we next descend into the Aerial.

The Aerial State.
NOw our bodies are more or less pure in this condition, proportionably to the
degrees of our aposta^y: So that we are not absolutely miserable in our first
step of descent; but indeed happy in comparison of our now condition: As yet
there may be very considerable remains of virtue and divine love, though indeed
the lower life, that of the body be grown very strong and rampant: So that as
yet we may be supposed to have lapst no lower then the best and purest Regions
of the Air, by Axiom 2 and 3. And doubtless there are some, who by striving
against the inordinacy of their Appetitites, may at length get the victory
again over their bodies, and so by the assistance of the Divine Spirit who is
always ready to promote and assist good beginnings, may re-enkindle the higher
life, and so be translated again to their old celestial habitations without
descending lower.

But others irreclaimeably persisting in their Rebellion, and sinking more and
more into the body, and the relish of its joys and pleasures, these are still
verging to a lower and more degenerate state; so that at the last the higher
powers of the Soul being almost quite laid a sleep and consopited, and the
sensitive also by long and tedious exercises being much tired, and abated in
their vigor, the plastic faculties begin now fully to awaken; so that a body
of thin and subtle air will not suffice its now so highly exalted energy, no
more than the subtle Ether can suffice us terrestial animals for respiration;
wherefore the Aerial congruity of life expires also, and thus are we ready for
an earthly body.

But now since a Soul cannot unite with any body, but with such only as is
fitly prepared for it, by principle 3. and there being in all likelihood more
expirations in the Air, then there are prepared bodies upon earth, it must
needs be, that for some time it must be destitute of any congruous matter that
might be joined with it; And consequently by Principle 3d. 'twill lie in a
state of inactivity and silence. Not that it will for ever be lost in that
forgotten recess and solitude, for it has a^ptness aptness and propensity to
act in a terrestrial body, which will be reduced into actual exercise, when fit
^atter is prepared. The souls therefore, that are now laid up in the black
night of stuipdity and inertnesse will in their proper seasons be awakened into
life and operation in such bodies and places of the earth, as by their
dispositions they are fitted for. So that no sooner is the^e any matter of due
vital temper, afforded by generation, but immediately a soul that is suitable to
such a body, either by mere natural congruity, the dispositi, on of the soul of
the world, or some more spontaneous agent is attracted, or sent into this so
befitting tenement, according to Axiom 2 and 3.

Terrestrial State.
NOw because in this state too we use our sensitive faculties, and have some
though very small relics of the higher life also; therefore the soul first
makes it self a vehicle out of the most spiritous and yielding parts of this
spu^ous terrestrial matter, which has some analogy both with its ^therial and
aerial state. This is as it were its inward vest, and immediate instrument in
all its operations. By the help of this it understands, reasons, and remembers,
Yea forms and moves the body: And that we have such a subtle aerie vehicle
within this terrestrial, our manifest sympathizing with that element, and the
necessity we have of it to all the functions of life, as is palpable in
respiration, is me thinks good ground for conjecture. And it is not improbable
but even within this it may have a purer fire and ather to which it is united,
being some little remain of what it had of old.

In this state we grow up merely into the life of sense, having little left of
the higher life, but some apish shows and imitations of reason, virtue, and
religion: By which alone with speech, we seem to be distinguished from Beasts,
while in reality the brutish nature is predominant, and the concernments of the
body are our great end, our only God and happiness; this is the condition of
our now degenerate, lost natures. However, that ever overflowing goodness that
always aims at the happiness of his creatures, has not left us without all
means of recovery, but by the gracious and benign dispensations which he has
afforded us, has provided for our restoration; which some (though but very
few) make so good use of, that being assisted in their well meant and sincere
endeavors by the divine spirit, they in good degree mortify and subdue the
body, conquer self-will, unruly appetites, and disorderly passions, and so in
some measure by Principle 7. awaken the higher life, which still directs them
upwards to virtue and divine love; which, where they are perfectly kindled
carry the soul when dismissed from this prison to its old celestial abode: For
the spirit and noblest faculties being so recovered to life and exercise
require an aetherial body to be united to, and that an aetherial place of
residence, both which, the divine Nemesis that is wrought into the very nature
of things bestows on them by Principle the second.

But they are very few that are thus immediately restored to the celestial
paradise, upon the quitting of their earthly bodies. For others that are but in
the way of recovery, and dye imperfectly virtuous, mere Philosophy and natural
reason (within the bounds of which we are now discoursing) can determine no
more, but that they step forth again into aer^ vehicles; that congruity of life
immediately awakening in them after this is expired. In this state their
happiness will be more or less, proportionably to their virtues, in which if
they persevere, we shall see anon how they will be recovered. But for the
present we must not break off the clue of our account, by going backwards
before we have arrived to the u^most verge of descent in this Philosophical
Romance, or History; the Reader is at his choice to call it which he pleases.

Wherefore let us cast our eyes upon the Most, in whom their Life on earth has
but confirmed and strengthened, their degenerate sensual, and brutish
propensions; And see what is like to become of them, when they take their leave
of these terrestial bodies.

Only first a word of the state of dying infants, and I come immediately to the
next step of descent. Those therefore that pass out of these bodies, before
the terrestrial congruity be spoiled weakened, or orderly unmound; According to
the tenor of this Hypothesis, must return into the state of inactivity.

For the Plastic in them is too highly awakened, to inactuate only an aerial
body; And, there being no other more congruous, ready, and at hand for it to
enter, it must needs step back into its former state of insensibility, and
there wait its turn, till befitting matter call it forth again into life and
action. This is a conjecture that Philosophy dictates, which I vouch not for a
truth, but only follow the clue of this Hypothesis. Nor can there any danger be
hence conceived that those whose congr^ityes orderly expire, should fall back
again into a state of silence and intertnesse; since by long and hard exercises
in this body, the plastic life is well tamed and debilitated, so that now its
activity is proportioned to a more te^uious and passive vehicle, which it
cannot fail to meet with in its next condition. For it is only the terrestrial
body is so long a preparing. But to

The next step of Descent, or After State.
TO give an Account of the After State of the more degenerate and yet
descending souls, some fancy a very odd Hypothesis, imagining that they pass
hence into some other more course and inferior Planet, in which, they are
provided with bodies suitable to their so depraved natures; But I shall be
thought extravagant for the mention of such a supposition; Wherefore I come to
what is less ^bnoxious.

When our souls go out of these bodies therefore, they are not presently
discharged of all the matter that belonged to this condition, but carry away
their inward and aerial state to be partakers with them of their after
fortunes, only leaving the unless earth behind them. For they have a
congruity to their aerie bodies, though that which they had to a terrestrial, is
worn out and defaced.

Nor need we to wonder how it can (...) have an aerial aptitude, when as that
congr^ity expired before we defended hither; If we consider the reason of the
expiration of its former vital aptitude, which was not so much through any
defect of power to actuate such a body, but through the excess of invigoration
of the Plastic, which was then grown so strong, that an aerial body was not
enough for it to display its force upon. But now the case is altered, these
lower powers are worn and wearied out, by the toylsome exercise of dragging
about and managing such a load of flesh; wherefore being so castigated, they
are duly attemper'd to the more easy body of air again, as was intimated
before; to which they being already united, they cannot miss of a proper
habitation.

But considering the stupor, dullness and inactivity of our declining age, it
may seem unlikely to some, that after death we should immediately be
resuffitated into so lively and vigorous a condition, as is the aerial,
especially, since all the faculties of sense and action, are observed gradually
to fail and abate as we draw nearer to our exit from this Stage; which seems to
threaten, that we shall next descend into a state of less s^upor and
inertnesse. But this is a groundless jealousy; for the weakness and
lethargick inactivity of old age, arises from a defect of those Spirits, that
are the instruments of all our operations, which by long exercise are at last
spent and seattred. So that the remains can scarce any longer stand under their
unweildy barthem; much less, can they perform all functions of life so
vigorously as they were wont to do, when they were in their due temper,
strength, and plenty. However notwithstanding this inability to manage a
sluggish, stubborn, and exhausted terrestrial body, there is no doubt, but the
Soul can with great care, when it is discharged of its former load, actuate its
thin aerie vehicle; and that with a brisk vigor and activity. As a man that is
overladen, may be ready to faint and sink, till he be releived of his burden;
And then, he can run away with a cheerful vivacity. So that this decrepid
condition of our decayed natures cannot justly prejudice our belief, that we
shall be crected again, into a state of life and action in aerial bodies, after
this congruity is expired.

But if all alike live in bodies of air in the next condition, where is then
the difference between the ^nst and the wicked, in state, place and body? For
the just we have said already, that some of them are re-instated in their
pristi^e happiness and felicite; and others are in a middle state, within the
confines of the Air, perfecting the inchoations of a better life, which
commenced in this: As for the state and place of those that have lived in a
continual course of sensuality and forgetfulness of God; I come now to declare
what we may fancy of it, by the help of natural light, and the conduct of
Philosophy.

And in order to this discovery I must premise some what concerning the earth,
this globe we live upon; which is, that we are not to conceive it to be a full
bulky mass to the center, but rather that (...) somewhat like a sucked Egg, in
great part, an hollow sphere, so that what we tread upon is but as it were, an
Arch or Bridge, to divide between the upper and the lower regions: Not that
this inward ^llowness is a mere void capacity, for there are no such chasms in
nature, but doubtless replenisht it is with some ^uid bodies or other, and it
may be a kind of air, fire and water: Now thi^ Hypothesis will help us easily
to imagine how the earth may move notwithstanding the pretended indisposition
of its Bulk, and on that account I believe it will be somewhat the more
acceptable with the free and ingenious.

Those that understand the Cartesian Philosophy, will readily admit the
Hypothesis, at least as much of it as I shall have need of: But for others, I
have little hopes of persuading them to any thing, and therefore Il'^ spare my
labor of going about to prove what they are either incapable of, or at first
dash judge ridiculous: And it may be most will grant as much as is requisite
for my purpose, which is, That there are huge vast cavities within the body of
the earth; and it were as needless, as presumptious, for me to go about to
determine more. Only I shall mention a probability, that this gross crust which
we call earth, is not of so vast a profound^ as is supposed, and so come more
press to my business.

It Is an ordinary observation among them that are employed in mines and
subterraneous vaults of any depth, that heavy bodies lose much of their gravity
in those hollow caverns: So that what the strength of several men cannot stir
above ground, is easily moved by the single force of one under it: Now to
improve this experiment, it is very likely that gravity proceeds from a kind of
magnetism and attractive virtue in the earth, which is by so much the more
strong and vigorous, by how much more of the attrahent contributes to the
action, and proportionably weaker, where less of the magnetic Element exerts
its operation; so that supposing the solid earth, to reach but to a certain,
and that not very great distance from the surface, and it is obvious this way to
give an account of the Phoenomenon.

For according to this Hypothesis the gravity of those bodies is less, because
the quantity of the earth that draws them is so; whereas were it of the same
nature and solidity to the center, this diminution of its bulk, and
consequently virtue would not be at all considerable, nor in the least
sensible: Now though there are other causes pretended for this effect, yet
there is none so likely, and easy a solution as this, though I know it also is
obnoxious to exceptions, which I cannot now stand to to meddle with; all that I
would have is, that it is a probability, and the mention of the fountains of the
great deep in the sacred History, as also the flaming Vulcanoes and smoking
mountains that all relations speak of, are others.

Now I intend not that after a certain distance all is fluid matter to the
ce^ter. For the Cartefian Hypothesis distributes the subterranean space into
distinct regions of diverse matter, which are divided from each other by as
solid walls, as is the open air from the inferior Atmosphear: Therefore I
suppose only that under this thick outside, there is next a vast and large
region of fluid matter, which for the most part very likely is a gross and
fa^lid kind of air, as also considerable proportions of fire and water, under
all which, there may be other solid floors, that may incompass and cover more
vaults, and vast hollows, the contents of which 'twere vanity to go about to
determine; only it is very likely, that as the admirable Philosophy of Des
Carts supposes, the lowest and central Regions may be filled with flame and
ether, which suppositions, though they may seem to some to be but the
groundless excursions of busy imaginations; yet those that know the French
Philosophy, and see there the Reasons of them, will be more candid in their
censures, and not so severe to those not illframed conjectures.

Now then being thus provided, I return again to prosecute my main intendment;
Wherefore it is very probable, that the wicked and degenerate part of mankindare
after death committed to those squallid subterraneous habitations; in which
dark prisons, they do severe penance for their past impletyes, And have their
senses, which upon earth they did so fondly indulge, and took such care to
gratify, now persecuted with darkness, stench, and horror. Thus does the
divine justice triumph in punishing those vi^e apostatet suitably to their
delinquencyes.

Now if those vicious souls are not carried down to the infernal caverns by the
mere congruity of their natures, as is not so easy to imagine; we may then
reasonably conceive, that they are driven into those dungeons by the invisible
Ministers of justice, that manage the affairs of the world by Axiom 3. For
those pure spirits doubtless have a deep sense of what is just, and for the
good of the universe; and therefore will not let those inexcusable wretches to
escape their deserved castigations; or permit them to resicle among the good,
lest they should infect and poison the better world, by their examples.
Wherefore I say, they are disposed of into those black under-Abysses; where
they are suited with company like themselves, and matched unto bodies as
impure, as are their depraved inclinations. Not that they are all in the same
place and under the like torments; but are variously distributed according to
the merits of their natures and actions; some only into the upper prisons,
others to the Dungeon: And some to the most intolerable Hell, the Abyss of
fire. Thus does a just Nemesis visit all the quarters of the universe.

Now those miserable prisoners cannot escape from the places of their
confinement; for it is very likely that those watchful spirits that were
instrumental in committing them, have a strict and careful eye upon them to
keep them within the confines of their goal, that they roave not out into the
Regions of light and liberty, yea it is probable that the bodies they have
contracted in those squallid mansions, may by a kind of fatal magnetisme be
chained down to this their proper element. Or, they having now a congruity only
to such fatid vehicles, may be no more able to abide the clear and lightsome
air, then the Bat or Owl are able to bear the Suns noonday beams; or, the fish
to live in these thinner Regions. This may be the reason of the unfrequency of
their appearance; and that they most commonly get them away at the approach of
light. Besides all this, some there are who suppose that there is a kind of
polity among themselves, which may, under severe penalties, prohibit all
unlicensed excursions into the upper world; though I confess this seems not so
probable, and we stand in no need of the supposition. For though the laws of
their natures should not detain them within their proper residences; yet the
care and oversight of those watchful spirits; who first committed them, will do
it effectually. And very often when they do appear, they signify that they are
under restraint, and come ^ot abroad, but by permission; as by several credible
stories I could make good: But for brevity I omit them.

Now though I intend not this Hypothesis, either for a discovery of infallible
truth, or declarement of mine own opinions, yet I cannot forbear to note the
strange coincidence that there is between Scripture-expressions in this matter,
some main strokes of the Orthodox Doctrine, and this Philosophical conjecture
of the state and place of the wicked. It Is represented in the Divine Oracles as
a deep pit, a prison, a place of darkness, fire, and bri^stone; and the going
thither, is named a descent. All which most appositely agree with the
representation we have made; And the usual Periphrasis of Hell torments, fire,
and brimstone, is wonderfully applicable to the place we have been describing;
since it abounds with fuliginous flames, and sulphurious stench and vapors;
And, as we have conjectured, the lowest cavity, is nothing else but a valut of
fire. For the other expressions mentioned, every one can make the application.
So that when a man considers this, he will almost be tempted to think, that the
inspired writers had some such thing in their fancies. And we are not to run to
tropes and figures for the interpretation of plain and literal descriptions;
except some weighty reason force us to such a Refuge.

Moreover Hell is believed among the Orthodox to have degrees of torments, to
be a place of uncomfortable horror, and to stand at the greatest distance from
the seat and babitation of the blessed. All which, and more that I could reckon
up, cannot more clearly made out and explained, then they are in this
Hypothesis.

Thus then we see the irreclameably wicked lodged in a place and condition very
^retched and calamilous. If any of them should be taught by their miseryes to
renounce and forsake their impietyes; or should have any dispositions to virtue
and divine love reinkindled in them; mere Philosophy would conclude, that in
time they might then be delivered from their lad durance; But we know what
Theology has determined. And indeed those brutish apostates are so fixed and
rooted in their sensual and rebellious propensions, that those who are not yet
as far distant from their maker as they can be, are still verging downwards;
And possibly being quite void of the divine grace, and any considerable
exercises of reason and conscience, they may never stop till they have run
through all the internal stages, and are arrived to the extremest degree of
misery, that as yet any are obnoxious to.

Wherefore the earth and all the infernal Regions being thus monstrously
depraved; it is time for the Divine Justice to show some remarkable and more
then ordinary severity upon those remorseless Rebels; and his goodness is as
ready to deliver the virtuous from this stage of wretchedness and impiety. When
therefore those have completed the number of their iniquities, and these are
fit for the mercy of so great a deliverance; then shall the great decree for
judgment be executed; which though it cannot be expected that mere Philosophy
should give an unerring and punctual account of, yet we shall follow this light
as far as it will lead us; not intrenching upon the sacred rights of divinity,
nor yet baulking what the Ancient Eastern Cabbala, assisted by later
discoveries into nature, will dictate; But sincerely following the Hypothesis,
we shall leave all its errors and misguidances to be corrected by the more
sacred Canons. So that where we shall discern the wisdom of the World to have
misdirected the most knowing and sedulous inquirers, we may duly acknowledge
the great benefit of that light which we have received to guide us in matters
of such vast and concerning speculation.

The Constagration of the Earth.
THerefore at length, when the time preappointed by the divine wisdom for this
execution, is come; The internal, central fire shall have got such strength and
irresistible vigor that it shall easily melt and dissolve that fence that has
all this while enclosed it; And all those other smaller fires, which are lodged
in several parts of the lower Regions joining themselves with this mighty
flame, shall prey upon what ever is combustible and so rage first within the
bowels of the earth, beginning the tragic execution upon those damned spirits
that are there confi^ed; these having been reserved in the chains of darkness
to the judgment of this great day; and now shall their hell and misery be
completed, and they receive the full reward of their impieties, which
doubtless will be the most intolerable and severe torment that can be imagned,
these sierce and merciless flames sticking close to, yea, piercing through and
through their bodies, which can remove no where to avoid this fiery
over-spreading vengenance.

And now the subterranean vaults being thus all on fire, it cannot be long ere
this prevailing combustion take hold of the upper regions, wherefore at last
with irresistible violence it breaks forth upon these also: So that the great
pyre is now kindled, smoke, fire, darkness, horror and confusion, cover the
face of all things? Wherefore the miserable inhabitants of the earth and
inferior air, will be seized on by the devouring Element, and suffer in that
fire that was reserved for the perdition of ungodly men.

But shall the righteous perish with the wicked? And shall not the Judge of all
the earth do right? will not the sincere and virtuous both in the Earth and Air
be secured from this sad fate? and how can their deliverance be effected?
Doubtless Providence that in all things else has been righteous and equal
will not fail in this last scene; but provision will be made for their recovery
from this vengeance that has taken hold of the wicked. But all natural causes
failing here, since their bodies are not pure enough to wast them up the quiet
regions of the un-infested ather; and the higher congruity of life, being yet
but imperfectly inchoated; they would be detained prisoners here below by the
chains of their unhappy natures, were there not some extraordinary interposure
for their rescue and enlargement; wherefore when we contemplate the infinite
fertility of the divine goodness, we cannot think, that he will let those seeds
of piety and virtue, which himself has sown and given some increase to, to
come to naught; or the honest possessors of them, fatally to miscarry: But that
he will employ his power for the completing what he has begun, and the
deliverance of those, who have relied upon his mercies. But for the particular
way and method how this this great iransaction will be accomplished, Philosophy
cannot determine it.

Happy therefore are we, who have the discoveryes of a more certain Light,
which does not only secure us of the thing, but acquaints us with the way and
means, that the Divine wisdom has resolved on, for the delivery of the
righteous. So that hereby we are assured that our ever blessed Redeemer shall
appear in the clouds before this fiery fate shall have quite taken hold of the
Earth, and its condemned inhabitants. The Glory of his appearance with his
Caelestial Legions, shall raise such strong love, joy, and triumph in his now
passionately enamourd expectants, as shall again enkindle that high and potent
principle, the spirit, which being thoroughly awakened and excited, will melt
the grossest consistence into liquid Ether, so that our bodies being thus
turned into the purest flame, we shall ascend in those fiery Chariots with our
Glorious Redeemer, and his illustirous and blessed Attendants to the Caelestial
habitations. This is the Resurrection of the just, and the Recovery of our
ancient blessedness. Thus have some represented this great transaction; But I
dare warrant nothing in this matter beyond the declarations of the sacred
scripturs, therefore to proceed in our philosophical conjectures, However the
good shall be delivered; be sure the wicked shall be made a prey to the
Scorching element which now rages every where, and suffer the Judgment
threatened. But yet the most degenerate part of mankind (if we consult mere
Reason and the Ancient Eastern Cabbals) who are detained prisoners in the now
inflamed Almospheare, shall not for ever be abandoned to misery and ruin. For
they are still pretended to be under the eye and tender care of that Almighty
goodness, that made and preserves all things, that punishes not out of malice
or revenge, and therefore will not pursue them to their utter undoing for ever:
But has set bounds to their destruction, and in infinite Wisdom has so
ordered the matter that none of his creatures shall be lost eternally, or
endure such an endless misery, then which not Being it self were more
eligible. Wherefore those curious contemplators fancy, that the unsupportable
pain and anguish which has long stuck to those miserable creatures, will at
length so consume and destroy rhat insensible pleasure and congruity that
unites soul and body, that the thus-miserably cruciated spirit must needs quit
it is unfit habitation; and there being no other body within its reach that is
capable of a vital union, according to the tenor of this Hypothesis, it must
become senseless and unactive by Axiom 4. And so be buried in a state of
silence and inertness.

At length when these greedy flames shall have devoured what ever was
combustible, and converted into a smoke and vapor all grosser concretions,
that great orb of fire that the Cartesian Philosophy supposes to constitute
the center of this Globe, shall perfectly have recovered its pristine nature,
and so following the Laws of its proper motion, shall fly away out of this
vortex, and become a wandering comet, till it settle in some other.

But if the next Conflagration reach not so low as the inmost regions of the
earth, so that the central fire remains unconcerned, and unimploy'd in this
combustion; this Globe will then retain its wonted place among the Planets. And
that so it may happen, is not improbable, since there is plenty enough both of
fiery principles and materials in those Regions that are nearer to the surface,
to set the Earth into a Lightsom flame, and to do all that execution that we
have spoken of. Some conceive therefore, that the conflagration will not be so
deep and universal as this opinion supposes it; But that it may take beginning
from a less distance, and spendit self upwards. And to this purpose they
represent the sequel of their Hypothesis.

The General Restitution.
Those thick and clammy vapors which erstwhile ascended in such vast measures,
and had filled the vault of heaven with smoke and darkness, must at length obey
the Laws of their nature and gravity, and so descend again in abundant showers,
and mingle with the subsiding ashes, which will constitute a mudd vegetative
and fertile. For those warm and benign beams, that now again begin to visit the
desolate Earth, will excite those seminal principles into action, which the
Divine Wisdom and goodness has mingled with all things. Wherefore they
operating according to their natures, and the dispositions which they find in
the restored matter, will shoot forth in all sorts of flowers, herbs, and
trees; Making the whole Earth a Garden of delight and pleasure; And erecting
all the Phenomenon proper to this Element. By this time the Air will be grown
vital again and far more pure and pleasant, then before the fiery purgation.
Wherefore they conceive, that the disbodyed souls shall return from their
unactive and silent recesse, and be joined again to bodies of purified and duly
prepared Air. For their radaical aptitude to matter still remained, though
theyfell asleep for want of bodies of fit temper to unite with.

This is the sum of the Hypothesis as it is represented by the profoundly
Learned Dr. H. More, with a copious and pompous eloquence.

Now supposing such a recess of any souls into a state of in activity, such a
Restitution of them to life and action is very reasonable; since it is much
better for them to Live and operate again, then to be useless in the universe,
and as it were nothing for ever. And we have seen above, that the Divine
goodness does always what is best, and his wisdom is not so shallow as to make
his creatures so as that he should be fain to banish them into a state that is
next to nonentity, there to remain through all duration. Thus then will those
lately tormented souls, having smarted for their past iniquities, be recovered
both from their state of ^rtechednesse and insensibility; and by the
unspeakable benignity of their Maker, placed once more in such conditions,
wherein by their own endeavors, and the divine assistance they may amend what
was formerly amiss in them, and pursue any good Resolutions that they took
while under thelash of the fiery tortures; which those that do, when their good
inclinations are perfected, and the Divine Life again enkindled, they shall in
due time reascend the Thrones they so unhappily fell from, and be circled about
with unexpressible felicity. Butthose that for all this, follow the sameways of
sensuality and rebellion against their merciful deliverer, they shall besure
tobe met with by the same methods of punishment; and at length be as miserable
as ever.

Thus we see the Air will be re-peopled after the conflagration: but how the
Earth will so soon be restored to Inhabitants, is a matter of some difficulty
to determine since it uses to be furnished from the Aerial regions, which now
will have none left that are fit to plant it. For the good were delivered
thence before the conflagration: and those that are newly come from underthe
fiery lash and latter state of silence, are in a hopeful way of recovery; At
least, their aerial congruity cannot be so soon expired, as to fit them for an
early return to their terrestrial prisons. Wherefore to help our selves in this
rencounter, we must remember, that there are continually multitudes of souls in
a state of inactivity, for want of suitable bodies to unite with, there being
more that dye to the aerie state, then are born into this terrestrial. In this
condition were myriads, when the general Fever seized this great distempered
body; who therefore were unconcerned in the conflagration, and are now as ready
to return into life and action upon the Earth's happy restoration, as if no
such thing had happened.

Wherefore they will not fail to descend into fitly prepared matter, and to
exercise all the functsons proper to this condition. Nor will they alone be
inhabitants of the Earth. For all the variety of other Animals, shall live and
act upon this stage with them; all sorts of souls infinuating themselves into
those bodies, which are fit for their respective natures.

Thus then supposing habitable congruous bodies, there is no doubt, but there
will be humane Souls to actuate and inform them; but all the difficulty is to
conceive how the matter shall be prepared. For who shall be the common seedsman
of succeding Humanity, when all mankind is swept away by the fiery deluge? And
to take Sanctuary in a Miracle is unphilosophical and desperate. I think
therefore, it is not improbable (I mean according to the duct of this
Hypothesis) but that in this renewed youth, of the so lately calcined and
purified Earth, there may be some pure efflorescences of balmy matter, not to
be found now in its exhausted and decrepit Age, that may be proper vehicles of
life into which souls may deseend without further preparation: And so orderly
shape and form them, as we see to this day several sorts of other creatures do,
without the help of generation. For doubtless there will be great plenty of
unctuous spirituous matter, when the most inward and recondite spirits of all
things, shall be dislodged from their old close residences; and scattered into
the Air; where they will at length, when the fierce agitation of the fire is
over, gather in considerable proportions of tenuous vapors; which at length
descending in a chrystalline liquor, and mingling with the finest parts of the
newly modified Earth, will doubtless compose as genital a matter as any can be
prepared in the bodies of Animals. And the calm and wholesome Air which now is
duly purged from its noxious reeks and vapors, and abounds with their saline
spirituous humidity, will questionless be very propitious to those tender
inchoations of life; and by the help of the Sun's favorable and gentle beams,
supply them with all necessary materials.

Nor need we puzzle our selves to fancy, how those Terrae Filii, those young
sons of the Earth will be fortified against the injuries of weather, or be able
to provide for themselves in their first and tender Infancy; since doubtless,
if the supposition be admitted, those immediate births of unassisted nature
will not be so tender and helpless as we, into whose very constitutions
delicacy and effeminatenesse is now twisted. For those masculine productions
which were always exposed to the open Air, and not cloistered up as we, will
feel no more incommodity from it, then the young fry of fishes do from the
coldness of the water they are spawned in. And even now much of our
tenderness and delicacy is not natural but contracted. For poor children will
endure that hardshp that would quickly dispatch those that have had a more
careful and officious nurture. And without question we should do many things
for self-preservati on and provision, which now we yield no signs of; had not
custom prevented the endeavors of nature, and made it expect assistance; For
the Indian Infants will swim currently, when as soon as they are born, they are
thrown into the water. And nature put to her shifts, will do many things more
then we can suspect her able for the performance of: which considered, it is not
hard to apprehend, but that those infant Aborigines, are of a very different
temper and condition from the weak products of now decayed nature: having
questionless, more pure and serviceable bodies, senses and other faculties
more active and vigorous, and nature better exercised; so that they may by a
like sense to that which carrys all creatures to their proper food, pursue and
take hold of that nutriment which the free and willing Earth now offered to
their mouths; till being advantaged by Age and growth, they can move about to
make their choice. But all this is but the frolic exercise of my pen choosing a
Paradox; And it is time to give over the pursuit.

To make an end then, we see that after the Conflagration the earth will be
inhabited again, and all things proceed much what in like manner as before. But
whether the Catastrophe of this shall be like the former or no, I think is not
to be determined. For as one world has perish't by water, and this present
shall by fire, it is possible the next period may be by the Extinction of the
Sun. But I am come to the end of the line, and shall not go beyond this present
Stage of Providence, or wander into an Abyss of uncertainties, where there is
neither Sun nor Star to guide my notions.

Now of all that has been represented of this Hypothesis, there is nothing
that seems more extravagant and Romantic then those notions that come under
the two last Generals; And yet so it falls out, that the main matters contained
under them, one would think to have a strange consonancy with some expressions
in the Sacred Oracles. For clear it is from the divine Volumne, that the wicked
and the Devils themselves are reserved to a further and more severe judgment
then yet afflicts them; It is as plainly declared to be a vengeance of fire
that abides them, as a compleatment of their torments: And that the Earth shall
be burnt, is as explicitly affirmed, as any thing can be spoken. Now if we put
all these together, they look like a probability, That the conflagration of the
Earth shall consummate the Hell of the wicked. And those other expressions of
Death, Destruction, perdition of the ungodly, and the like, seem to show a
favorable regard to the State of silence and inactivity. Nor is there less
appearing countenance given to the Hypothesis of Restitution, in those passages
which predict New Heavens and a New Earth, and seem to intimate only a change
of the present.

And yet I would have no body be so credulous as to be taken with little
appearances, nor do I mention these with an intent that they should with full
consent be delivered to intend the asserting any such Doctrines; But that there
is show enough both in Reason and Scripture for these Opinions to give an
occasion for an Hypothesis, and therefore that they are not mere arbitrary and
idle imaginations.

Now whatever becomes of this particular draught of the Souls several
conditions of life and action, the main Opinion of Praeexistence is not at all
concerned. This scheame is only to show that natural and imperfect Reason can
frame an Intelligible Idea of it; And therefore questionless the Divine
Wisdom could form and order it, either so, or with infinitely more accuracy
and exactness. How it was with us therefore of Old, I know not; But yet that we
may have been, and acted before we descended hither, I think is very probable.
And I see no Reason but why Praeexistence may be Admitted without altering any
thing considerable of the ordinary Systeme of Theology. But I shut up with that
modest conclusion of the Great Des Carts.

That although these matters seem hardly otherwise intelligible then as Ihave
here explained them:

Yet nevertheless remembering I am not infallible, I assert nothing; But submit
all I have written to the Authority of the Church of England, and to the
matured judgments of graver and wiser men; Earnest^ desiring that nothing else
may be entertained with credit by any persons, but what is able to win it by
the force of evident and Victorious reason. Des Carts Princ. Prilos. lib. 4.
ss. CVII.

FINIS.

