Panta Dochimaete A SERMON Treating of the Trial of all Things by the HOLY
SCRIPTURES, The confessed Rule of FAITH and PRACTICE, SHOWING The Deplorable
ABUSE of that Rule; With an Attempt touching the Examen of CEREMONIES.
Delivered in St. Paul's Cathedral November 8. being the xxi. Sunday after
Trinity.

(...)

1 ad Tim. v. 8. (...)

1 ad Corinth. viii. 2. By J. G.

LONDON, Printed by J. R. for Humphrey Robinson at the Sign of the Three
Pigeons in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1664.

Imprimatur

Nov. 30. 1663. Tho. Grigg, Rev. in Christo P. D. Humfr. Episc. Land, a Sacr.
Domest.

To the Right Reverend Father in GOD, Humphry by Divine Providence Lord Bishop
of London, our honored Diocesan.
MY LORD,
WHat is the state and condition of this Land, and how lamented by serious men
your Lordship knows full well. If I appear an unworthy means of contributing
some Charisma toward the settling or healing of my Country, I should reach the
highest of my ambition. Your Lordship perceives that all could not be said
which was requisite in the abstract of an hour. The greatest argument that
staves off some good minded people is, the pretense of dissolute life; which if
perfectly true, were an inconsequence, seeing it is expressed by our Lord, that
the Rabbis which say, and do not, as long as they sit in Moses's Chair ought
to be heard. Howbeit, we hope we can exhibit not a few who shall set an
example to them in all true piety of conversation, provided that affectation of
sanctity and turbulency carry not away the name. My Lord, Either they are
Deceivers or we; and because it is so, I thought I could not acquit my self
better, then by publishing the Churches principles to all the World, whereby
She will discover, yea and anathematize the contrary Heresy. All that I have
asserted is, our Reason, our Faith, and our Order, that men may be in some way
of using their Bibles toward Truth and Edification, Spiritual Growth in Duty
and Charity, not toward Offenses and Divisions, which by me (by the Grace of
God) shall not come in to the Church. It Is good to have a care of the Woe
through whom -- The Apostle that bids us hold fast what is good, in the Text
bids us hold fast our Creed, the (...) and our Discipline Apostolic (...). And
this I reckon was not casual. It is a prodigious thing when the unlearned and
unstable cannot endure to hear that the Scripture may be wrested, when they are
the only men that do it, and that (Lord open their eyes!) to their own
damnation. It Is a brave thing this self-conceit, being illuminate in our own
eyes; true knowledge is ready to puff up, false knowledge puffs up more. Let
Truth arise, and let Error vanish from our Cities: Let the unity of the Spirit
find a Dwelling amongst us that would be spiritual. Upon the prudent pursuance
of which we shall pray for the Governors of the Church, and amongst them for
your Lordship, as your Lordships most humbly devoted,

J. GOAD.

1 THESSALONIANS. V. XXI. Prove all things: Hold fast that which is good.


AS in the early Spring you cannot but observe, walking in a Forest, the
pleasant evidences of the season, by a Primrose here, and another there, and
not far off a knot crowding together; so in the Book of God, you may observe
here a Lesson, and there a second, and anon a whole Posie of flowers (as in
this very chapter) grow at your feet, and breath themselves forth in their
several expirations. But as in this allusion, it often times happens there is
some difficulty in gathering, the flower growing perhaps within the empalement
of a thorny hedge, or prickly bush; so we do begin to discern some difficulty
also, some thorn or scruple which may threaten us with a raze or a wound,
unless we are more cautious in gathering.

The difficulty arises from the state of Religion, which should be one
unquestioned unmoved profession; but when we see a Nation have so lost
themselves, as in a Forest indeed, every one in a several path, luring perhaps
one to another, but not knowing how to come together, nor how to get out: when
I shall see the lowest members of Christ's Body learn of Korah so far, as to
take upon them to mutine against their Superiors, to define contrary to their
Governors, to devise Governments, and to pronounce Babylon and Anathema to all
that dissent, and these men have their eyes as well as others (for, would we
pull out the eyes of these men? said Korah). And this so far, that our very
Civil Peace is endangered every hour with designs of blood and confusion; but
that our eyes are upon God, who we hope notwithstanding our provocations (of
another nature God knows then what is supposed) will vouchsafe to preserve us.

When all this which ought to be bemoaned by every one that understands Reason
or Religion, all this I say shall be thought to be the genuine Issue of the
Apostles Precept in our Text; and the pretext shall be, What have they done?
but only in Conscience to God, and love to their own souls, Proved all things;
Proved the Doctrines of the Great Ones, Proved the Government, and Proved all
the rabble of their Ceremonies, and they have evidently found the contrary to
be good; What is left, but that we also should prove with them, and so come
over to them or else clear up that misunderstanding of this Apostolic
exhortation, which has occasioned, and will justify this disunion.

And this is our design at this time, through Gods much implored assistance,
to show that these words are the Remedy and Antidote rightly understood, not
any cause or occasion of distemper; That if we prove and examine all things
after the Apostles way, we shall come to settlement and unity, find the ways
of Truth, and Peace, and Righteousness; we should all light upon this (...) in
the Text, and hold it fast, as the Apostle exhorts us to do; to which yet he
would not exhort us, but that he supposes it not impossible to find it.

The words in the verse will not take up much time for a critical enquiry into
their meaning; the word (...) does indeed here signify what is there rendered,
Prove, i. e. Try and Examine, and consequently censure and judge according to
their difference; as in that known parallel, 1 John IV. 1. Believe not every
spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God, or no: Only the (...) must
be restrained to a peculiar state of things; Not all things in Philosophy, or
the Mathematiques, the Conclusions, Problems, Experiments; for these are
exotique to the Christian, though they be (...) too in their kind: But all that
respect the spiritual concern, all Doctrines and Principles that belong to
Faith and good Manners, that is the (...) may be found, the Moral and Spiritual
good to be held fast, when found, by Faith and a tenacious observance.

Now since all Acts of Examen and Probation are made with respect to some Rule;
as in Angles the Square, in Levels the Plumb-line, in Measures the Standard;
our chief enquiry must be, what is this Rule according to which our Examen must
proceed? And secondly, Who are the proper Judges to fit on these things?
Whether every one of the Laity, or Clergy only? To whom for certain it only
belongs in a special manner, Rev. 11.2. Upon which account some very Learned
and Christian men have restrained the Precept here to them only.

Yet I shall not deny them (nor do they I think) their right of Trial and
Judgment, even as far as they themselves shall venture, when they shall be
rightly instructed in the true nature of application of the Rule on one hand
(which is our business) and consider soberly and meekly the more petite
measures of their own Parts and Graces; seeing God dispenses not his Talents
to all equally, but divides to each man severally as he pleases.

I say, I shall not deny them, nor indeed can I, the way I go, provided they
use the Rule according to the Authors mind, and withal keep themselves within
the bounds that God and Nature has set them, as they will answer dearly to God
for the contrary, who will have every member to know his own station, as lusty
and liking, and thriving as he may be in his own esteem.

Howbeit, since the Act of Examining and Proving in the Text, supposing the
Rule (with the Spirit of God toward the admission and love of it) is an Act of
the Understanding, it is clear that the rational man is the proper Judge here
regarded, the Scripture many times referring things even to our Judgment, 1
Cor. x. 15. Luke XII. 57. and all the world knows that Judgment is an Act of
the Understanding.

For as in the first admittance of the Rule we did not take it up upon an easy
credulity, as the Atheist upbraids us, but upon most weighty moment abundantly
courting and pressing us for our assent; so after that assent, the same Reason
which draws conclusions for her own use, is able to turn and taste of those
which she sinds drawn to her hand. But in this her Estimate of so sacred a
thing as Religion, she is not a little jealous and cautious; because a Drug or
Jewel the more precious it is, the more do men study how to adulterate it.

The Case is plain; Religon is not the Fools Gospel, it despises not the Fool
neither, provided he be a docile, i.e. a wise Fool. The Body consists not of
Babes only, it has its men, and the Scriptures call upon us to be men in
understanding, that we may approve (...) Phil. 1. the things that are excellent
(for so Hesychius explains the word); in all judgment, (...), according to
that, Psalm. 119. Teach me good judgment and knowledge (...) says the Hebrew; a
spiritual taste to distinguish, joined in that place with (...) which the LXX
render by (...).

No man says, at least I cannot, that Reason can make out the mysteries of
Religion, the Holy Trinity, etc. But that Religion has to do with Reason,
appears, because no other creature is capable of Religion, and no Law of God
can lay hold of us without it: Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not commit
Adultery, does not reach us but upon these reasonable Suppositions; 1. That God
speaks to All; 2. That We are some of that number.

For that Reason makes inference from the sacred Text, observe the Apostle, who
having occasion to apply that place of Scripture to our Lord Christ, [He has
put all things under his feet] steps in and says, that It Is Manifest that he
is excepted who did put all things under him; 1 Cor. xv. 27. Manifest to what?
but to Reason: as in another place, It Is manifest that we can carry nothing out
of this world; Manifest to sense it self.

But then how our Lord himself uses arguments and deductions from the Text.
It Is excellent for every one that loves the praxis of Reason, to consider how
he handles the Pharisees and Sadducees, and worsts them, as in case of the
Sabbath; Do the Priests (says he) do such butcherly work as kill and flay the
sacrifice for the ends of God, and may not my Disciples grind an ear of corn
for the ends of nature? S. Matthew. xii. 5. May David's Hunger entrench upon the
Shewbread, and must we starve in the midst of a Corn-field? ver. 3. and if
Circumcision (when he had healed on the Sabbath) that wounding Ceremony be no
violation, a healing Miracle sure (says he) is no breach, S. Joh. vii. 23.

Thus in the question of the Souls Immortality, he argues S. Matthew. xii. 32. If
God entitled himself to be the God of Abraham, and Isaac, then sure they have a
perpetual Being and subsistence with their God; for it is no Title of Honor to
be the God of the Dead, those that are not the better for him, as They that
have no subsistence are not. Ergo.

And once more in the case of Blasphemy, S. Joh. x. 34. Jesus answered, Is it
not written in your Law, I said you are Gods? If he call them Gods to whom the
Word of God came, and the Scripture cannot be broken, say ye of him, etc.

Nay since one way of Probation of all our Hopes, our ever blessed Jesus to be
the Messiah, lies in deduction from the Prophesies of the Old Testament, it
will be but wrong to intelligent men to say any more.

The reasonable man then is constituted the Judge, after examination and proof
to bring in his Inference. What is the Rule now? The Answer that is justly
expected here is the Scriptures, the Word of God and of his Prophets, the Law
and the Gospel, the Law of Moses and the Law of Christ. And this Answer takes
its date from the time in which the Church of God first owned the Canon as now
it stands: For however it pleased God to tutour the Patriarchs by Tradition and
other Revelations, and to found the Christian Church by the oral Preaching of
the Apostles, it is evident that since he has committed Both Testaments to
Writing, seeing it is his Word, it is our RULE, and being such, no question has
lost nothing by the writing. All confessing that God had designs of safety and
conservation of that his Word to the respective after-ages, when first he began
the writing part himself.

I might add to this, that ONLY Scripture is the Rule, but then I must crave
leave to distinguish and take heed that the word [Onely] be a just exclusive of
what is extraneous to Scripture, not to have any malignancy against ought that
has natural intimacy and consanguinity with it.

Of this nature are these: (Let notional men dispute how they differ from
Scripture, or from one another:) the constant Belief of the Church, the
constant Public Practice, the Authority of the Church, the Summaries of Faith,
commonly called the Creed, the example of Saints of God, the great example of
our Lord Jesus, the common Tradition and sense of mankind, those notices of
good and evil implanted in our souls by our great Creator God blessed for
ever, commonly called Recta Ratio, or the light of Nature.

Some of which are contained in the Scriptures as the Pith and Marrow of the
same, as the Creed, and the example of Christ, some are supposed to the whole
body, as right Reason, and the light of Nature, and some things are naturally
annexed to the vigor of the Scriptures, viz. the authority and practice of the
Church in all points which the Scriptures have put into her hand.

Against any of which it will be unjust and violent to oppose the Scriptures
upon this account, because they all agree in a sweet and necessary
subordination (at least) one to the other: and it is a material rule subordinata
non pugnant subordinates are not to be set at variance.

The Scriptures that were left to the Church as a conservatory of Faith, since
Faith is but One, must be left also by Gods design as a conservatory of unity.
But seeing that is lost among us, it is too apparent, that it is even with the
Scriptures, as with other Rules and Instruments Mathematical, they are exact
and infallible in themselves, but yet every one knows not how to use them.

The error arises, because Mathematical Instruments are not assumed by any,
without the precognition of some prolepses and postulata premised to their due
operation. To give you a more clear example in the Sun, which is the Rule, the
only Rule and Index of the hour of the day, so certain that all other Machines
must be corrected by it: but no man can find that hour of the day by the Sun it
self, unless he knows beforehand the Horizon, which is East, and which is
West, yea, and the Meridian also. Secondly, These Rules must be applied to
their proper Correlatives the Ruler for Lines, the Square for Angles; not
contrary the Rule for an Angle, or the Square for a Line, they were not given
us to that purpose. Scripture is a rule according to the Writers intent, of
Faith, Not of Ceremonies, Nor of every dictate of Nature, and Nature again is a
rule of practice and conscience within its sphere, not of things beyond it,
matters of mere Faith and mystery. For want of some such directions as these I
say the error arises, and does not the Scripture attest the same, that men know
not how to use the Scriptures? Does not that learned Apostle S. Paul say of
some that call themselves Teachers of the Law, Which yet understand not what
they say, nor whereof they confidently affirm, 1 Timothy 1.7. Does not the
Scripture confess, that the Scripture is and may be wrested by such and such
persons, 11 Pet. 111.16. Those certainly that know not how to use them, Does it
not once again say, That the Law (the Scripture) is holy and good; but then it
must be used (...) lawfully 1 Timothy 1.8. to bring us to Christ, not to draw us
from him, and so in like manner to bring us to Unity, not to draw us from it.

And is not the Scripture then used not lawfully, when we wilfully exclude all
other Guides, or Lights, or Rules which the Scriptures themselves own and abet,
and impose on all that will take her word.

These things if true (as it is pity they should not for Truth, and Peace, and
Order sake) we should quickly learn to search the Wounds of the Church, and
tent them, and by Gods grace heal them.

For all contrary pleas of schism and disunion would fall to the ground, since
it would be as unreasonable to say, I will be guided by Scripture only, not
regarding the Light of Nature, or common dictates of Conscience, I will be
swayed by Scripture only, not respecting any Creeds or summaries of Faith, how
ancient soever, I will be judged by Scripture only, defying all manner of
public Testimony or Tradition, whether it has footing in the Scripture or no:
Scripture shall be my Rule, not the example of Christ (for many cry up the one,
that little think they are obliged to the other) This upon deliberation will
appear to be q.d. I will be guided by the Sun alone, not by the imaginary East
and West, or the humane invention of the Meridian: I will build my House level
by the Plumb-line, not regarding which is up, and which is down.

Now since we are engaged to prove all things matters of Faith, Practice, and
Ceremonies also, you are to take notice, (that we may duly prove all things)
that there is a difference between the former and latter: that the difference
stands thus, as I trust we shall make it good; that the Scripture which is a
distinct Rule for Faith and Practice; is not such for matters of Discipline. It
is only general for this; as viz. When it commands Decency, and Order, and
Obedience, but in particular it is not; whence a distinct testimony of
Scripture is not to be called for by our Posers for every Ecclesiastical Usage,
nay it is ignorant and absurd so to think: but in the other a distinct Rule is
indeed acknowledged. Yet again with these cautions, that in matters of Faith no
interpretation of Scripture must thwart the Creed, or in matters of Practice
cross-grain the Light of Nature.

To begin with this first. The Light of Nature and Natural Principles are
supposed to the holy Scriptures, as Unit is to Numbers, or the Dawning of the
day to the Sunrise, a Beam of the Divine Conscience shot into the soul in the
day of the Creation, when God said to the little World, Let there be light, and
there was light, and God saw that it was good. And though great was the loss of
that light in our first Father, yet the growing darkness reached not so far
(without question) as to extinguish all that was good; the very shame that was
left him was a sign of some good remains: he knew that disobedience was
nakedness, his fear and flying for the same show that he was not past all
grace, he was not delivered up (...) No Divine ever said so.

Natural Principles therefore remain in us; and if they should not, without
doubt we should all run like Beasts into the Wilderness, with Nebuchadnezzar in
the head of us: for by these all mankind know, (since I question whether the
Sea Monsters in our shape be of the same race with us) know, I say, Good and
Evil, that there is a GOD, a Law, a Vengeance, a Worship, and we give more then
guesses at what is truly Honest, and Just, and Modest, what becomes our
natures, and what misbecomes us Unjust, Inhumane, and Unholy also.

For the Heathen always could, and can to this day tell us, what is the
iniquity of Perjury and Parricide, Sacrilege and Fraud, the iniquity of
unhallowing holy Rites and Times by servile Work, or by impure Addresses.

Hence the Apostle tells us, that all the works of the flesh are (...)
manifest, Gal. v. to the rational Conscience. It Is true, it must be enlightened
by faith to know Idolatry, Witchcraft, or Heresy (at least) to be works of
darkness, but for the rest they are all manifest to mere Reason, Adultery,
Fornication, Strife, Sedition, Hatred, Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, and
such like.

Add that great known place, Romans ii. 14, 15. The Gentiles do by nature the
things contained in the Law, and Having not the Law, they are a Law unto
themselves. Having not the Books of Moses, they are a Moses to themselves,
because many of them made conscience of these sinful works of the flesh now
reckoned up.

To speak plain then, This Law of Nature is a Rule, no prejudice to Scripture:
For if it shall be asked, Whether it be sin to transgress it? who sees not that
the answer must be, yea: that all unnatural men are impious, which is a perfect
demonstration, that this Law is a Rule, because as we may sin against the
Scripture, so we may sin against it. Nay who knows not that it is an
aggravation of sin, the more grossly and palpably it affronts this innate
light, such as the unnatural lusts, Romans 1. the unnatural burning of their
children to that cursed Idol Moloch, and the like.

Upon which it is evident, that the Word of God cannot, according to Gods
intent, be universally opposed to this Law, because this is also Gods, Gods own
Law, written in the Table of our hearts, as the other (if yet it be the other)
was in Tables of Stone. I may well say, if yet it be the other: For all Divines
that I know confess, that the Ten Commandments for the Moral part are all one
with the Primaeval Law of Nature. Now there is no opposing of God to God,
Redemption to Creation, Grace to Nature, the one is more excellent then the
other, but they are at no hand opposite, one does not overthrow the other.

Here if it be asked, Whether all Principles and Conclusions rational are
comprised in Scripture, (a material Quere toward the understanding of our Texts
business) the answer (for the conclusions) must be Negative. The Scriptures do
charge many of them upon us with this dreadful caution, Ego Dominus, Thou shall
not curse the Deaf, I am the Lord; or put a stumbling block before the Blind, I
am the Lord: yet the conclusions drawn from Natural light are Infinite, as
Christ's Miracles, which Saint John says the Scriptures could not hold. Be
judge your selves, when every true and wholesome Lesson in Practick Philosophy,
yea all the grave and righteous Laws of Policies and Nations are naught else
but deductions from the Law of Nature: and who can undertake to find then
distinctly in the holy Scriptures, distinctly, I say; for in the general it is
true they may be found, especially above other places in that famous Text of
Saint Paul to his Philippians, chap. iv. 8. where he conjures them to
whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are grave, whatsoever things are
pure, just, lovely, and of good report, if there be any virtue or peace, to
think on them.

But distinctly and expressly to sind every wholesome Law of this Land in the Law
or Gospel, I appeal to the knowing in the Law, if they will say it; it is
enough, that they are not contrary, and it is a sign there is God in them,
because not contrary to Scripture, according to our principle above. And

It is pity but Christians should understand these things, as long as they are
the words of Truth and Soberness. The holy Scripture is careful to teach us to
do our duties to God, to pray, to hope on him; but it is not always sollicitous
to teach us in what common sense can sufficiently tutour us. I instance in one
of many, viz. Consulting the Physician, or using any good means toward our
recovery. The Son of Sirach indeed minds us of it, but he is Apocryphal, and
the Canonical in the case of Asa seems to condemn it: and so for the use of all
natural means in general. It Is ridiculous to press me for a Text of Scripture,
if Right Reason and Humanity sufficiently instructs us: For Reason is a Talent
also, of which God will take his account.

Hence the Libertines must learn their no Plea for Fornication, and
Drunkenness, and Gluttony, and Revelling, and self-Murthers, nor Pride and
Haughtiness, although possibly they are not expressed in the Decalogue. Nor must
men venture in the Topic of Matrimony on Poligamy, Marriage of Kin, Matches
precipitate or unequal, or hasty second Matching within the days of mourning
for the first, although they fancy no Text that condemns them. The like may be
said for Sacrilege (which sure many think no Text forbids the Christian)
breaking open of Graves, etc. yea all immodest offensive Cynical behavior to
civil Company, remembering that they are condemned in the general, Charity
behaveth not it self unseemly, 1 Cor. xiii. and Provide things honest in the
sight of all men, Romans xii. 17. And if in the special they are not found, let
them take notice that Saint Paul has an Et caetera for them, (...) and such
like; a place to be studied by all conscientious persons, Gal. v. 21.

All that the Light of Nature teaches must be supposed and granted beforehand
by him that means to read the Scriptures. What says the Apostle in the case of
Ruffian hair, Does not even nature it self teach you, says he, 1 Cor. xi. 14.
q.d. Suppose the Scripture be silent, does not that sufficiently teach us.

Let Interpreters be consulted on those words, with those of Romans xiv. ult.
Whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, and the more knowing will be satisfied.

To put all out of doubt, when our Savior was accused of breaking a Text, does
he not retreat to sound Reason, thereby showing us, that Scripture must seldom
or never (excepting in the mysterious parts, as we said above) be constrained
against it. I have healed one on the Sabbath day, it is true, and you condemn
me, but without reason: so Which of you having an Ox or an Ass fallen into a
pit, will not straightway help it out on the Sabbath day, S. Luke xiv. 5. and
again, Is it lawful to do good, or to do evil.

And I desire that our Savior may be observed, whether, when he says, He came
not to destroy the Law; he does not mean the Moral and Natural Law also. I am
sure that place of Hosea, I will have mercy and not sacrifice. Whatever Hosea
meant, he applies it to mercy to ones self in the case of the shewbread, S.
Mat. xii. 7. Secondly, I desire it be observed, whether our Savior throws not
the name of Hypocrite on those pretenses mainly, which may be proved to be not
sincere by the strength of Reason; as to deny Tribute to Caesar, and yet see
the superscription, to wipe the outside, and let the inside be filthy, to
behold the mote in my brothers eye, and not consider the beam in my own eye, to
be uncovered in the presence of my Master, and not to show the same reverence
in the presence of my God. I could add more, but I shall be too long on this
point; only this must not be omitted: That Religion without Reason may carry us
into a Frenzy. I would this Land of ours did not show you the truth of what I
deliver. The Spirit of God is no frantic Spirit, but the Spirit of love and a
sound mind, 2 Timothy i. 7. The Apostle asks his disorderly Corinthians what they
mean, Will not they say that you are mad, 1 Cor. xiv. 21. The Apostle would not
have us be of a cracked Religion.

If then the Light of Nature implanted in us be such a Light, which we must
have recourse to when the case serves, if that must also with the holy
Scriptures have some share in proving all things, then we are something toward
a settlement, we have what will keep us sober at least, (...), as the Apostle
speaks, Romans xii. 3. We shall put up no hideous impudent pretenses that shall
dare to thwart this Light; we shall not be wild or brutish with the untamed
Heifers, or the wild Ass that snuffes in the Wilderness; we shall not be like
the populous Fish of the Sea that have no Ruler; we shall not preach down
Crowns and Scepters, the Ordinance of God and Nature, and set that new
Magistrate the People above them. On pretense of Freedom we shall not bring in
Confusion, and invade other men's Estates on the Plea of Saintship; we shall not
from the example of Jael, Phineas, and the Canaanite preach hideous Massacres
of all the Loyal Party, to such numerous Congregations which are able to do the
feat; we shall not with those Fanatics in Jeremy vii. 10. believe that we can
possibly be redeemed even to commit such abominations; we shall have none strip
themselves of Shame and Garments, and display themselves Naked through our once
civil Streets; none will desie the civilities of a salute: we shall not study
to do things quite contrary to humanity, only because all mankind that were in
their wits had done so before; we shall not forget we are men, because we are
fellow creatures; we shall save our natures, if we do not save our souls.

And so much for the first particular, Prove all things, which concern
Conscience by the Rule of holy Scripture, but at no hand excluding the Light of
Reason or Nature.

Our second particular treats of the proof in matters of Faith, Faith strictly
so called: in which sense not every point of Spiritual Knowledge is an Article
of Faith, i. e. necessary to salvation: the Scriptures are the Rule of both
Faith and Spiritual Knowledge, but so as their interpretation keep a fair
correspondence with the Rule of Faith, the Creed, the public confession of
Christ from the first minute of Christianity, made in the Church by all the
Candidates of the holy Baptism, as you hear by the (...) in the first Person, I
believe, etc. Which confession is brought down to after Ages; not in Tables of
Stone, says Saint Hierome, but in the hearts of them that believe unto
righteousness, and in the mouths of those that have made confession to
salvation: For to this very practice does the Apostle there refer, Romans x.

The greatest searchers into the annals of the Church Voss. de Symb. confess,
that the Apostles Creed, as now it stands, was in use above twelve hundred
years ago, viz. before four hundred years after Christ. Let us take their
grant, and let us ask them in the Name of Christ; Was the Apostles Creed then
thought an Innovation: such inferences giddy people are apt to make. But if we
look into the Scriptures, there we shall find that Catechism into the Faith of
Christ, and Confession of the same is elder then the very name of Christian,
Acts xi.26. as it must be, because nothing else could give them that name,
Elder by some years then the writings of the New Testament. Saint Lukes
Theophilus was catechis'd into Christian Religion, before the Evangelist wrote
his Gospel, S. Luke i.4.

The Creed and the sum of Christianity differ secundum magis and minus, a
straiter and a larger compass, the Creed believes the Son of God, the sum of
Christianity says (...), of one substance with the Father. This believes the
Resurrection of the Body, that explaines it self a Shining and Glorious Body;
they differ not in substance, but as the Bud and the Rose in Explication only.

Now the sum of Christianity is the Immediate Rule of Faith, the Scriptures
being the Rule quatenus They contain in them this great Pawn and Pledge, the
grand Depositum of our Religion. This Depositum was left with the Church, and
also committed to writing. Left with the Church; thence the Apostle exhorts in
in several places to hold it fast. So 2 Timothy i.13. Hold fast the Form of sound
words in Faith and Love which is in Christ Jesus. Observe first, (...), a Form
of sound words, a Draught, a Breviate, (so Ptolomy calls his Maps of the World
(...)) a Form and a Rule; Thus is our LORD's Prayer a Form of sound words, and
a Rule (viz.) of Prayer; the Decalogue a Form of sound words, and a Rule of
Life. Observe 2ly a Form of sound words, or rather sound Articles and
Propositions, (...), for single words are not capable of soundness or of the
contrary. Thirdly, the Contents of this Form, the Credenda and Agenda, as all
Creeds rightly understood do contain Matters of Faith and Matters of Practice,
witness that Article of Remission of sins Gloriously and Catholickly explained
by, I believe one Baptism to Remission of sins. Now these Credenda and Agenda
the Apostle calls Faith and Love which is in Christ Jesus. Next, that this Form
must be held fast, that is some sign it was of no unreasonable extent; it must
be grassed first before it can be held fast: such as does not overlade the
Memory, as the Apostle seems to speak, 1 Cor. xv.2. where he is explicating
the Articles of the Creed: (...) Construe it how you please, it makes for us.

Now to tell us that at first, Voss, de 36. Symb. dep. 3. p. 14
it was enough for the Baptized to profess Belief in the Lord Jesus, or the
Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Act. ii. chapter viii. 12, etc. is
contrary to those very Scriptures and Reason. For he that believes in the Lord
Jesus, does not believe in those two words only, but in all those Great Things
concerning him; All that he has any way done and said to the Redemption of the
world, his immaculate Conception, his Passion, Resurrection, Mission of the
Spirit, and, the end of all, the blessed Remission of our sins. And thus we
have a Little Creed at least.

And it is evident that the very Institution of Christ points at a larger Form,
when he has appointed all Baptized Persons to profess Belief in the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, S. Matthew. xxviii. Belief in their Names too, which in the
First Person cannot signify less then God the Father Almighty, Creator of the
World, and that is all the Apostles Creed expresses; and the Third Person the
Holy Ghost cannot imply less then the Lord and Giver of Spiritual Life, as the
Nicene Creed has it, which yet the Apostles Creed spares to express.

It must not be denied but that the Ancient Confessions of the Church of God in
several places did not agree to every title or syllable: the East and Western
Church had several Forms, as to this matter; nay, that of Aquileia in the same
Italy differed says Ruffinus from that at Rome.

But let it be considered that there was no Confession recited in public but
was in order to Baptism, yea and what presupposed a Larger Catechism of the
Novice into the Mysteries and Duties of Religion; and then where will be the
variety, or will it not be fupplied out of the Principles premised to a perfect
Agreement?

To illustrate this, bating the Descent into Hell, as the Roman Creed did, and
the Communion of Saints with Aquileia, of which we cannot discourse here what
is there in the Creed, but is witnessed to have been there, and naturally must
be from the beginning?

For could any Confession leave out the Article of Remission of sin? What, and
be a Confession in order to Baptism? Did any omit the Article of the
Resurrection? Nay. It Is confessed none did, and good reason too; for without this
Article our Religion were a Fable, 1 Cor. xv.14. or the Incarnation of Jesus,
or his Death, or coming to Judgment, could any Confession or Catechism leave
these out?

Nay further, Is it not natural for a new Convert in the day of his Addition to
the Church, to profess Sancta Ecclesia, the Holy Church that was then
descending into the Laver of Baptism the Sacrament of Initiation into that
Church, therefore Holy, because none but the washed and the sanctified did
enter? Or was the word Catholic Church a new Addition (as is pretended)
toward the prevention of Horesie? this is but suspected by those that it may be
consider not the word (...) in S. Peter's and S. James's Epistles: But as to the
thing, it is evident they believed in the Apostolic, and what is Apostolic
throughout the World, but Catholic?

What then if the Apostles Creed, as it is called, were not a Form agreed by
them totidem syllabis; yet the Effect and substance was agreed among them
before ever they departed from Jerusalem to go preach to every Creature? Do not
the Church Monuments tell us so much? See Ruffinus in Symbol. S. Ambros. ep.
81. Hieron. ep. ad Pamach. quoted by Vossius disp. 1. sect. 13. Nay you that
will take the pains of a Pilgrimage to Jerusalem may be shown the very place
where the Fame says they made this Agreement. See Mr Sandys and Mr Morisons
Relations.

But why trifle we? Did the Apostles trow ye preach Christ at Jerusalem? And
what is preaching of Christ but preaching such Articles concerning him, his
Dying for our sins, Resurrection, and Repentance unto Remission of sins? Must
we prove this out of Scripture? Nothing more easy. See Act. viii.5. cum 12.
xxviii.31. 1 Cor. i.23. xv.12. Ephesians. vv.19, 20. 1 Cor. iii.2. Gal. iii.1. Did
not they then going abroad preach the same Christ, and the same Gospel, i. the
same (...) and Body of Articles? How is it called Ephesians. xv.5. One Faith,
indivisa in se and divisa a quolibet alio? What is meant by the Unity of that
spirit which preached Christ far and near? Ephesians. iv.3. And how is heed taken
least they should preach 2 Cor. xi.4. several Jesuses, any Form of Doctrine
that should be dissonant from the Truth, as a false scheme of the Grace of God?
Hence that of 1 Pet. v.12. the true Grace of God wherein ye stand? Did they
preach the Name of Christ and not the Thing? Did they preach him any how? or
only did they protest but One saving way, as the Truth is in Jesus, Ephesians. iv.21.
not introducing any false Article, for then it is a danger Christ may profit
nothing, Gal. v.2. Nor omitting any true one, especially that Great Article of
REPENTANCE involved in Remishon of sins; for the Apostle hopes, whatever some
may teach, that His Charge will not learn Christ SO: so falsely, etc. Ephesians.
iv.19. What need we look for further presumtions, when as Christ's Institution
is extant to his Apostles, going to teach all Nations, and to Baptize them
(Catechize them first) into the Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. This
only is enough to evidence it.

What is the issue then? The sum of our Religion is a Rule, then is the Creed
also a Rule of Faith. The first appears from several places of the Scripture,
-- You have obeyed from the heart that Form of Doctrine, Romans vi.17. That Form
is the Rule of their Faith and Obedience. A Rule I say of Faith; for if any man
shall teach contrary to it, (...), transgress that Rule, he must be marked for
one that causes Divisions and Herefies in the Church, Romans xvi.17. Yea, if an
Angel from heaven shall dare to do it, he shall have his anathema as the
Heretics have, Gal. i. Hence it is expressly called (...) the Rule, as I could
make it out, Gal. vi.16.

The second appears from the illustrious Testimony of the Primitive uncorrupted
Church, in which solemnly and deliberately the Creed is noted as Tertul. de
Trin.
Regula Fidei, there being no other sum of Christianity extant but that. And
that you may see Tertullian looked upon it as the Rule, you shall find him
advers. Marcion, l. 4.
trying the Spirits, and the Doctrines, and the false Prophets, yea and their
false Gospels too by it. To this purpose he formally repeats it to the Heretic
as universally accepted from the beginning. Marcion forsooth did believe a
several God in the Old Testament and in the New, and had a false Gospel coined
under the name of S. Luke. This Ancient Writer Prax. contr. P. and de Virg.
veland.
repels both, because the Creed began I believe in One God, etc. And this was
within less then ab initio Evangelii decucurrisse advers. Prax.
100 years after S. John the Evangelist.

And had not Saint John the Evangelist taught him and us this very Method of
Examen? who is he that bids us not believe every Spirit, but try the Spirits,
whether they are of God or no, 1 John iv.1. Now how must that be done? even by
the Articles of our Creed, by the Rules of the Catholic Faith, say the
Contents of that Chapter. You shall hear him. Hereby know ye the Spirit of God:
That Is good; How? Every Spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, is of God, verse. 2. and every Spirit that confesses not, is not of God.
He gives his Criterium from an Article of the Creed against the Heretics of
that Time which oppugned it; for so the words following import, This is that
Spirit of Antichrist, verse. 3. that even now already is in the World. He does
not, it is true, give One Catholic Rule to try all Heresies by; for how many
Heretics were there, that were so cunning afterward, as to confess the
Incarnation, as Saint Austin observes on that place: but he gives one pro
tempore, sufficient at that time, and from the Creed he fetches it.

But the holy Apostle Peter speaks of all the Creed: For when he had seasonably
admonished us, that some do abuse and wrest the holy Scriptures, he gives us an
account who they are, viz. the unlearned, and the unstable; which can be none
else but those that have not sufficiently learned, and are not strongly
confirmed in the fundamental Lessons of Christianity, 2 Pet. iii.16.

The Scripture then is the un-erring Rule of Faith, but so that its
interpretation must have regard to the Rule and symbol of our Faith: the
reasons are the same as before, because they sweetly agree; the one is
contai'nd in the other, the one is supposed by the other, as we said of the Law
of Nature. They are mutual helps one to the other. The Scriptures were given,
that our Faith might not be interlop'd, and the Creed was given that the
Scripture might not be wrested, Neither can be spared by the faithful.

So here is no clashing; the Decalogue is the Rule, but not to shut out the
Pentateuch. The five Books of Moses are the Rule, but not to exclude the Ten
Commandments. Nothing must exclude its own Quintessence.

And is not this necessary? No question God saw it very necessary; and the
advantages are undeniably these: First, The Creed is one compact abridgement of
fundamentals, which in the Scripture lie as in the Mine here and there
respersed. Secondly, It is plain and easy; but the Scriptures have many things
hard to be understood: So said Saint Peter, when yet the Book of the Revelation
was not written. Hence the old Heretics few or none denied the Scriptures, but
the Creed many disowned.

After all this are we not nearer to Unity now? Yes: For if this Rule were
believed to be a Rule and Form preserved to us from the beginning, we should
none of us dream of new Lights, and stand amazed at every puff of doctrine
from this, or that, or the other illuminate.

We should not reckon salvation by any Name but Jesus, nor by that neither
unless rightly understood.

We should not divide Christ into Parishes, piecemeal, making so many
Catechisms as Congregations, and Christianities as Pulpits.

We should none of us dare to scruple the very Godhead of our Blessed Lord and
the Worlds (...) founded in it; we should not outface the Church of God in her
main mystery; whereby she is distinguished from the Jewish Synagogue, or the
Turkish Mosque.

We should not dare to contract this great salvation, and deny the universality
of Christ's merits.

We shall not abuse the grace of God, either to presume on a profane, or to be
secure in an indifferent life.

We should regard and respect the known ways of Christ, Baptism, etc. not
dreaming of an invisible Spirit to twitch us to Heaven by the hair of the head.

There is none of us would make it an Article, much less place all our saving
Faith in an infallible absolute assurance of our well-doing. We should rather
tremble at the brightness of Him that is to come judge Quick and Dead, and
tremble again at our sacrilegious breaches of our Vow in Baptism, and our
indevout repentances therefore.

We should not imagine no necessity of holiness toward eternal remission of
sins, we should not be afraid of good Works, Thing, nor Name.

We should talk less of the Spirit, and live more by it. We should look upon
Christianity as a kind of pure Angelical life, the exertion of the Spirit of
God received in Baptism.

We should believe a Church, be such men in understanding as to know our
Mother, and so natural as to reverence her.

We should not make such a vast Hiatns in Church History, as to reckon none
from the Apostles to our days: for if we reckon any, we could not place
Reformation in a wilful departure from it in every thing where humor prompts
us to do that easy thing of wresting Scripture.

And (to see that I would be impartial) neither should we out of a pretended
esteem of this Apostolic Form, content our selves with a scanty measure of the
knowledge of Christ: Seeing there is Duty and Knowledge, and to believe in
Christ rightly understood is a World of both. And thus much for proving of
matters of Faith.

Now for Ceremony and Order, the endless Dispute in this Island. How shall we
prove this? what Rule have we for these? Here, as no where else, do I look that
my authority should be acoepted: How can it, when the Churches is denied? a
very demonstration from so private a person shall not pass.

Yet I deem these things cannot be banished out of the Church: My reason is,
all Beauty lies in Order, all Decency in Ceremony.

With Order there is Beauty even in the Furrows of the Field, and without it
there is none in the Beds of a Garden, Irrational is the despoiling of Order,
hence such care taken, least the Swine break into the Garden.

God by the very Creation is a God of Order, Genesis i. And behold all was very
good; altogether as well as each particular. Besides his Title of Lord of Hosts
shows as much: Every one that knows what belongs to an Army, knows without
Order it is nothing.

Yea and Nature her self is not without her Ceremonies, the Leaves of the
Trees, and the Flowers of the Field; Solomon in all his Ceremony could not
outstrip them: and so decent are these, that without them the Trees look bald,
and the Earth withers into desert.

So in Animals, the House-Cock has his Spur and Crest, the Ensigns of
Chivalry, the rest of the Birds have their Habits and Liveries, the Turkies
neck is faced with Scarlet, and the Lapwing has his Cap of Maintenance.

Yet nearer, The hair of our Face and Beard is but a Ceremony, viz. a mark of
distinction and decency: and these instances that I have given, are so much to
the purpose, that it is known they have the Fate of Ceremonies, to wit, to be
thought superfluous, as the Goats Beard, etc. Yet given no question by the wise
Creator for use and ornament; but we that perceive not the Divine Reason
herein, think them idle luxuriant Excrescencies.

We know what our Savior has expressed against Traditions, and we do more
then partly believe him: He does at no hand condemn any Tradition or Rite of
the Elders directly; mark that, but such only as manifestly thwart the Word of
God; such are the unnatural neglect of maintenance of our needy Parents upon a
religious pretense of Corban, S. Mark vii.11. As for washing of the hands he
condemns it, but not directly, as if unlawful in it self, because no where
commanded, (as S. Chrysostom uncautelously lets fall) but indirectly, i.e. in
such a person whose scrupulous Hypocrite could make great conscience for the
less, and none of the greater. Thus elsewhere he condemns the Pharisees, yea
pronounces woe against them in several cases, Matthew. xxiii. First, Woe to you
Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites, for you compass Sea and Land to make a
Proselyte: A woe (and yet no fault in the World) All Religion that is good, or
believes it self to be good will do so. But what follows? You make him a child
of Hell twofold more then your selves. Again, Woe to you Scribes, Pharisees,
Hypocrites, because you garnish the Tombs of the Prophets, and say, If we had
been in the days of our Fathers, etc. No faults again, none I hope in that
repentant expression, If we, etc. But chiefly that of tithing Mint and Cummin,
which our Savior says they ought to have observed, and yet woe to the Scribes
for such tithing, whilst they omit the great matters of the Law, S. Matthew.
xxiii.23.

And if I much mistake not, our Savior puts this difference and distinction
himself, the phrase of the Text being clearly altered in one from what it was
in the other. In the matter of Corban our Savior charges them home with making
void Gods Law (...), This is sinful and impudent; but in the Washing it is
only (...), they are taxed for laying aside the Law of God, the Law of greater
matters, S. Mark vii.8.

But does our Savior deny any where, That he which makes conscience of the
great matters of the Law, may be (if he will) punctual in the less. If the
Pharisees heart should be clean washed, would the washing of his hands defile
him? Let any man judge what our Savior did, and all his Disciples at the
Marriage of Cana in Galilee, where there were six Water-pots set for this
Ceremony, yea and other times also. As an innocent Ceremony does not sanctify
a man, so neither does it defile him. Let us take heed of hypocrisy, and
secure the greater matters, and the less are free for us: To the clean all
things are clean, Tit. i.13.

Ceremonies may be superciliously censured (poor things) but as the Herald
says, In civil matters there can be no State or Majesty, so in Religion there
can be no Devotion, no solemnity without them.

All wise men know, that Religion is not a mere reserve, nothing outward: For
how then shall our Brother be edified? How shall our Religion be professed? How
solemnly professed? If there be in Religion a solemnity, there must be some
such thing as a becoming Ceremony. The unhappy Covenant could not be the solemn
League and Covenant, without the assumption of an outward Ceremony, lifting up
of the hand to swear.

And I appeal to any man that has a heart humbly to serve God, whether when he
composeth himself to devout pouring out of his soul to God, he can forbear the
natural expression of his eye and hand with heart. Let us lift up our hearts
and hands to God in the Heavens, Lam. iii.41. I ask whether the Publican could
forbear in his holy indignation against his enemy (himself) to smite his
breast. There is a natural spring in our bodies, that moves our hands, and
eyes, and knees according to our inward affection. And as I remember, pious
Anatomists give the reason why Nature made our eyes with such Muscles, and our
knees with such a Flexure.

God must be worshipped in Spirit and Truth, therefore he may not be worshipped
by Ceremony only: But must he therefore be worshipped without any? It is enough
for me that our blessed Savior, who best knew his own meaning used them, when
in the solemn time of his last Devotion, he adored on his S. Matthew. xxvi.39.
face, yea and on the Cross it self, when he delivered up his tormented spirit
to the Father, the Text says, He S. John xix.30.
Bowed his head, and gave up the Ghost.

They that will say a Ceremony is just nothing, should be asked, how they would
take it, if any one should spit in their faces, it is but the Ceremony of
DeFiance. Or if Christ's Disciples should shake off the dust of their feet for a
testimony against them, Matthew. x.14.

I am sure our Savior expects such testimonies from us. See what he says to
his friend Simon, when the ceremonious Woman came in that wiped his feet;
Simon, I have something to say to thee. S. Luke vii.44.
He accuses him of the defect of a triple Ceremony, and then brings in the
Woman for a sairer example; Thou gave me no water to wash my feet, this Woman
has washed me with her tears, thou gave me no kiss, this Woman has not
ceased to kiss my feet; my head with oil thou did not anoint, this Woman has
anointed my feet with ointment: And what is the conclusion? He loved little,
and she loved much. So true is it, there is no devotion without them.

Our Adversaries therefore would have done ill to have lived in the days of
Christ's flesh, who might perhaps have been contented to have cried Hosanna, but
they would have scarce made one at gathering of branches to strew Christ's way;
they would hardly have laid their Carpets and Garments in his Road; while his
Disciples laid all under the feet of his very Beast, S. Matthew. xxi.8.

I know these practices are liable to exception. The holy Woman's ointment Judas
put in ad quid praeditio haec? Had not it been better sold and given to the
poor? And yet our Savior defended that Woman. So to lay my Garments under an
Asses feet, What sense is for that? Yet our Savior accepted this; and God give
us grace to do those things that our Savior will accept.

But now to the Rule: What is the Rule of these things? R. Affection, Charity.
A high esteem is the Fountain and Rule of these expressions: You do not hear me
say a distinct Text of holy Scripture, that is for the greater matters of the
Law: There was no express Scripture for tithing of the Mint.

The Apostle is discoursing of these things, it is good to ask him, What is the
Rule of Ceremonies; The Apostle answers, Light of Nature, 1 Cor. xi.14. What is
the Rule (again) the same Apostle answers, Custom the decent, rational custom
of the Church of God, ver. 16. Nay, but what is the Rule? The Apostle answers,
(We know not how he will please you) Tradition Apostolic, ver. 2. Which places
if again consulted, you shall find that he speaks of such Natural Light, as it
is shame not to obey: Such Customs which have enough in them to silence the
Contentious, and such Traditions as he praises them for observing, and exhorts
them to hold fast, and so I am upon my Text this third time, Prove all things,
hold fast that which is good.

And this the Presbyterians abroad, with open face acknowledge, that much is to
be attributed to the Ancient Customs of the Church, that it is no Derogation
to the Perfection of Scriptures employed in the determination of Greater
Articles to leave the less to the Public Wisdom of the Church: but it is not
the Interest of ours at home, that these things should be taken notice of. Yet
let Chamiers 9th Book de Canone be consulted, particularly cap. 1. p. 20. where
he says, Et sane illum oportet esse oris impudentissimi qui eam (Traditionem,
Consuetudinem Ecclesiae) contemnat. Nos vero illum parum abest quin sacrilegum
appellemus, and quidem non tantum in Rebus levioribus (the Ceremonies) etc. sed
and grauioribus, etc. Et ix. cap. xviii. sect. 52. Resp. per observantias nulla
dogmata intelligi, sed duntaxat varios ritus, quorum exempla quaedam subnectit
(speaking of Origin) Genu flexionem, conversionem ad Orientem, Ritus sumendae
Eucharistiae, etc. Atqui illa omnia Catholici (the Protestants) libere
permittunt Traditioni. But once more (for I appeal to the whole Book) he has
these words: Hinc autem non sequitur Scripturas esse imperfectas, nisi prius
demonstrentur dogmata Fidei ab Apostolis instituta esse quae omnino scripta non
sunt, ix.20, 32. For as to the Rites, he says, It is not denied, quandam ab
Apostolis potuisse constitui, quae quia non essent de essentia and naturafidei,
minus curavint scriptis refer, ix.19, 20. Pray let it be pondered.

The same reason give we. Scripture is not their Rule, because it is above
them. Secondly, Because they are of a mutable condition, where the first
constituent Reason of the practice proves to be such; otherwise not. There are
some Traditions immutable, which it is not in the power of the Church to change,
as the institution of the Lords Day fixed on the first day of the Week, and yet
they belly Calvin if he would not have changed it to Thursday; but that Reason
of our Lords Resurrection has determined it to that day of the Week, as the
Sabbath by another was determined to the Jew.

Here it is to be noted, when we say Custom or Tradition, we do not mean an
Arbitrary usage of the Church, as the Gentry put on their Garments, and the
Ladies their Fancies, merely for variety, but there is discernible with it
something more of moment, either the Light of Nature, as in all Humble
Postures, Institution of Festivals, many times Gods and Christ's own Wisdom and
Spirit, in all of them Reason sufficient to constitute them.

For why the Apostles Love-Feast? Why the Veil? S. Jude xii. 1 Cor. xi.10. 2
Cor. xiii.13.
Why the Holy Kiss? Why the Love-Feast? because it was (...) Love: the Reason
is in the Name. Why the Kiss? the Reason is in the appellation a Holy Kiss, a
Kiss of Charity? Why the Vail? because of Modesty and Reservedness in the
Virgin in the presence of God and his holy Angels.

Thou shall not add thereto, 1 Cor. xi.
nor diminish therefrom, establishes Gods authority, but it does not overthrow
his Churches. Moses his Chair and the Sanedrim were put up by God to make
Canons of Church and State in points not decidible by the Text.

The Church of God always knew it her Innocent Right to ordain a Ceremony on a
just Reason, before Moses was born, Genesis xxxii.32. witness the abstaining from
the sinew in memory of Jacobs wrestling: so do the Jews ever since observe
solemn Fasts for Miriams Leprosy, Moses his breaking of the Tables, and the
Death of the sons of Aaron, as the learned Usher has noted them and more for
us in his Ages of the World.

Many that are used to this day come from Gods own wisdom under the
Law-Dispensation, and therefore adopted by the Church under the Gospel; the
Spirit of Christ so thought it good, who is thereby thoroughly witnessed to the
Jew to be their Messiah, promised by the God of their Fathers, in this, that
(bating the mere shadows and servile work, in whose room he has put
substantial and more glorious services) in founding his Church he has retained
all that was fit, and solemn, and decent, such as are the distinction of the
Courts of the Lords House, the Orders of Priest and Levite, their hours of
Prayer, their attendances by night in the Temple, secubations in times of
Humiliation, the Baptism of the Infant about the eighth day, the giving of the
Name at Baptism, and the Godfathers (at they used at Circumcision) the
seclusion of the Woman after Childbearing for a Months space, the Reading the
Law in their Synagogues, their singing, the Hebrew Amen, and Alleluja, the
Dominical day for the Sabbath, nay our very Sacraments themselves advanced from
the Jews who had their Baptism and Cup Eucharistical, and many others in which
God, God I say is visibly evident.

I should surfeit you, if I should lead you as I thought to have done through
every particular; but at present it cannot be.

Only thus far have I attempted to bring all good Christians to Truth and
Unity. Let no man do me that wrong past repair, to think that I have in any of
this an evil eye toward the holy Scripture; whatsoever is said I wish un-said,
that is not proved thereby.

If for matters of Faith and practical conscience the holy Scriptures suppose
the Creed and Light of Nature, it cannot exclude them. If for matters of
Ceremony the Scripture undertaketh not, but commends to us other subordinate
authority, let those places be expunged, or else we dare not say but what we
have said. If we be judged by Scriptures, let us be judged by Scriptures, and
he that makes conscience of one clause, must make conscience of all uniformly,
or else he had better never seen it. Would men but consider this.

That the holy Scripture is the Rule, I have not insisted on, because I took it
for granted, and I should have been tedious in asserting what every body knows.
It is a Rule, and such a Rule, that he that loves his salvation must diligently
attend it: see how many Precepts are in it. (Think not of x or xx, but of x
times xx) And as many as there are, I never counted my self to understand any
thing, till I perfectly believed that every one of them were my Rule in order
to salvation: so that men of unwary conversations (such as I am) cannot read
them without a sigh and shaking of the head, as S. Austin uses to say, Yerret
me, this and that Precept frights me, when I know how far I come short.

All that I have labored for is, that the Scripture may not be wrested, that
we may not lose the fruit of it by abusing it. Hereby will I, nill I, owning it
to be a Rule, if it be but in this, that it is liable to be wrested.

But let no man strange that Scripture may be abused, (as profane and audacious
as the Practice is, though I fear not commonly thought so) even by those that
seem to cry it up. How do we take it, when some cry up Liberty to bring in
Confusion? Do they not abuse Liberty thereby? The seditious Party do so. What
think you of those that magnify grace in flat opposition to all duty? Do they
not abuse it? the Autinomian does so. Nay, if one shall cry up Jesus Christ
himself (can Christ be extolled too much? yea, but if he should be set up) in
opposition to his Father, I have seen a Cursed Paper do so. Nothing is done
right, but what is stated according to its due limits of explication. This is
the sourse of all our misery.

And now this objection is out of the way, how shall I bespeak you to return to
the unity of that Church, to which, if you had once proved all things by
Scripture Rules, you must at last retire: the worst that you can gain is the
character of an understanding and peaceable person, a wise man, and a meek one.
Why must a Ceremony fright you? What deformed Multiplying-Glass do you see that
in, which of it self is rational, innocent, and solemn? Do we place the
substance of Religion in them? Nay, we say indeed there is no outward
profession without them, no real body but what will cast its shadow. Which of
us would not have censured Mary Magdalen of superstition to have wiped Christ's
feet with her hair, and have pitied the ignorance of those men that threw their
Garments under our Saviors Asses feet? How many counted our Savior himself a
breaker of the Sabbath (because they consulted not right reason) and how many a
Blasphemer (because they knew not his authority) Our Lord was not stanch enough
for those that called him wine-bibber, and the holy Baptist for his fasting and
prayer had a Devil. Have we no need of proving all things, and take in all the
lights and helps that God vouchsafes us? Let not Reason, Creed, Scripture,
Christ, all be against us, for in the end they will be too hard for us.

FINIS.

