Catholic Charity Recommended in a SERMON, BEFORE The Right Honorable the Lord
Mayor, AND Aldermen of LONDON: In order to the abating the Animosities among
Christians, that have been occasioned by Differences in Religion.

BY Ios. Glanvill, Rector of Bath.

LONDON: Printed for H. Eversden, under the Crown Tavern in West-Smithfield,
and I. Collins, at the Kings Head in Westminster Hall. 1669.

To the Reader.
I Never thought of having an occasion to make this Sermon more public than it
was in the Preaching of it: But some of my Hearers chanced to be so sagacious,
as to spy a Design in it, which my dullness never thought of; and to report
several Passages to the purpose of their Phansy; which I either never said, or
not so as they represented: Upon the occasion of which mistakes chiefly (I
suppose) I have been frequently solicited by others, who had kinder
apprehensions of that Discourse, to let it go abroad. This I now do for that
reason; for I find that without it, neither the one, or other will be
satisfied. I have added some things toward the Conclusion, which I should have
said, if the time allotted to these Public Exercises would have permitted. In
the whole, I assure the Reader, I intended nothing, but to recommend, and press
one of the greatest, and yet one of the most neglected Duties of Christianity:
And I am very sorry that our Divisions have brought things to such a pass, that
men take it ill to hear of Charity. And whether it be seasonable in our times
to exhort men to such a Duty, or no; let those that kn^w the temper of the Age
judge. If it should need an Apology (and methinks it should not) that I have
chosen so plain, and ordinary a Text; I would let those, that object it, know,
That I intend no subtilties of Wit, or Tricks of various fancy, no Wire-drawn
Interpretations, or nice Divisions, to ostenate quaintness, or pedantick
Learning; but seriously to mind the contentious world of an important part of
Christianity, which it seems to have forgotten; and to recommend a Virtue,
which nearly concerns all the Affairs of Religion, and all the great interests
of men: For which purposes the plainest words are most proper. And I chose such
the rather that I might not need to spend any of my short time in Divisions,
Coherences, and Explications; which ordinarily signify very little, and would
have hindered my doing any tolerable right to the main Subject.

J. G.
London, Feb. 10 1668.
A SERMON OF Catholic Charity.
1 Pet. I. part of xxii. v. See that you Love one Another.
HOW many, and how great have been the Feuds, and still are, of this tottering,
and broken Age, there is no man here so happy as to be ignorant. That such
Strifes among Brethren are Unnatural, and Diabolical; and that it is a lovely
thing to see Christians live together in Charity, and Love; there is no
Christian but will grant: but how the fatal Evil is to be cured, and the lovely
thing is to be compast; here is the Knot, here is the Difficulty. To endeavor
the reconciling Extremes that are so divided, may look like a design to
persuade a friendship between the Winds and Waves. It Is very strange that
Christians should be so at odds, whose Religion is Peace, and Love; and the
reasons of whose differences are so small, in proportion to the degree of their
Animosities. Our GOD is One, and we have the same common SAVIOR; we profess
one GOSPEL, and believe the same Creeds; we have the same SACRAMENTS, and the
same fundamental ORDINANCES: And since we are agreed in These, what is there
left, that is worth the heat of a Dispute? what, that can justify a Division?
Certainly, it is not men's Pinciples that keep them so at odds, there is
somewhat more in the matter; there is something wanting that would heal our
Breaches, and compose our Divisions. Love would heal us, if we would be healed.

NOW in a general Combustion, it is every Christians Duty to bring what Water he
can, to throw upon the Flames; especially, it is the office of the Ministers of
Peace, to endeavor to promote it. It Is a plain subject; but such are most
necessary, and this is most seasonable* seasonable at all times, but
principally in these, wherein it is hard to discern by the practice of
Christians that the Duty called Love has any thing to do with Christianity.
And yet this is a vital grace of our Religion: It Is the Law and Gospel in a
word; for Love is the fulfilling of the Law, and the Gospel is a Law of Love.
And it is very strange, and very sad, that an Age, which has so much of light
and faith in the pretense, should have so little of Charity and love in the
practice; especially, since that light, which is from above, is full of
Benignity, and Goodness; and that faith, which is truly Divine, works by
love. This is the Duty which our Apostle recommends in the words, and I have
chosen it for my present subject: In Discoursing it, I shall show you.

(1.) The Necessity of the Duty, (2.) It Is Extent, (3.) The Excellency of it;
and propose (4.) some Means to assist us toward the attainment of this
Generous, and Catholic Spirit.

For the (1.) The Necessity of the Duty; the whole Scripture is so full, and so
express in enjoining it, that methinks I might be excused from a labor, that
would seem superfluous to one, that knows the Gospel, and not the practice of
those that profess it: But because the Christianity of most Christians, is, (if
I may so speak) quite another thing from the Christianity of CHRIST; it will be
necessary to mind them what HIS was, that they may be persuaded to conform
theirs unto it: and though men's understandings are convinced already that
Charity is their Duty, yet there is but too much need to represent some of the
vast heap of injunctions that make it so, to incline their Wills. I shall
therefore briefly lay together a few of the chief instances of this kind; that
you may have the distincter sense of the reasons of your Duty, and from them,
the most powerful motives to enforce it. In order to this, let us consider in
short, the Injunctions of Christ, and the teachings of his Apostles.

OUR SAVIOR urges it as his New Commandment; John 13.34. and inculcates it
again under the obliging form of his Command, John 15.12. He makes it a
distinguishing note of his Disciples, John 13.35. and enjoins them to love
their Enemies, Mat. 5.24 He mentions it as the great qualification of those on
his Right hand, that shall be received into his Kingdom, Mat. 25.34.35. and the
want of it, as the reason of the dreadful Curse pronounced upon those miserable
ones on the Left, at the solemn Judgment, ver. 41, 42. St. Paul calls Love,
the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.8, 9, 10. and sets it in the first place
among the fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5.22. yea, reckons it five times over
under other Names in the Catalogue. viz. those of Peace, Long-suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Meekness, ver. 22.23. He advances it above all Gifts and
graces, 1 Cor. 13. above the Tongues of Men and Angels, ver. 1. and above
Prophesy, and Mysteries, and Knowledge, and Faith, ver. 2. And the beloved
Disciple St. John, who lay in the Bosom of his Dear Lord, and seems to partake
most of his Spirit, is transported in the commendation of this Grace. He tells
us, that God is Love, 1 John 4.7. and repeats it again, ver. 16. He makes it an
Argument of our being born of God, and Knowing Him, ver. 7. and the want of
this an evidence of not Knowing God, ver. 8. He counts it the mark of
Discipleship; and the contrary, a sign of one that abides in Death, 1. John
3.14. He calls him a Murderer that hates another, ver. 15. and a Liar, if he
pretends to Love God, and loves not his Brother, 1 John 4.20. In fine, he
out-speaks the greatest heights of Praise, when he says God is Love, and he
that loves dwells in God, and God in him, 1 John 4.16. I might represent
further, that we are commanded to Love without dissimulation, Romans 12.9. to be
kindly affectioned one toward another, ver. 10. to put on the Breast Plate of
Faith, and Love, 1 Thessalonians 5.8. to be pitiful, and courteous. 1 Pet. 3.8. to
provoke one another to love, and to good works, Heb. 10.24. to serve one
another, Gal. 5.13. to love as Brethren, 1 Pet 3.8. We are minded of Christ's
New Commandment, 1 Ioh. 3.23. and of the Message which was from the beginning,
That we should Love one another, ver. 11. and are urged by the consideration of
Gods loveing us, 1 John 4.1. Thus the Apostles exhort, and teach: and they
Pray, that our Love may abound. Phil. 1.9. and 1 Thessalonians. 3.12. and give solemn
Thanks for it, when they have found it, 2 Thessalonians. 1.3.

And now considering the expresness of all these places, I cannot see, but that
any Duty of Religion may be more easily evaded than this; and those who can
fancy themselves Christians, and yet continue in the contrary Spirit, and
Practice, may conceit themselves Religious, though they live in the constant
commission of the sins of Drunkenness, and Theft. And if such can quite their
Consciences, and shuffle from the edge of all these plain Recommends, and
Injunctions; they have found a way to escape all the Laws of God, and may, when
they please, become Christians, without Christianity. For the evidence, I have
suggested to prove the necessity of this Duty, does not consist in half
Sentences, and doubtful Phrases, in phansied Analogies, and far-fetcht
Interpretations; but in plain Commands, and frequent Inculcations; in earnest
Entreaties, and pressing Importunities; in repeated Advices, and passionate
Commendations: And those whom all these will not move, are Incapable of being
persuaded, against their humor, or their interest, to any Duty of Religion. So
that, though I see never so much eagerness for an Opinion, or Heat for an
indifferent Circumstance without the conscience of Christian Love; I shall
never call that forwardness for those little things, Zeal, or Religion: Yea,
though those warm men should sacrifice their Lives to their beloved Trifles, I
should not think them Martyrs; but fear rather, that they went from one Fire to
another, and a Worse. And in this I have the great Apostle to warrant me, who
says: Though I give my body to be burned, and have not Charity, it profits
me nothing, 1 Cor, 13.3.

Thus of the first Head, the Necessity of this Duty; I come to the second, the
Extent of it. Our Love ought,

I. To be extended to all Mankind. The more general it is, the more Christian,
and the more like unto the Love of God, who causes his Sun to shine, and his
Rain to fall upon the Good, and upon the Evil. And though our Arms be very
short, and the ordinary influence of our kindness, and good will, can reach but
to a very few, yet we may pray for all men, and desire the good of all the
world; and in these we may be charitable without bounds: But these are not all.
Love obliges us to relieve the Needy, and help the Distressed, to visit the
Sick, and succor the Fatherless and Widows, to strengthen the Weak, and to
confirm the Staggering and Doubting, to encourage the Virtuous, and to reprove
the Faulty; and in short, to be ready in all the offices of Kindness, that may
promote the good of any man Spiritual, or Temporal, according to the utmost of
our power, and capacity. The good man is Merciful to his Beast, and the
Christian ought to be Charitable to his Brother, and his Neighbor; and every
man is our Brother, and every one that Needs us, is our Neighbor: And so our
Love ought to extend to all men universally, without limitation; though with
this distinction.

II. That the more especial Objects of our Love ought to be those that agree
with us in a common Faith Gal. 6.10, that is, All Christians, as Christians,
and because such. What ever makes our Brother a Member of the Church Catholic,
that gives him a title to our nearer affections, which ought to be as large as
that. Our Love must not be confined by names, and petty agreements, and the
interests of Parties, to the corners of a Sect: but ought to reach as far as
Christianity it self, in the largest notion of it. To love those that are of
our Way, Humor, and Opinion, is not Charity, but Self-love; it is not for
Christ's sake, but our own. To Love like Christians, is to Love his Image from
whom we are called so: And that consists not in demure Looks and affected
Phrases, in melting Tones and mimick Gestures, in Heats and Vehemence, in
Rapture and Ecstasy, in systemes of Opinion, and scrupulosity about Nothing;
But in Faith and Patience, Innocence, and Integrity; in Love to God, and
Charity to all the World; in a modest sweetness, and humble Deportment; in a
peaceable Spirit, and readiness to obey God, and Those He has set over Us.
Where ever These are, there is the Image of our Lord, and There ought to be our
Love; though the persons thus affected, are Ignorant of many things, and err
in many; though they differ from us in some Opinions we count Orthodox, and
walk not in the particular ways or Circumstances which We esteem Best. And thus
briefly of the Extent of the Duty, we ought to Love ALL MEN, but especially ALL
Christians, I descend to the Third general, viz.

(III.) The Excellency of Christian Love, which I represent in the following
particulars.

(I.) IT is the Image of God, and of all the graces renders us most like our
Maker: For God is Love, and the Lover of Men; and his tender Mercies are over
all his Works: And the most suitable apprehension we can form of his Being, is,
to look on him as an Omnipotent, Omniscient, Immutable Goodness. And is it not
a glorious Excellency, that makes Men like the fountain all persection? Our
unhappy First Parents lost Paradise, by aspiring to be like God in Knowledge:
and if we endeavor to be like him in Love, we shall be in the way of gaining a
better Paradise than they lost.

(II.) LOVE is the Spirit of Angels, Glorified Souls, and the best of Men.
There is nothing by which the Angelical nature is so Much distinguished from
the Diabolical, as Love, and Goodness; for the Devils have Spiritual, and
Immortal natures, and great degrees of Power and Knowledge; and those perhaps
not much inferior to what is to be found in some of the better Spirits: so
that the great difference is not in the excess of natural perfections, which
the Angels of Light have above those of Darkness; but in this, that the former
abound in Love, Sweetness, and Benignity; and the latter, in Malice, Cruelty,
and Revenge; these are the very Image of Satan, and Spirit of Hell. Whereas
all the Celestial Inhabitants live in the joyful exercise of uninterrupted Love
and endearments: Nor is that Love confined to the blessed, and glorified
Company, but it sheds it self abroad upon the nether world; and they are
Ministering Spirits for our good, Heb. 1.14. They so far Love us, that they can
stoop from Heaven to serve us. There is Joy there at the Conversion of a
Sinner; and no doubt there is Love to converted Saints, and care and pity for
all the rest of Men. For the spirits of the Just made perfect are freed from
their froward humors, and pettish natures; their mistaken Zeal, and sondness
of Opinions; which straightned their Affections while they were on Earth: and
now they are enlarged by the vast improvements of their Knowledge, and
accomplishment of their Virtue; by a fuller sense of Divine Love, and of their
Duty; by the genius of their company, and the employment of the happy Place. So
that in Heaven all are Chatholicks in their Affections.

And the better any man is, the more he is so upon Earth: The good man makes
not himself his center, not are his thoughts wholly engrost about his own
concernments; but he is carefully solicitous for the general benefit, and never
so much pleased as when he is made an instrument of Divine Goodness, to promote
the interests of his Christian brethren. 'Twas an high strain of Love in Moses,
expressed toward the Transgressing Israelites, when he was content to be blotted
out of Gods Book, rather than that their Sin should not be blotted out. Exodus
32.32. and St. Paul was no less Zealously affectionate toward the Jews, when
he said, he could wish himself accursed from Christ, viz. separated from
Christian communion as a most vile and abject person, for their sakes. Romans
9.3. These were spirits whom Religion and Divine Love had enlarged: and the
more any man advances in Christianity, the nearer he approaches to this
generous, heroic temper.

(III.) LOVE is an eminent branch of the Divine Life, and Nature. Love is of
God, and every one that Loves, is born of God, says the Apostle, 1 John 4.7,
8. The Divine Nature in us, is the Image of God Pourtraid, and lively drawn
upon the regenerated Soul; and we have remark't above, that Love is the vital
Image of our Maker; it is His spirit infused into us, and growing in us; and
upon that account to be preferred before all Gifts, and natural Perfections: as
St. Paul has done it in the mentioned 1 Cor. 13. And the common Gifts of the
Spirit differ from this special Grace, as the Painters Picture does from his
Son: His Counterfeit may indeed, in a superficial appearance to the Eye,
resemble him more than his Child; but yet it is but an empty shadow, destitute,
and incapable of his Life, and Nature: So there are a sort of Gifts, that have
a spiritual appearance, and may, to those that see things at distance, or have
not their senses exercised, seem more like the divine nature, than this modest
virtue: But those that come near them, and are better able to discern, perceive
that in themselves they are without the Divine Life, and Motion, and are mere
Liveless Pictures. And here I dare say, that the happiest faculty to Preach
Plausibly, and Pray with Fluency, and Eloquence; to Discourse Devoutly, and
readily to Interpret Sripture, if it be not joined with a benign and
charitable spirit, is no participation of the God-like life and nature; nor
indeed any more Divine, than those common gifts, and natural parts, which those
that think highly of themselves upon these accounts, despise. For very Evil men
have been eminent in these accomplishments, and Wicked Spirits are without
question endowed with them; and they are of themselves arguments of nothing but
a faculty of Imitation, a devotional Complexion, and warm Imagination: Whereas
on the other hand, Charity, and Christian Love are good Evidence of a Renewed
state, and nature. Our Savior made it a Character, Ioh. 13. and the Catholic
Apostle concludes from it, 1 John. 3.14. By this we know that we are passed
from death to life, because we love the Brethren. And if this be a Mark, and
St. John be not mistaken, I doubt that some who are very gracious, by many
Signs of their own, will want one of Christ's, to prove their comfortable
presumption.

(IV.) LOVE is the bond and tie of Christian Communion; How can two walk
together except they are agreed? The Church is a Body consisting of many
Members, which unless they Unite, and send their mutual supplies one to
another, the Whole is distempered, and in the ready way to Death and
Dissolution. Now Charity is that vital Cement whereby they are United, and the
Soul by which the common body lives; that whereby the League between the
members is preserved, and health with it. When this decays, sad symptoms, and
mortal evils follow. We see in Nature, the great Fabric of the World is
maintained by the mutual Friendship, and conspiracy of its parts; which should
they universally fall out, and break the bond of Amity that is between them;
should they act their Antipathies upon each other; yea, should they but cease
to serve one another for the general good; the whole frame would quickly be
dissolved, and all things shuffled into their old Chaos, and Abyss. And the
greatest evils that have, or can happen to the Church, have been the effects of
the Decay of Charity, and those intestine Divisions that have grown up in it.
From these she has always suffered more, than from external persecutions: The
flames within have consumed her, when those from without, have only singed her
garments.

(V.) LOVE is the most Catholic grace, and upon that account the most
excellent; since that which promotes the good of the whole, is better than any
private perfection: for which reason, things in nature will quit their
particular interests, when the common good so requires; as heavy bodies will
ascend, and light bodies descend, to prevent a chasm, and breach in Nature. Now
of all the divine virtues, there is none of so large an influence, as Love;
it is a grace designed for the good of the community, as the principle of
self-Love is for the preservation of particular beings. This stirs up our
endeavors for the good of others, and especially for the general good. The
Church receives no wound, but Love feels the smart of it; nor is any member of
it afflicted, but Love is grieved. This is the very Spirit of our dear Lord,
who was touched with a feeling of our Infirmities. And to these I add this last.

(VI) LOVE commends Christianity to those without, and cleanses the Profession
of it from many Spots it has contracted. The generality of men are not able to
judge of Religions themselves, but usually reckon of them, as they do of their
Professors. What ever is excellent, or else unworthy, in a votary of Religion,
redounds to the credit, or disparagement, of the Religion he has adopted: So
that, were the charity and goodness of Christianity transcribed into the lives
of Christians, it would ravish the eyes of all Beholders, and outshine all
other Professions. Men would more easily be persuaded to believe that Religion
to be from God, whose Professors they saw to be so God-like. Love and goodness
prevail where nothing else will; these win and captivate the Soul: And such
conquests are better, and more noble than either those of Arts or Arms, which
only bring the body under. It Is but small credit to any Religion to cut it is
way by the Sword, or gain upon the world by Power or Policy; That which opens
it self a passage by its native loveliness, and beauty, is the most
Illustrious, and makes the surest, and most generous Conquests. And were
Christendom but Christian in this regard, and the Professors of the true
Religion, truly Religious, that is, abounding in that charity, and goodness,
which Christianity enjoins; our Religion would spread its wings through the
World, and all contrary Professions would lie in the dust before it: Whereas
the Divisions, and fatal feuds of Paganized, degenerated Christendom, are now
the great Partition Wall between Us, and the Heathen-World; yea, they are more
particularly the great scandal of the Reformation, and make us the scorn of
Those of Rome.

O that They that speak and pray much against the Beast, would not prove
instrumental to uphold his Throne! We expect, and hope for glorious times when
the Man of Sin is fallen; and doubtless there shall be such: But then the glory
of those times consists not in external rule, or dominion of the Church, but in
the Universal Restoration of it to it is primitive Simplicity, and Purity. Then
will the Church be Glorious indeed, when all Christians shall unite upon the
Foundation of an Holy Life, and the joint Profession of the few, plain,
Fundamentals of Faith: When they shall make real Goodness the Object of their
affections toward each other; and all Differences in Opinions and dispensible
Practices, the Objects of their mutual Forbearance: When such times as these
shall come, then does the Reign of Christ begin: And this is the true, and
wished Millennium. Now we cannot expect those glorious days which are to
Commence upon the Fall of Antichrist, till we see all Christians sincerely set
upon Destroying what is Antichristian in themselves. Antichrist will not be
overthrown by our declaiming against Him, and spitting the fire of Rage at the
Infallible Chair. It will be to better purpose for us to examine what of
Anti-christianism remains in our selves: And while Rancour, and Bitterness,
Rage, and Animosities upon the Account of Difference in smaller Opinions are in
our Borders, Antichrist has a Throne among us; and there is nothing could be
so Effectual a Blow at the Root of Anti-christianism, as the exercise of
Charity and Catholick-Goodness. And when we see these take place, then may we
Triumphantly sing forth, BABYLON IS FALLEN.

I come now Fourthly to the Means of attaining this excellent and Catholic
Temper; And I propose them by way of DIRECTION, CONSIDERATION, and CAUTION. The
DIRECTIONS are these: (I.) Acknowledge worth in any man. Whatever is good is
from God, and He is to be loved, and owned in all things; as well in the Paint
upon the Butter-flies wing, as in the glorious uniform luster of the Sun; as
well in the composure of the little Ant, as in the vast Bodies of the Whale, or
Elephant; In the least Herb under our feet, as well as in the Stupendous
Fabric of the Heavens over us: And moral perfections are to be acknowledged,
as well as these natural ones. We are to love Virtue in an Heathen, and
whatever is Well, or Worthy in those, whose Apprehensions are most distant from
our own. And we must take care that we make not our Relish, the Measure of
Worth and Goodness: Say not this is excellent, because it is agreeable to your
particular Palates; and that on the other hand is Vile, and Loathsome, because
it is distastful to your Gust and Genius. There are various kinds, and degrees
of Excellency, which differently affect the diversity of Tempers, and
Constitutions; And, at the best, we are Imperfectly good, and therefore cannot
be the Measure. Let us then be so Ingenuous as to own the virtue and the
goodness that is in all parties, and Opinions; Let us commend and love it. This
will be a means to sweeten our Spirits, and to remove the Animosities we are
apt to conceive against the Persons of Dissenters; and it will engage them on
the other hand, to a greater kindness for us, and so Lessen our Distance, and
Disagreements. There is a kind of Spirit among some, which is so different from
that Charity, which thinks no Evil. 1 Cor. 13. That it thinks nothing else
concerning those of a differing Judgment, but that their Virtues are dull
Morality; and their Piety, Hypocritical Pretensions; or whatever Worse
Ill Will can Invent, and Rage can say: They will not believe that to be a
Jewel, which they find among so much supposed Rubbish. But let us take Care,
that we deny not God the Honor of his Gifts, and Graces; or proudly fancy
that he has given us the Monopoly: This is contrary to that Charity which is
not puffed up, and does not behave it self unseemly. Or, if we could modestly
suppose, that there is nothing but Ignorance, and mistake among all those who
are not of our Opinion; yet however, their Virtues ought to be acknowledged.
The Son of God was to be Worshipped, even when he lay in the Stable; and the
Arc to be owned, when among the Philistines. ('It Is a sign that we love God for
himself, if we Love him every where) And indeed, that Worth is more to be
admired that grows up in an uncultivated Soul, and among the Weeds of Error,
and false Principles. To find a Rose, or Tulip in a Garden, is a common thing,
and Merits less of our regard; but to meet with them in the Highway,, or open
Fields, this ingageth our nearer Notice, and recommends the Flowers to our more
particular Kindness. Thus Virtue, though in all men excellent, yet it is no more
than is expected to be in Persons of Knowledge, and right Judgment; But in the
Ignorant, and Mistaken, it thrives under Disadvantages, and deserves more to be
Cherished, and Encouraged. And now if 'twere possible to bring the divided
World to these Ingenuous Acknowledgements, men would find their Spirits
composed, and their Animosities qualified; They would see they have Friends,
even in the Tents of their Enemies; and this, Apprehended and Owned mutually,
would be a very hopeful way to endear and reconcile us. And (II.) I recommend
this as another; Be much in the Contemplation of the Love of God. He that knows
how much God has Loved him, has a mighty Reason to Love his Brother; The
Apostle urges the Argument, 1 John 4.11. If God so Loved us, we ought also to
Love one another: and he that considers, cannot choose; for he must needs find
himself sweetly Engaged to Love God, of whose Love he is sensible; and he that
loves Him, loves all things in him: For all things are his, and he tenders
every thing he has made. The Love of God does not Confine us to his single
abstracted Essence, but requires our Kindness to all that bear his Image, and
produce it. Seraphick Love will be Catholic; It does not burn like a Lamp in a
Sepulcher, but it is like the Stars of Heaven, that impart themselves to all
things. And as the Planets, that receive their Light from the Sun, do not suck
it in, and ingross it, but disperse, and shed it abroad upon the most distant
Bodies; in like manner, a Christian Soul that is warmed and lightened by Divine
Love does not keep it within it self, but communicates it is benign Influences
to all the Objects that are within it is reach. The Love of God in it is proper
Nature is diffusive, and very opposite to Envy and Animosity; It Dispels the
Clouds, and Allays the Tempests that arise from the Body, and it is Appetites;
and Composeth the Soul to the Sweetest, and most even Temper; It Inlarges our
Minds, and Softens our Affections, and Calms our Passions, and Smooths the
Ruggedness of our Natures; It destroys our Pride and Selfishness, and so
strikes up the Roots of Enmity, and Divisions; and thus disposes us to the
most Generous and Comprehensive Charity. In order to which Blessed Issue, I
Advise further. (III.) Make the great Design of Religion yours; and know, that
the Intent of that is, not to Cure heads with Notion, or to teach us Systems of
Opinion; to resolve us a Body of Difficult Points, or to Enable us to talk
plausibly for lesser Truths; But to furnish our minds with encouragements of
Virtue, and instances of Duty; to direct us to govern our Passions, and subdue
our appetites and self-wills, in order to the glory of God, the good of
Societies, and our own present and eternal Interests. And if Christians would
take this to be their business, and conscienciously apply themselves unto it;
they would find work enough in their own hearts to employ them, and neither
have time, nor occasion to pry into the Infirmities of others, nor inclination
to quarrel with them: they would see how unwise it is to be seeking, and making
Enemies, when they have so many within themselves; and how dangerous, to be
diverted to a needless, and unjust foreign War, while a deadly domestic Foe is
strenghtned by it. And methinks it is wonderful, and it is sad, that we should be
so mild, and indulgent to the enemies, that we are bound to engage against by
our Duty to God, and to our selves, by his Laws, and our own Reasons, by the
precepts and examples of his Son our Savior, by his Sacraments, and by his
Blood, by all things in Religion, and all things in Interest; and at the same
time, be so eager against those, whom we ought to consider as Friends, upon the
account of our relation to God, and the tie of common nature, and the
obligations of Divine Commands, and the interests of Societies, and the
practice of the best times past, and the hopes of a future happiness.

This is lamentable in it self, and yet the more so, for being common. And it
seems to me such a kind of madness, as if a man should be picking causless
quarrels with his Neighbors about a chip of Wood, or a broken Hedge, when a
Fire in his house is consuming his Goods, and Children: Such Frenzies, and much
greater, are our mutual enmities and oppositions, while we quietly sit down in
our unmortified Affections. And we should know them to be so, did we understand
our Danger, or our Duty, and seriously mind either the one, or other: We should
find then that a Christian has no such enemies as the Flesh, the World, and
the Devil; that these will require all our care, and employ all our strength,
and diligence: and he that knows this, and considers, and acts suitably, will
find too much in himself to censure, and oppose, and too little to admire
himself for above others; He will see sufficient reason to incline him to
pardon his erring brother, and be the more easily induced to exercise charity,
which himself so many ways needs. The last Direction is this.

(IV.) Study the moderate pacifick ways, and principles, and run not in
extremes: both Truth, and Love are in the middle; Extremes are dangerous. After
all the swaggering, and confidence of Disputers there will be uncertainty in
lesser matters: and when we travel in uncertain Roads, it is safest to choose
the Middle. In this, though we should miss a lesser truth, (which yet is not
very likely) we shall meet with Charity, and our gain will be greater than our
loss. He that is extreme in his Principles, must needs be narrow in his
Affections: whereas he that stands on the middle path, may extend the arms of
his Charity to those on both sides. It is indeed very natural to most, to run
into extremes: and when men are fallen Out with a Practice, or Opinion, they
think they can never remove ^o too great a distance from it; being frighted by
the steep before them, they run so far back, till they fall into a precipice
behind them. Every Truth is near an Error; for it lies between two Falsehoods:
and he that goes far from One, is apt to slip into the other; and while he
flies from a Bear, a Lion meets him. So that the best way to avoid the Danger
is to steer the middle Course; in which we may be sure there is Charity and
Peace, and, very probably, Truth in their Company.


Thus of my DIRECTIONS. For CONSIDERATIONS I Will propose such as show the
Unreasonable of our Enmities, and Disagreements upon the account of different
Opinions; which will prove that our Affections ought to meet, though our
Judgments cannot. My first is this, (I.) Love is part of Religion; but Opinions
for the sake of which we loose Charity, are none. The First, I have proved
already: and for the other, we may consider, That Religion consists not in
knowing many things, but in practicing the few plain things we know. THE
NECESSARY PRINCIPLES OF FAITH LIE IN A LITTLE ROOM. This is Life Eternal to
know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent; Says he
that best knew what was Eternal Life, and what necessary unto it, Ioh. 17.3.
and the Apostle St. Paul draws up all into the same two Principles. He that
comes unto God must know that he is, and that he is a Rewarder of them that
diligently seek him; Heb. 11.6. St. Peter was pronounced blessed upon the
single Profession, that Jesus was Christ the Son of the Living God, Mat. 16.16.
and the Eunuch was baptized upon the same. Act. 8.37. Saint Paul reckons these
as the only Necessaries to Salvation. Romans 10.9. If thou confess with thy Mouth
the Lord Jesus, and believe in thy heart that God has raised him from the
Dead, thou shall be saved. And St. John to the same purpose, Whosoever believes
that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God. This Faith indeed must suppose the
general Principles of natural Religion, and produce the Real Fruits of
Righteousness to make it effectual to it is end; and these supposed, the
Apostles speak as if it contained all that is essentially necessary to be
believed, and known, in order to our Happiness. Thus the Fundamentals of belief
are few, and plain: For certainly the Divine Goodness would not lay our Eternal
Interests in Difficulties, and multitudes; things hard to be understood, and
retained. The difficult work of Religion is not in the Understanding, but in
the Affections, and Will. So that the Principles, in which Religion consists,
are the clearly revealed Articles in which we are agreed. For the others about
which we differ, and dispute, though some of them may be consequences of those,
and good helps to the practice of Religion, yet I should be loath to make them
a necessary and essential part of it: For he that says they are, concludes all
men under a state of Ruin and Damnation, who either do not know, or are not
able to receive them: An uncharitableness, that is as bad as Heresy, if it be
not one it self. The sum is, Religion lies in few Principles, I mean as to the
Essence of it; and that principally consists in Practice. So the Prophet
reckons, Mich. 6.8. He has showed thee O man what is good: and what does the
Lord require of thee, but to do Justice, and love Mercy, and to walk humbly
with thy God? and St. James gives an Account of Religion like it. Iam. 1.17.
True Religion, and Undefiled before God and the Father is this, to Visit the
Widow, and Fatherless in their Afflictions, and to keep himself unspotted from
the World. Religion is an Holy Life, and Charity is a main branch of that; But
Opinions are no vital part, nor do they appertain to the substance of it. And
shall we loose a Limb for an Excrescence, or an Ornament; An Essential of
Religion for that which is but accessory, and extrinsick; Charity, for an
Opinion? I think it is not reasonable, and I hope you think so likewise. But I
offer to your Consideration: (II.) Charity is certainly our Duty, but many of
the Opinions, about which we fall out, are uncertainly true; viz. as to us. The
main, and Fundamental Points of Faith are indeed as firm as the Center, but the
Opinions of men are as fluctuating as the Waves of the Ocean. The Root, and
body of a Tree is fast, and unshaken, while the Leaves are made the sport of
every Wind. And Colors sometimes vary with every position of the Object, and
the Eye, though the Light of the Sun be an uniform Splendor. The Foundation of
God stands sure, but men often build upon it what is very Tottering, and
uncertain. The great Truths of Religion are easily discernable, but the
smaller, and remoter ones requite more sagacity and acuteness to descry them;
and the best Light may be deceived about such obscure, and distant Objects. And
methinks it is very strange, that men should be so excessively confident of the
Truth, and Certainty of their Opinions; since they cannot but know the Weakness
of Humane understanding in general, and cannot but often have found the
Fallibility of their own. The Apostle tells us, that we know but in part, 1
Cor. 13.9. and makes Confidence an Argument of Ignorance, 1 Cor. 8.2. If any
man think that he knows any thing, he knows nothing yet, as he ought to
know. And Solomon reckons it as an Effect of Fools: The Fool rages, and is
confident: and there is nothing that discovers it more.

For let us consider, That the Scripture has not been so clear, and express in
defining lesser Points; and the words, in which they are thought to be Lodged,
are many times figurative, and obscure, and of various meaning, spoken only by
the by, or agreeable to forms of speech, or customs, that we do not know, of by
the way of condescension to common Apprehension: And therefore we see that
Interpretations are infinite, and there is no sort of men less agreed, than
Commentators. All Opinions plead Scripture, and many pretend to reason, and
most to Antiquity. The Learned, and the Prudent, Churches, and Councils,
Confessors, and Fathers, the former and the latter Ages, the Virtuous, and the
Devout, the Credulous, and the Inquisitive, they have all differed in the
lesser matters of Belief. And every man differs from almost every other in some
thing, and every man differs often from himself in many things. Age has
altered our Judgments, or we are Children still. Our Affections change our
Thoughts, and our Imaginations shift the Scene: and what we call Reason is many
times but a chain of Phantasms. And we are guided by prejudices, and overruled
by Authority, and formed by Education; and suck in our Opinions Carelessly, and
by accident. We are deeply settled, before we have examined; and when we
examine, it is but by halves; we see but few things, and judge all things by
them: We either seek not Truth at all, or are unable to manage a due, and
impartial search; when we stumble upon it, we do not know it; and when it is in
sight we boggle, and are afraid, and run away from it; or stand, to pelt it
with dirt, and vile Names. In the mean while, we catch at shadows, and grow
fond of the Images of our own Phansies, and cry up these for Truth, and Faith;
and disturb Societies, and the Peace of mankind, to gain credit to our Dreams.
Such a thing is man, and such reasons have we to be confident of our Opinions;
and to hate those that are not of our Persuasion; and to forsake a certain Duty
for Doubtful Tenants. These things, well considered, might lessen our fondness
toward Opinions, and promote our Charity toward each other; which will grow
by the same degrees, by which the other decreaseth. And that it may, I add this
further to be considered, viz.

(III.) Christian Love is necessary, but Agreement in Opinions is neither
necessary, nor possible. It Is very true indeed, that the WAY to HEAVEN is but
One, and to walk in that, is the one thing necessary: but then that is not the
particular Path of thy Feet, or the other: but the way of an Holy Life; which
may be practiced under very different Forms of Apprehension, and Belief. Though
the way be not broad in respect of Practice, or sensual Indulgence; yet it has
a Latitude in respect of Judgment, and Circumstantial Opinion. The Paths may be
many in this Royal Road; and it is not absolutely necessary, that we should
measure Footsteps, and all exactly tread the same: He that goes in the
plainest, and nearest, is in the best condition for Pleasure, and Safety; but
another that goes about, or in the rugged and uneven Path, may come to the same
journeys end, though with more difficulty, and danger: And I shall not deny to
afford him Pardon for the folly of his choice, lest possibly I should need it
my self.

It Is true, we are commanded to hold the Unity of the Spirit, and that is
necessary: but this is in the Essentials of Faith, and Life, in which all good
men are agreed, notwithstanding that their froward Zeal will not permit them to
see it. Unity in the lesser things may be requisite for Peace, and the
Interests of Societies; but it is not absolutely so, for the Salvation of men's
Souls. Yea different Apprehension about Opinions in Religion might consist well
enough with Peace, and public safety likewise, could men be persuaded to be
modest, to keep their Apprehensions to themselves, or not to fancy their
Conceits necessary for all the rest of mankind; and so vex their Neighbors,
provoke their Rulers, and dissettle Government for the Propagation of them.

It Is a frequent wish with some, that all men were once of one mind: but then
it must be theirs, no doubt; for they would not judge it reasonable upon other
terms: They may as well wish that we were all of one Age, Complexion, Humor,
and Degree of Understanding. In these we see Providence has made a great
diversity, and in this there is both Beauty and Convenience. Perhaps variety of
Opinions may be contrived into us for the same reasons, and it is like much of
the pleasure of Conversation, and inquiry would be lost, if there were an
universal Harmony in our Conceptions: But however this is, it is enough, that
such an agreement is not necessary; Yea, I take the other Step, it is impossible.

Our Tempers, Capacities, Educations, Genius's, Converses, Interests, and
Accidents are strangely diverse; and therefore our Apprehensions must needs be
different. There is scarce any exact likeness in Nature: and all the variety
that is, arises from the various mixture of a few Elements. How great a
diversity then must needs proceed from the different Combination of so many
things as influence our Belief, and Judgments? Since the World began to this
day, men have been of different Opini^ions; and, no doubt, will be so to the
general Flames: For circumstances considered, it is merely impossible it should
be otherwise. Seeing then that Charity is necessary, and agreement in Opinions
is neither necessary, nor possible: we ought to comply with our main Duty,
notwithstanding any lesser difference. If this were considered, there might be
some Hope of reconciling; and Contenders would see, that though they differ,
yet they need not, they ought not to divide; but Unity of Affection might be
preserved amid diversity of Opinions. For which happy Christian temper men
would see more reason, if they would Consider.

(IV.) That Errors, of themselves, are Infirmities of the Understanding, and
not Enormities of the Will; For no man is willing to be deceived: So that they
ought not to be the Objects of our hatred, but our pity. We hate no man for
being Poor, or Blind, or Lame: and Error is the Poverty, and Blindness, and
Lameness of the mind. We all are Pilgrims in our Way to the Jerusalem that is
above: If some will go in this Path, some in the other, these in a Circuit, and
those amongst the Rocks; we may be sure, it is because they know not the danger,
and Inconveniences, which they Choose: So that we may, and we ought to persuade
them, all we can, not to divert into those Ways: But if they will upon the
Supposition, and Belief of their being best; we may lament their unhappy
mistake, but must not beat them, or throw Stones at them for it.

Error is founded in Ignorance; even that gross one of the Sadduces about the
Resurrection is imputed to their not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of
God. Mat. 22.29. and both Reason, and Charity requires us to pity Ignorance,
and to pardon it. Our Savior makes it the motive of his Prayer for the
forgiveness of the Jews that Murdered him. Luke 23.34. Father forgive them, for
they know not what they do. It Is very true that Error many times is
occasioned by a corrupt Bias in the Will, and Affections; But then if our
erring Brother be sincere in other matters, we are not to conclude that his
Understanding is this way corrupted; and we can scarce be certain of it in any
case: Or, if it be, if he believes himself, he does not know that his Interest
or Inclination are the things, which prevail with his Judgment: and so
Ignorance is at the bottom still: For it is a Contradiction that any man should
believe that, which he does not think is true, though he have never so much
Appetite, or Interest to incline him. And if these oblige a man to profess
against the Dictates of his mind, or to suspend the exercise of it, (as often
times they do) such men are to be reckoned under the Character of Vicious, and
not barely erroneous; and so are not to be counted into the sort of mere
Dissenters in Opinion, concerning which I am now discoursing. And that you may
not rashly judge that your Brother speaks against his Conscience, because he
professes the belief of things that to us seem very wild, and absurd, and so
hate him as a time-server, and an Hypocrite; when he is but an innocently
mistaken person: I add this other Consideration, viz.

(V.) That we ought to make allowance for Education, Authority, and fair
pretenses; which have a mighty power, even over honest minds, and do often
unavoidably lead them into Error. For let us consider, how easily we receive
the first impressions, and how deeply they sink into our souls: Childhood
refuses no folly, examines no absurdity; Education makes it any thing: The
first is entertained as best, and whatever offers after, is execrated, and
despised, if it be not like it. This is the condition of all Mankind in their
tender age, and the far greatest part carry the apprehensions to their graves,
that they sucked in infancy. And hence it comes about, that there is nothing
more impossible, or ridiculous, even in dreams, and distracted imaginations,
than the things which have been entertained by great numbers of men, as Sacred.
There are no conceits in Bedlam more wild, and extravagant, than many about
Religion, which have been believed firmly, and zealously promoted, and fiercly
contended for, even to Blood and Desolation, by mighty Nations, and whole
Empires; by Princes, and People; by Great men, and Learned; by Devout, and
Prudent, in long Successions from Father to Son, many Ages together. And all
these follies have been first imposed by Education, and confirmed by Authority,
and Custom; The power of which is very great, and very few have strength enough
in their Understandings to overcome it: And in matters of Religion they are
afraid to use their Reasons against those Follies which are taught to be Divine
Dictates, above all humane Intellect, and not to be tried, or examined by it.
Upon which accounts it has been, that Mankind has been more extravagantly
mad in many Tenants about Religion, than in any thing else whatsoever. For in
other things the use of Reason is permitted, but in Religion it has been
almost Universally denied.

They then, the far greatest part of men, are slaves to the Principles in which
they were bred; and our constitution, infirmity, and circumstances are such,
that very few can help it; and error in the most is in a manner unavoidable,
at least in the weaker sort, and Herd of men: For they have no doubts, about
what they have been always Taught; and have little or no capacity, inclination,
or opportunity, to Examine: So that it is morally impossible for them to free
themselves from the prejudices they lie under. And consequently we ought not to
judge them Insincere, because they profess things incredible, and ridiculous;
or hate them for believing them, when it is so difficult, and so almost
impossible, that they should do otherwise.

And yet we are further to consider, how much those that differ from us, and
err in the things in which they differ, are to be allowed upon the account of
the Authority, and Example of many learned, wise, pious, and devout Men that
instruct, and encourage them in their way; and deeply threaten any diversion
from it. This is a mighty prejudice, when it is on the side of Error, and, no
doubt, many honest minds are carried away by it. We are naturally apt to follow
others, especially those that we esteem; and it is reasonable to do so in
things, that we are not so well able to judge of our selves; and modest to
permit our judgments to be inclined by the sense of those that are wiser, and
better. So that He may be a good man, and a lover of Truth, that yet is much
Mistaken in his Opinion; which, in such a case as this, is his Unhappiness, not
his Fault.

And I may add the other thing mentioned, viz. that we ought to allow our
erring brother for the fair, and specious pretenses which many errors plead
for themselves; as Antiquity, Piety, Consent of Churches, (Reverend Names,)
Spirituality, Gods Glory, Gospel Light, and Liberty, and many other such, which
sound well, and sway much with many very pious people who are taken with the
pretense, but are not able to discern the fallacy; and so swallow the error
for the sake of those fine Names, wherewith it is gilded: In which case also,
there is Infirmity, and Misfortune, that require our Pity, and our Charity; but
nothing that can justify our Rage or Hatred. Yea, why should we not rather
Love him for the Zeal and Respect he has to those good things, the shadows of
which have deceived him, rather than Hate him for his weakness in Mistaking?
And for those that are so Rigid to the Infirmities of Mistaken Judgments, I
wish they would Consider,

(VI.) That in many things they err themselves; and therefore shall have need
of the Charity of others. There is none of us, I hope, so immodest, as to say,
or think, that he is mistaken in nothing: If any do, that person erres more,
than most of those whose Errors he censures. And if he acknowledges that he
erres in some things, though he knows not the particulars; he is himself
concerned in the plea for Charity toward the erroneous. If we were infallible,
and all our Opinions were Certainties, and Demonstrations, we might then have
more pretense for our Stifness, and Severities; But to confess the Infirmities
of our own understandings, and to give no candid allowances to other men's
failings, this is utterly inexcusable, and contrary to our own interests. For
in this rigorous way, every man condemns himself, and puts a weapon into every
other man's hand to destroy him. Let him that is without Error, throw the first
Stone at the Erroneous; but if he begins, that is obnoxious himself, what
favor can he expect? The same reason that he has to Assault those before him,
all the rest have to Pelt him. So that to hate, and reproach our Brother for
his supposed Errors, is, besides the other evil things, very unwise, and
unpolitick, and contrary to the principles of Safety, and Self-love. If this
were well considered, Interest might perhaps effect that in some, which sense
of Duty cannot.


Now in all this, I have no intention to make Apologies for Error, but to lay
sure grounds for Universal Love; and what I have said, is not for the Interest
of any particular Sect, but it is the joint concern of all parties in Religion;
since they all equally need each others Charity. If any man be Angry, and think
I would have him be too kind to the Erroneous; he will, I hope, be pacified,
when he considers, that I also design to make them kind to him; and the
kindness I plead for, respects men's Persons, and Virtuous Qualities, and my
Charity is to the Infirmities of their Understandings: but for the fondness,
and bitter Zeal; the pride, and narrowness; the malice, scorn, and separation,
that uses to go with the opinions of Sects; these I confess are very odious,
and detestable; and it is very hard not to be warmed to Indignation by them.
These are Vices, and Immoralities; and a True Catholic, that loves God, and
his Neighbor heartily, may, and ought, to manifest his resentments against
them, in order to the discountenancing and curing such hateful and deadly
evils. Thus of my Considerations: I propose the CAUTIONS under the following
Heads.

(I.) Beware of inordinate Admiration, and Love of any Sect. When we
passionately Admire a Party, we are apt to Despise them that differ from it,
and to confine the Church to those of that particular way. Hence it is that
fond Opinators invest their beloved Congregation with all the glorious
Privileges, and Titles, making Angels of their own men; when as for others,
they look down upon them, as heretical, or carnal, as formal people, or merely
moral, who are strangers to God's Grace, and Covenant, and ignorant of the
mysteries of Faith and Religion; and therefore they will not defile themselves
with their Conversation, nor come into their Assemblies. They look upon the
rest of Christians with an eye of pride, and scorn, and affectedly thank God
that they are not like these Publicans, these men of the world. They hug
themselves in the dear opinion of their own Light; and conclude all others to
be in Darkness. They heap up Teachers to themselves, 2 Timothy 4.3. and dote upon
their own Apostles. I am for Paul, or I am for Apollos, or I am for Cephas.
This is a precious man, or that is a Gospel-Preacher; such a one is very
Powerful, and such a one is very Sweet, and Spiritual; and O how Beautiful are
the Feet of those Messengers of good tidings to them, while they assure them by
the Marks of their Sect, that they are God's Peculiar, and Chosen People!

Which Fondness were not so Mischeivous, if at the same time all others were
not counted Reprobates and Cast-aways. But this follows, and many other fatal
evils: endless Enmities are begun, and Charity is destroyed, and the foundation
is laid for Cruelty, and Persecution: and Gods goodness, which is to his whole
Church, is wronged be being narrowed, and Christ's Blood is undervalued, and the
greatest part of his Purchase is by these men given to the Devil, and
Christianity is undermined, and the Peace of Mankind is overthrown. All this we
have sadly seen: and I have said nothing here out of any Animosity, or
Bitterness; nor have I any design to render any good man, or number of men
Odious, or Contemptible; but to represent the Vanity, and the Mischief of this
fond spirit, of admiring Parties; which has been very fatal to Charity, and to
the whole body of Religion.

And we shall understand more of the evil of it, if we consider St. Iude's
description of the Sectaries of his time, who looked upon themselves as the
only illuminated people, and despised all other Christians. These the Apostle
describes (1) by the groundlesness, and vanity of their conceits; They were
Dreamers; ver. 8. (2) by their insolence against Government; They Despised
Dominion, and spoke Evil of Dignities; in the same Verse. (3) by their ignorant
malice, ver. 10. They spoke evil of things they knew not; (4) by their Cruelty
and Unmercifulness to their Brethren; They have gone in the way of Cain; (5) By
their Murmuring,, and Projecting against their Rulers ver. 11. And perished in
the gain saying of Core; (6) By the speciousness of their show, and appearance;
They were Clouds, ver. 12. (7) By their emptiness, and want of real virtue,
notwithstanding their pretenses; They were Clouds without water. (8) By their
unconstancy, and unsetledness; They were carried about of winds. (9) By their
violence and fury, ver. 13. Raging waves of the Sea. (10) By their eminency,
and pretended Light; They were Stars. (11) By the irregularity of their
motions, and their running up and down; they were Wandering Stars. (12) By their
discontentedness, They were Murmurers, Complainers* ver. 16. (13) by their
Stubborness in the way of their own wills, Walking after their own Lusts. (14)
By their Proud expressions concerning themselves, and their Party; by their
Canting, and Mysteriousness of their Phrases; Their Mouth speaks great
swelling Words. (15) By their fond Admiration of their own People, Having men's
Persons in Admiration. (16) By their Proud Scorn, they are called Mockers, ver.
18. (17) By their Separation, ver. 19. These be they who Separate themselves.
(18) By their real Sensuality, and self-pleasing, under great Boasts, and
pretensions to the Spirit; sensual, having not the Spirit. This is the Apostles
description of the first Separatists, the Gnostics, who admired themselves,
and withdrew from the Communion of other Christians, under pretense of greater
Holiness: And I could wish they had had no Successors among us; and they will
have the fewer, if we learn to avoid the undue Admiration of any particular
Sect.

My next Caution, is,

(II.) That you avoid eager, and passionate Disputes; in these, Charity is
always lost, and Truth seldom, or never found. When the Passion is raised, the
Judgment is gone; and there is no seeing to the bottom in disturbed, and
muddied waters. It Is the calm, and quiet considerer that finds Truth, while the
hot, and confident disputer loses both himself, and it; when his passion is
once kindled, he cannot speak any thing pertinently himself, nor understand
what is spoken to purpose, by another; and so can neither convince, nor be
convinced. If thou differ with thy brother then, do not ruffle with him in
vehement disputes, but remember the Apologue. The Sun and Wind contended for
the Travelers Cloak; the Wind blustered about him, and endeavored to prevail
by rudeness, and violence; but with this bad success, that the man held his
Garment the faster for it: At length, the Sun shines forth with a calm and
insinuating beam, which warmed him gently, and by degrees; and then the
Traveller put his Cloak from him. If thou art desirous to prevail with thy
friend to lay down his Opinion, assault him not by the fierceness of disputes;
For such attempts will but raise his passion, and that will make him stick the
closer to his Error; but shine upon him with a calm light, insinuate thy
better principle by modest, and gentle suggestions. He that has wedded any
falsehood, has many prejudices against the contrary Truth; and these are not to
be torn off all at once, but softly, and by degrees to be unwound. This is the
likeliest way to prevail upon Dissenters; or, if at any time it fails of its
success, there is however no hurt done: Charity and Peace are preserved, which
are much better, than most Opinions for which we contend. Whereas by Disputes
men are mutually provoked, and tempted to pour forth many Idle, and many bitter
words; the quiet and temper of their minds is disturbed, and likely the Peace
of others also: They are brought no whit nearer each other, in their Judgments,
but put at a much greater distance, in their Affections: Whereas by the other
method of calm proceeding all these evils are avoided.

It Is true, we are commanded to contend earnestly for the faith that was once
delivered to the Saints, Jude 3. But the Faith there meant, does not consist in
points of doubtful disputation, but in the Fundamental Article of Christ Jesus,
being the Messiah, joined with a virtuous and holy conversation; and the
persons against whom those primitive Christians were to contend, were Ungodly
Men that denied the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, ver. 5. For these
Essential matters, we may, and we ought to be earnest; but Contention about
lesser things, is called by the Apostle, Perverse Disputing, and reckoned as
the effect of pride, and ignorance, 1 Timothy 6.5, And hence I pass to a Third
Caution, which is this,

(III.) Beware of Zeal about Opinions; by which, I mean all the Propositions of
less certainty or consequence: About these we may, no doubt, be inquisitive and
thoughtful; and our search will be commendable, while we manage it with
modesty, and caution, in order to the gaining more Motives, and directions for
a virtuous Practice: But to be eager in them, and to disturb the peace of
Societies for their sakes; this is a vicious, and dangerous excess, destructive
to Christian Charity, and the public weal, and order.

There is nothing has done the world more mischief, than indiscreet,
unseasonable Zeal for Truths, while men have not made a difference between
those, that are necessary to be believed, and known; and those others, which
may safely be doubted, and denied. It Is a great and dangerous mistake to think,
that we ought to publish, and propagate all the Truth we know; For every man
thinks his own Opinions about Religion, Gods Truth; and nature inclines men to
desire to beget their own image upon other men's minds; and if this be made a
Duty too, every man will be a Teacher of all the rest; and no man will let his
brother be at quiet, etc. This man is ready to burst till he has given himself
vent; and the other is as impatient, till he has contradicted what he has
said: Both are zealous to Proselyte each other, and neither can be contented
with a single conquest, till the public be disturbed. These are some of the
effects of opinionative zeal, and we know it by a dear experience. Here is the
source of all Divisions, and Sects. God's Truth is the pretense of every Party,
and being enlightened themselves, they all think they ought to enlighten all
others: and these Lights meeting, and being infinitely reflected, beget a flame
between them, in which all of them are scorched, and Charity, and Peace are
consumed.

If therefore we are friends to Christian Love, let us avoid, and oppose, this
its most fatal enemy; and consider, That we need not be zealous for more truth,
than what God has made necessary, and ought not to be zealous for more, than
what Scripture and Reason have made certain; That the Necessary, and certain
things are very few, and the remo^er doctrines difficult, and deep; That we may
easily be deceived in speculative points, where so much acuteness, and freedom,
and care, and diligence is needful; That the greatest part embrace Shadows, and
their Zeal for folly, and falsehood: That our brethren may be good men, though
they understand not many things that we know; or err in many in which we judge
aright; That the benefits of an Opinion, if true, will not make amends for the
trouble, and disturbance, that is made to promote it; and That Charity is more
valuable than Knowledge, 1 Cor. 8.1. 1 Cor. 13.

If we thus Consider, we shall be contented with the satisfactions of our own
minds, and not be Angry with others because they will not take us for their
Guides; we shall exercise our Zeal upon the necessary, certain things, and our
Charity about the rest; we shall inform our brother who needs, or desires it;
and let him alone when it may do him, or others hurt to disturb him; we shall
propose our Opinions seasonably, and modestly, and be willing that men should
receive them, as they can; we shall not be concerned at any man's Mistake, that
does not minister to Vice, and when it does, we shall prudently, and calmly
endeavor to rectify his thoughts; we shall converse indifferently with all
Persuasions without wrangling, and discord; and exercise our Charity, and Good
Will toward the Good men of any sort. Thus our Zeal will be rightly tempered,
and directed, and Charity promoted. And yet further in order to it, I propose
this last Caution.

(IV.) Beware of censuring, and affixing odious Names and consequences upon the
persons or opinions of Dissenters. He that Censures another, in part Hates him,
and wants many degrees of that Charity the Apostle commends, and describes, 1
Cor. 13, 4, 5, 6, 7. which bears all things, hops all things, believes all
things, endures all things. He that Rails at his Neighbor for his Opinion,
wants only power to Persecute him for it: yea, even this is a kind of
Persecution; for there is a persecution of the Tongue, as well as of the Hand;
and He that Injures his Brother in his Name, is a Persecutor, as well as the
other, that hurts him in his Body or Estate. Let us take heed then, lest we
become guilty by fastening names of Reproach upon those of different Judgment;
and fastening the odious consequences that we our selves make upon our
Neighbor, as his Opinion. Both these are very common, and the Spite, and
Injustice of them do exceedingly exasperate our Spirits, and inflame our
Disagreements. By this way, Truth is exposed to contempt, and scorn, as well as
Falsehood; and there is none so Sacred, but its Adversaries have made it a
deformed Vizard, to bring it under the Hatred and Reproaches of the Ignorant;
and that which has an Ugly Face, is more than half condemned among the
generality of men, who cannot distinguish the true complexion, from the dirt
that is thrown upon it. This the Zealots of all Parties very well understand,
when they run down many things by a Vile name which they cannot Confute by
Argument. It Is but raising the Cry of Arminianism, Socinianism, Popery,
Pelagianism, and such like upon them; and all other Refutation is Superfluous.
These I mention not out of Favor, but for Instance; and it is the like in many
other cases. Thus apt are men to frighted, by Bugbear Names, form Truth, and
Charity. And this is Superstition in the true sense, to be afraid of things in
which there is no hurt; and it is promoted by the Uncharitable fastening of our
own consequences upon our brothers Opinion; This we think follows, and then
make no Scruple to say, it is his Opinion; when he hates, and disowns it, and
would quit his Tenent, if he thought any such thing were a consequence from it.
And thus also are our differences heightened, and rendered almost incurable.
If then we have any kindness for Charity and Christian Love, let us take care
of such dis-ingenuous practices. A true Catholic should not take any Name to
himself, but that of a Christian; nor Reproach any other with any Style of
Infamy. He should not, and cannot in Modesty, or Justice, charge his brother
with any Opinion which he will not own, though he never so clearly see that it
may be concluded, from what he believes and teaches. If men would learn to be
thus Fair, and Candid, to each other, our Differences would be reduced to a
narrower Circle; and there might be some hopes that Piece and Love would
revive, and flourish in our Borders.

IF any now should ask me, Whether this Doctrine, of Universal Love, do not
tend to Universal Toleration? I should answer, that thus far it does, viz. that
all private persons should Tolerate each other, and bear with their brother's
Infirmities; That every man should allow another that Liberty, which he desires
himself in things wherein the Laws of God, and the Land, have Left him Free;
and permit him his own Opinion without Censure, or Displeasure: Such a
Toleration, I think, Christianity requires in Private men; But as to the
Public, I do by no means think it Modest for Us to determine what the
Government should do: And in This case, it is as unfit as in Any whatsoever;
since this matter depends upon the Consideration of so many Things, that it is
very Difficult to state the Bounds of Just Permission, and Restraint: Leaving
That therefore to Their Prudence, whom Providence has called to determine in
It; I shall only say, that so much Toleration, as may consist with the
Interests of Religion, and Public Safety, may be Granted: But such a Liberty
as is prejudicial to any of These, should not be expected: For Christianity,
and all other Considerations, oblige the Government to provide for the Common
Good. And were the Duty of Catholic Charity duly practiced, and Private
Christians once persuaded to Tolerate one another; it might then perhaps be
safer for the Government to give a Larger public Toleration than possibly now
is fit. In the mean while, without troubling our selves with phansies about the
Duty of our Governors, Let us mind our Own; especially this great one, of
Charity and Christian Love. And if we mind this, and practice sutably, God will
be Glorified, and Religion Advanced; the Church will be Edified, and our Souls
Comforted; Government will be Established, and the Peace of the world Promo^ed;
And the Peace of God which passes all Understanding, will keep our hearts, and
minds, in Christ Jesus. To whom, with God the Father, and God the Holy Ghost,
be ascribed all Glory, and Worship, henceforth, and for ever.

FINIS.

