SOME DISCOURSES, SERMONS AND REMAINS Of the Reverend Mr. Jos. Glanvil, Late
Rector of BATHE, and Chaplain in Ordinary to His MAJESTY. Collected into one
Volume, and published BY ANT. HORNECK, Preacher at the SAVOY. Together with a
SERMON Preached at his FUNERAL by Joseph Pleydell, Archdeacon of CHICHESTER.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortlock at the Sign of the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard, and James Collins at his Shop under the Temple Church. 1681.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
TO recommend these Sermons to the World were to write a Panegyric upon Light,
and to attempt to make that amiable to the Spectator, which challenges
acceptance by its own brightness. The Oriental Pearl needs not the flattering
praises of the greedy Jeweller, nor the Stone that is dug out of the Mines
of Golconda the faint Encomium's of the crafty Merchant.

The Author of these Discourses, as his Wit lay out of the common road, so this
genuine offspring of his fertile brain soars above the common level of
Ecclesiastical Orations. Death seemed to envy the vast parts of so great a man,
and in the ascent of his Age, snatched him away, when the learned world
expected some of his greatest attempts, and enterprises. As he valued no
notions, that were mean and trivial, so those, he has sent abroad, savor of a
more than ordinary genius. His Soul seemed to be spun of a finer thread than
those of other mortals, and things looked with another face, when they passed
through the quicker fire of his Laboratory.

Some curious Artists, though their work is materially the same with that of
meaner Artificers, yet the shape they give it, and the neatness of the Fabric,
makes it seem a thing composed of different ingredients.

Even the most obvious truths, when coming from our Author received a greater
Luster; and that meat, which familiarity made in a manner nauseous to some
nicer Pallats, when dressed with his Sauce, became more pungent, and
consequently more acceptable.

And though I am not able to bring in a list of the persons, who have been
effectually wrought upon by his Sermons, and become eminent Saints under his
Ministry, Yet Charity bids us believe, that not a few by his means turned
Proselytes of Righteousness; though if his pains had proved unsuccessful, it
could have been no disparagement to his glory.

Providence is sometimes pleased for reasons best known to it self, to cast
men's lots in places, where they cannot boast of many converts made by their
Preaching, and I have been acquainted with some, who have spoke it with Sorrow,
that in ten years time they could not say, that any of their constant hearers
had come to them to beg directions, how to perfect holiness in the fear of God.
One would admire that men of that life and power (as I have known some to be)
should work no greater wonders: and yet we have not a few parallel examples in
the Gospel: and when the Son of God himself, could make no impression upon the
men of Capernaum, we need not marvel, if his servants meet sometimes with the
like repulses; but this does not lessen their reward, no more than the
ineffectual attempts of Ezechiel made him shine with less brightness in the
Firmament of Heaven. And where such labors are lost, they do indeed aggravate
the hearers guilt, but do not frustrate the Labourer of his recompense.

To continue barren under such Thunders, is to prepare for the scourge of
Scorpions, and where men remain unmoved under sound and affectionate, teaching,
they make way for their greater Agonies.

His Sermons as they were very solid, so they were (which is the grace and life
of them) pathetick, and by his zeal and fervor one might guess, how big his
desire unto God for Israel was, that they might be saved; Though he met
sometimes with disappointments, yet he remembered he was a Christian. And as he
was not without his crosses, so he carried himself under them like a true
Philosopher. His mind seemed to be serene, when things went most contrary to
his wishes: and whatever storm the inconstancy and sickleness of sublunary
objects threw upon him, within still he felt a calm, beyond that of Socrates,
when the ungrateful Athenians sent him the fatal draught to drink his death and
ruin.

He had a mind fitted for Contemplation, and his thoughts could dwell on a
Divine Object, till he had sucked out the Cream and Marrow. His Divinity like
his Philosophy was free from Dogmatizing, and while he tied himself to no
(...), he arrived to a clearer apprehension of truth and error. The Divine
Plato was somewhat dearer to him than the subtiler Aristotle; and it cannot be
otherwise, where souls long to be transformed into the Image of the Deity.
Nothing seemed to ingross his desire so much as the reformation of an
unbelieving world, and indeed there were few men fitter for that enterprise,
God having blessed him with a considerable stock both of Reason and Eloquence.
To a clarified mind the gross Atheistical surmises of Modern Wits, must needs
be exceeding fulsome: and no marvel if Souls so fine, break forth sometimes
into very severe Satyrs, to lash this petulant humor. If any thing could raise
his passion, it was the non-sensical discourses of DEISTS and Christian
Infidels, and he thought he might be justly angry with such wretches, that like
the Giants of old, durst make War with Tremendous Omnipotence.

He loved not to invelop Theological Doctrines in mysterious phrases, and ever
thought that Divinity best agreed with the mind of the Holy Ghost, that was
expressed in rational and intelligible propositions.

He was never any great Admirer of our Modern Illuminati, and he counted that
discourse but little better than Nonsense, which affected to recommend it self
to the admiration of the hearer by its not being understood: Where his Reason
tired, and could give him no direction, he was willing to take Faith for his
Guide; and though he confessed, that not a few things in Scripture were
altogether unaccountable to his understanding, yet he doubted not, but they
would all be made clear in that State, where we shall know even as we are
known. This puts me in mind of the Motto, which a Friend of the Ingenious Mr.
Culverwell has added to his Sermons, and which may serve as an Epilogue to
this Preface,

What this, we shall know as we are known, may be
The Author could not tell, He is gone to see.
Anthony Horneck.

SERMON I. THE Way of Happiness.

The Fourth Edition.

SERMON I.
LUKE 13. 24. Strive to enter in at the strait Gate: For many, I say unto you,
will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.
WHEN I consider the goodness of God; and the merits of his Son, our Savior;
and the Influences of the Holy Spirit; and all the advantages of the Gospel;
The certainty of its Principles, the reasonableness of its duties, the
greatness of its ends, the suitableness of its means, the glory of its Rewards,
and the Terror of its punishments; I say, when I consider these, and then look
upon Man as a reasonable Creature, apprehensive of Duty, and interest, and apt
to be moved by hopes and fears; I cannot but wonder, and be astonished to think,
that notwithstanding all this, the far greater part of men should finally
miscarry, and be undone. It Is possible some such Considerations might be the
occasion of the question propounded to our Savior in the verse immediately
foregoing the Text. -- Lord, are there Few that be saved? God is Love, and all
the Creatures are His, and Man a nobler sort: He is the Lover of Men, and Thou
art the Redeemer of Men; and though Man has offended, yet God is propense to
pardon, and in Thee he is reconciled; He is desirous of our Happiness, and Thou
art come into the world to offer, and promote it; and the Holy Ghost is
powerful and ready to assist our endeavors; We were made for happiness, and we
seek it; And Lord, are there Few that be saved? The Text is Christ's return to
the Question, Strive to enter in at the strait Gate; for many, I say unto you,
will seek to enter, and shall not be able. In which words we have three things.

(I) An Answer implied; strait is the Gate.

(II) A duty expressed, strive to enter.

(III) A Consideration to engage our greater care and diligence in the Duty;
For many will seek to enter, and shall not be able.

By the Gate, we may understand the entrance, and all the way of Happiness, and
that is, Religion: By the straitness of it; the Difficulties we are to
encounter. By striving; earnest and sincere endeavor: By seeking; an imperfect
striving. And from the words thus briefly explained, These Propositions offer
themselves to our Consideration.

I. There are many and great difficulties in Religion, The Gate is strait.

II. The difficulties may be overcome by striving, Strive to enter.

III. There is a sort of striving that will not procure an entrance, For many
will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.

I begin with the First in order, viz. That there are many and great
difficulties in Religion; And to what I have to say about it, I premise this
negative Consideration: That,

The Difficulties of Religion do not lie in the Understanding. Religion is a
plain thing, and easy to be understood. It Is no deep subtilty, or highstrain'd
notion; it is no gilded fancy, or elaborate exercise of the brain; It Is not
placed in the clouds of Imagination, nor wrapped up in mystical clothing; But
it is obvious and familiar, easy and intelligible; First preached by Fishermen
and Mechanics, without pomp of speech, or height of speculation; addressed to
Babes and Plebeian heads; and intended to govern the wills of the honest and
sincere; and not to exercise the wits of the notional, and curious. So that we
need not mount the wings of the wind to fetch Religion from the stars; nor go
down to the deep to fetch it up from thence; For it is with us, and before us,
as open as the day, and as familiar as the light. The great Precepts of the
Gospel are clothed in Sunbeams, and are as visible to the common eye, as to
the Eagle upon the highest perch. It Is no piece of wit or subtilty to be a
Christian, nor will it require much study, or learned retirement to understand
the Religion we must practice. That which was to be known of God, was manifest
to the very Heathen, Romans 1. 19. The Law is light, says Solomon, Prove. 6. 13.
And it is not only a single passing glance on the eye; but it is put into the
heart, and the promise is, that we shall all know him, from the greatest to the
least. Our duty is set up in open places, and shone upon by a clear Beam; 'Twas
written of old upon the plain Tables of Habakkuk, Hab. 2. 2. So that the
running Eye might see and read: And the Religion of the H. Jesus, like himself,
came into the world with Rays about its Head.

Religion, I say, is clear, and plain, and what is not so, may concern the
Theater, or the Schools; may entertain men's Wits, and serve the Interests of
Disputes; but it is nothing to Religion, it is nothing to the Interest of men's
Souls.

Religion was once a Mystery, but the Mystery is revealed; And those things
that we yet count Mysteries, are plainly enough discovered as to their being
such as we believe them, though we cannot understand the manner how; and it is
no part of Religion to enquire into that; but rather It injoyns us meekly to
acquiesce in the plain declarations of Faith without bold scrutiny into hidden
things. In short I say, the difficulties of Religion are not in the
Understanding; In prompto and facili est aeternitas, said the Father; The
affairs of eternity depend on things Easy and Familiar. And I premise this to
prevent dangerous mistakes.

But though Religion be so facile and plain a thing to be understood, yet the
way to Heaven is no broad, or easy Path; The Gate is strait enough for all
that; and I now come to show what are the real difficulties of Religion, and
whence they arise.

I. One great Difficulty arises from the depravity of our Natures. The
Scripture intimates, That we are conceived in sin, Psalm 55. 5. Transgressors
from the Womb, Isaiah 48. 8. Children of Wrath, Ephesians. 2. 3. And we find by
Experience that we bring vile Inclinations into the World with us. Some are
naturally Cruel, and Injurious; Proud, and Imperious; Lustful, and Revengeful;
Others, Covetous, and Unjust; Humourfome, and Discontented; Treacherous, and
False: And there is scarce an instance of habitual vice, or villainy, but some
or other are addicted to it by their particular Make and Natures: I say, their
Natures, for certainly it is not true what some affirm, to serve their
Opinions, in contradiction to Experience; That Vices are not in Men's natural
Propensions; but instilled by corrupt Education, evil Customs and Examples:
For we see that those whose Education has been the same, do yet differ
extremely from each other in their inclinations; And some whose Breeding has
been careless, and loose, who have seen almost nothing else but Examples of
Vice; and been instructed in little, besides the arts of Vanity and Pleasure; I
say, there are such who notwithstanding these their unhappy circumstances,
discover none of those vile Inclinations, and Propensions, that are in others,
whose Education has been very strict, and advantageous. This I think is enough
to show that many of our evil habits are from Nature, and not from Custom only.

And yet I cannot say that Humane nature is so debaucht, that every Man is
inclined to every Evil by it: For there are those, who by their Tempers are
averse to some kind of Vices, and naturally disposed to the contrary Virtues;
some by their Constitutions are inclined to hate Cruelty, Covetousness, Lying,
Impudence and Injustice; and are by Temper, Merciful, Liberal, Modest, True and
Just. There are kinds of Vices which our Natures almost universally rise
against, as many Bestialities, and some horrid Cruelties; and all men, except
Monsters in Humane form, are disposed to some Virtues, such as Love to
Children, and Kindness to Friends and Benefactors. All this I must confess and
say, because Experience constrains me; and I do not know why Systematick
Notions should sway more than that.

But notwithstanding these last concessions, it is evident enough that our
Natures are much vitiated, and depraved; and this makes our business in the way
of Religion, difficult. For our work is, to cleanse our Natures; and to destroy
those Evil Inclinations; to crucify the Old Man; Romans 6. 6. and to purge out
the old Leven; 1 Cor. 5. 7. This is Religion, and the Way of Happiness, which
must needs be very difficult, and uneasy. For the vices of Inclination are
very dear, and grateful to us; They are our Right Hands, and our Right Eyes,
and esteemed as our Selves: So that to cut off, and pluck out these, and to bid
defiance to, and wage War against our selves; to destroy the firstborn of our
Natures, and to lop off our own Limbs; This cannot but be very Irksome and
Displeasant Employment; and this is one chief business; and a considerable
thing that makes Religion difficult.

II. Another Difficulty arises from the Influence of the Senses. We are
Creatures of sense, and sensible things do most powerfully move us; we are born
Children, and live at first the life of Beasts: That Age receives deep
Impressions; and those are made by the senses, whose Interest grows strong, and
established in us before we come to the use of Reason; and after we have arrived
to the exercise of that, sensible objects still possess our Affections, and
sway our Wills, and fill our Imaginations, and influence our Understandings; so
that we love, and hate; we desire and choose; we fancy, and we discourse
according to those Impressions; and hence it is that we are enamored of
Trifles, and fly from our Happiness; and pursue Vexation, and embrace Misery;
and imagine Perversely, and reason Childishly: for the influence of the Body
and its Senses are the chief Fountains of Sin, and Folly, and Temptation: Upon
which accounts it was that the Platonical Philosophers declaimed so earnestly
against the Body, and ascribed all Evils and Mischief to it; calling vice
(...), corporeae Pestes, material Evils, and bodily Plagues. And the Apostle
that understood it better, calls Sin by the name of Flesh, Gal. 5. 17. Works of
the Flesh, Gal. 5. 19. Law of the Members, Romans 7. 23. and cries out upon the
Body of this Death, Romans 7. 24.

And now this is our natural Condition, a state subject to the prevalent
influences of Sense, and by this means to Sin and Temptation; and it is our Work
in Religion, to mortify the Body, Romans 8. 13. and to cease from making
provision for the flesh, Romans 13. 14. and from fulfilling the Lusts thereof,
Gal. 5. 14. To render our selves dead to the prevalent life of Sense, and Sin,
Romans 6. 8. and 11. 5. and to arise to a new Life, Romans 6. 4. The Life of
Righteousness, and Faith, Hab. 2. 4. A Life that has other Principles, and
other Pleasures; other Objects, and other Ends, and such as neither Eye has
seen, nor Ear heard, nor any of the Senses perceived. Yea, this is a Life that
is exercised in contradiction to the Judgments of sense. Its Joy, is
Tribulation; Jam. 1. 2. Its Glory, Reproaches; 2 Pet. 4. 14. Its Height is
Lowness; Luke 14. 11. Its Greatness, in being Meanest; Matthew. 20. 27. And its
Riches, in having Nothing; 2 Cor. 6. 10. To such a Life as this, Religion is to
raise us; and it must needs be difficult to make us, who are so much Brutes, to
be so much Angels; us, who seem to live by nothing else but sense, to live by
nothing less; This with a witness is an hard, and uneasy Work, and another
difficulty in Religion.

III. A Third proceeds from the natural Disorder and Rage of our Passions. Our
Corrupt Natures are like the troubled Sea, Isa. 57. 20. And our Passions are
the Waves of that Ocean, that tumble and swell, and keep a mighty noise; they
dash against the Rocks, and break one against another; and our Peace and
Happiness is shipwrackt by them. Our Passions make us miserable. We are
sometime stifled by their Numbers, and confounded by their Disorders, and torn
to pieces by their Violence; mounted to the Clouds by Ambition, and thrown down
to the deep by Despair; scorcht by the flames of Lust, and overwhelmed by the
Waters of unstable Desire; Passions fight one against another, and all against
reason; they prevail over the Mind, and have usurpt the Government of our
Actions, and involve us in continual Guilt and Misery. This is the natural
State of Man; and our work in the way of Religion, is to restrain this
Violence, and to rectify these Disorders, and to reduce those Rebellious
Powers under the Empire and Government of the Mind, their Sovereign. And so to
regain the Divine Image, which consists much in the order of our Faculties; and
the Subjection of the Brutish, to the reasonable Powers. This, I say, Religion
aims at, to raise us to the perfection of our Natures, by mortifying those
Members, Col. 3. 5. our unruly Passions and Desires; and crucifying the Flesh,
with its Affections and Lusts; Gal. 5. 24. And thereby to make us humble in
Prosperity, quiet in Adversity; meek under Provocations, steady amidst
Temptations, modest in our Desires, temperate in our Enjoyments, constant to
our Resolutions, and contented in all Conditions: Here is our great Business,
and our Work is this: And certainly it is no easy thing to bring order out of a
Chaos, and to speak a Tempest into a Calm; to resist a Torrent, and to stop and
turn the Tide; to subdue a Rebellious Rabble, and to change them from
Tyrannical Masters, to Modest and Obedient Servants: These, no doubt, are works
of difficulty enough, and these must be our Employment in the way of Religion;
and on this score also, the Gate is strait.

IV. Our Work in Religion is yet more difficult, upon the account of Custom, to
which we are subject, and by which we are swayed much. This is vulgarly said to
be another Nature, and the Apostle calls it by that name, 1 Cor. 11. 14. Does
not Nature it self teach you, that if a Man have long Hair, it is a shame unto
him? By the word Nature, the best Interpreters say only Custom is meant; since
long Hair is not declared shameful by the Law, and Light of Nature, taken in
its chief and properest sense: For then it had never been permitted to the
Nazarites: But the contrary custom, in the Nations that used it not, made it
seem shameful and indecent. There are other places in Scripture and ancient
Authors, wherein Nature is put for Custom: But I must not insist on this; the
thing I am about is, that Custom is very powerful; and as it makes a kind of
Nature, so, many times it masters and subdues it. Wild Creatures are hereby
made gentle and familiar; and those that naturally are tame enough, are made to
degenerate into wildness by it.

And now besides the original depravities of our Natures, we have contracted
many vicious habits by corrupt and evil usages; which we were drawn into at
first by pleasure and vanity in our young and inconsiderate years, while we
were led by the directions of sense: These, by frequent acts, grow at last into
habits; which though in their beginning they were tender as a Plant, and easy
to have been crushed or blasted, yet time and use hardens them into the firmness
of an Oak, that braves the Weather, and can endure the stroke of the Ax and a
strong Arm.

Now to destroy and root up these obstinate customary evils, is another part of
our Work. And Religion teaches us to put off concerning the Old Conversation,
the Old Man, Ephesians. 4. 22. and to receive new Impressions and Inclinations; to be
renewed in the spirit of our Minds, 5. 23. and to put on the New Man, 5. 24. To
make us new Hearts, Ezekiel. 18. 31. and to walk in newness of Life, Romans 6. 4.
This we are to do, and this we may well suppose to be hard work; the Scripture
compares it to the changing the Skin of the Ethiopian, and the Spots of the
Leopard, Jer. 13. 23. and elsewhere. How can they do good, that are accustomed
to do evil? Jer. 13. 23. It Is hard, no doubt; and this is another difficulty in
Religion.

V. The Power that Example has over us, makes the way of Religion difficult.
Example is more prevalent than Precept, for Man is a Creature given much to
Imitation, and we are very apt to follow what we see others do, rather than
what we ought to do our selves.

And now the Apostle has told us, That the whole World lies in Wickedness, 1 John 5. 19. and we sadly find it: we cannot look out of doors, but we see
Vanity and Folly, Sensuality and Forgetfulness of God; Pride and Covetousness,
Injustice and Intemperance, and all other kinds of Evils: These we meet with
every where, in Public Companies, and Private Conversations; in the High Ways,
and in the Corners of the Streets.

The Sum is, Example is very powerful, and Examples of Vice are always in our
Eyes; we are apt to be reconciled to that which every one does, and to do like
it; we love the trodden Path, and care not to walk in the Way which is gone in
but by a few.

This is our Condition, and our work in Religion is, to overcome the strong
Biass of corrupt Example; to strive against the Stream, to learn to be good,
though few are so, and not to follow a Multitude to do Evil, Exodus 23. 2. This
is our Business; and this is very Difficult.

VI. The last Difficulty I shall mention, arises from Worldly Interests and
Engagements. We have many Necessities to serve, both in our Persons, and our
Families. Nature excluded us naked into the World, without Clothing for
Warmth, or Armature for Defense; and Food is not provided to our Hands, as it
is for the Beasts; nor do our Houses grow for our Habitation, and comfortable
abode. Nothing is prepared for our use without our Industry and Endeavors. So
that by the Necessity of this State, we are engaged in Worldly Affairs: These,
Nature requires us to mind, and Religion permits it; and nothing can be done
without our Care; and Care would be very troublesome, if there were not some
Love to the Objects we exercise our Cares upon: Hence it is, that some Cares
about the things of this world, and Love to them is allowed us; and we are
commanded to continue in the Calling wherein God has set us, 1 Cor. 7. 20. and
are warned that we be not slothful in Business, Romans 12. 11. We may take some
delight also in the Creatures that God gives us, and love them in their degree:
For the animal Life may have its moderate Gratifications; God made all things,
that they might enjoy their Being.

And now, notwithstanding all this, Religion commands us to set our Affections
upon things above, Col. 3. 2. not to love the World, 1 John 2. 15. to be
careful for nothing, Phil. 4. 6. to take no thought for to morrow, Mat. 6. 34.
The meaning of which Expressions is, That we should love God and Heavenly
things, in the chief and first place; and avoid the immoderate Desires of
Worldly Love and Cares. This is our Duty: and it is very difficult: For by
reason of the hurry of Business, and those Passions that Earthly Engagements
excite; we consider not things as we should, and so, many times perceive not
the Bounds of our Permissions, and the Beginnings of our Restraints; where the
allowed Measure ends, and the forbidden Degree commenceth: what is the
difference between that Care that is a Duty, and that which is a Sin;
Providence and Carking; and between that Love of the World which is Necessary
and Lawful, and that which is Extravagant and Inordinate? I say, by reason of
the hurry we are in, amidst Business and worldly Delights, we many times
perceive not our Bounds, and so slide easily into Earthly-mindedness and
anxiety. And it is hard for us, who are engaged so much in the World, and who
need it so much, who converse so much with it and about it, and whose time and
endeavors are so unavoidably taken up by it; I say it is hard for us, in such
Circumstances, to be crucified to the World, Gal. 6. 14. and to all inordinate
Affections to it: to live above it, and to settle our chief Delights, and Cares
on things at great distance from us, which are unsuitable to our corrupt
Appetites, and contrary to the most relishing Enjoyments of Flesh; which Sense
never saw nor felt, and which the Imagination it self could never grasp. This,
no doubt, is hard Exercise, and this must be done in the way of Religion; and
on this Account also, it is very difficult.

Thus of the First Proposition, That there are great Difficulties in Religion.
I come now to the Second.

II. THat those Difficulties may be overcome by striving; which imports both
the Encouragement, and the Means; That they may be vanquished, and how.

(1.) That the Difficulties may be subdued, is clearly enough employed, in the
Precept; we should not have been commanded to strive, if it had been impossible
to overcome. God does not put his Creatures upon fruitless Undertakings: He
never requires us to do any thing in order to that, which is not to be
attained. Therefore when he was resolved not to be entreated for that stubborn
and rebellious Nation; He would not have the Prophet pray for them, Jer. 7. 16.
Pray not for this People, for I will not hear thee. He would not be petitioned
for that, which he was determined not to grant. He puts not his Creatures upon
any vain Expectations and Endeavors; nor would he have them deceive themselves
by fond Dependences. When one made this Profession to our Savior, Lord, I will
follow thee whither soever thou go; Christ tells him, that he must expect
from him no worldly Honors or Preferments; no Power or sensual Pleasure, no,
not so much as the ordinary Accommodations of Life: The Foxes have Holes, and
the Birds of the Air have Nests, but the Son of Man has not where to lay his
Head, Luke 9. 5, 8. He would not have the man that likely might look for these,
upon the opinion of his being the Messiah, in the Jewish sense, one that should
at last, whatever the meanness of his Condition was at present, appear as a
Mighty, and Triumphant temporal Monarch; I say, our Savior would not have the
Man follow him for that, which he had not to bestow upon him. Since then that
he who would not put us upon fruitless labors, has commanded us to strive to
enter; it is evident, that an entrance may be procured into the Gate by
striving, and that the Difficulties may be overcome.

The next thing in my Method is to show, How; the manner is employed in the
Text; and expressed in the Proposition, viz. By striving; and by this, is meant,
a resolute use of those means that are the Instruments of Happiness. They are
three, Faith, Prayer, and active Endeavor.

(I.) Faith is a chief Instrument, for the overcoming the Difficulties of our
way.

And Faith in the general, is the belief of a Testimony; Divine Faith the
belief of a Divine Testimony; and the chief things to be believed, as
encouragements and means for a Victory over the Difficulties in Religion, are
these; That God is reconciled to us by his Son; That he will assist our weak
endeavors by the Aids of his Spirit; That he will reward us if we strive as we
ought, with immortal Happiness in a World of endless Glory.

By our belief of God's being reconciled, we are secured from those fears, that
might discourage our approaches and endeavors, upon the account of his Purity
and Justice. By the Faith of his Assistance, all the objections against our
striving, that arise from the greatness of the Difficulties, and the
disproportionate smallness of our Strength, are answered. And from our
believing eternal rewards in another World, we have a mighty motive to engage
our utmost diligence, to contest with all difficulties that would keep us from
it.

What satisfaction is there, says the believer, in the gratification of my
corrupt Inclinations and Senses, in comparison with that, which arises from
the favor of God, and an Interest in his Son? What difficulties in my Duty,
too great for Divine Aids? What pains are we to undergo in the narrow and
difficult way, that the Glory which is at the end of it, will not compensate?
What is it to deny a base Inclination that will undo me; in obedience to him
that made, and redeemed me; and to despise the little things of present sense,
for the hope of everlasting enjoyments; Trifling pleasure, for Hallelujahs?
What were it for me to set vigorously upon those Passions that degrade my noble
Nature, and make me a slave and a beast, and will make me more vile, and more
miserable; when the Spirit of the most High is at my right hand to assist me?
Why should my noble Faculties, that were designed for glorious ends, be led
into infamous practices by base Usages, and dishonorable Customs? What is the
example of a wicked, sensual, wretched World, to that of the Holy Jesus; and
all the Army of Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs? What is there in the World,
that it should be loved more than God? and what is the Flesh, that it should
have more of our time and care, than the great interests of our Souls?

Such are the Considerations of a mind, that Faith has awakened; and by them
it is prepared for vigorous striving. So that Faith is the Spring of all; and
necessary to the other two Instruments of our Happiness. Besides which, it is
acceptable to God, in it self, and so disposes us for his gracious helps, by
which we are enabled to overcome the Difficulties of our way. While a man
considers the Difficulties only, and weighs them against his own strength, let
him suppose the Liberty of his Will to be what he pleases, yet while it is
under such disadvantages, that will signify very little; and he that sees no
further, sits down in discouragement; But when the mind is fortified with the
firm belief of Divine help, he attempts then with a noble vigor, which cannot
miscarry, if it do not cool and faint. For he that endures to the end, shall be
saved, Mat. 24. 13. Thus Faith sets the other Instruments of Happiness on work,
and therefore it is deservedly reckoned as the first; and it is that which must
always accompany the exercises of Religion, and give them life and motion.

(II.) Prayer is another means we must use, in order to our overcoming the
Difficulties of the way. Our own mere, natural Strength is weakness; and
without supernatural helps those Difficulties are not to be surmounted. Those
Aids are necessary, and God is ready to bestow them on us; For He would have
all men to be saved, and to come to the Knowledge of the Truth, 1 Timothy 2. 4.
But for these things he will be sought unto. And it is very just, and fit that
we should address our selves to him by Prayer, to acknowledge our own
insufficiency, and dependence on him for the mercies we expect; and thereby to
own Him for the giver of every good and perfect gift; and to instruct our
selves how his favors are to be received and used, viz. with Reverence and
Thanksgiving: This, it is highly fit we should do; and the doing it prepares us
for his blessings; and he fails not to bestow them on those that are prepared
by Faith and Prayer; For he gives liberally and upbraids not; And our Prayers
are required, not as if they could move his will, which is always graciously
inclined to our Happiness; But as it is that tribute which we owe our Maker and
Benefactor; and that without which it is not so fit he should bestow his
particular favors on us. For it by no means becomes the Divine Majesty, to
vouchsafe the specialties of his Grace and Goodness to those, that are not
sensible they want them; and are not humbled to a due apprehension of their
weakness and dependence. But for such as are so, and express their humble
desires in the Ardours of Holy Prayer, God never denies them the assistances of
his Spirit: For if ye being evil (says our Savior) know how to give good
gifts unto your Children, how much more shall your Father which is in Heaven
give good things to those that ask Him? Mat. 7. 11.

And These Divine Helps obtained by Faith and Prayer, and joined with our
active constant endeavor, will not fail to enable us to overcome the
Difficulties, and to procure us an entrance at the strait Gate. And so I come
to the Third Instrument of our Happiness, which is employed in striving, viz.

(III.) Active Endeavor, in which Repentance and the fruits of it are implied;
Both Faith and Prayer are in order to this; and without it neither can turn to
account. For Faith without works is dead, Jam. 2. 20. and Prayer, without
endeavor, fruitless; yea indeed, in the Divine Estimate, it is none at all:
It Is bodily exercise; no Prayer. For when we invoke Gods help, we desire it,
that we may use it; Divine Grace is not a Treasure to lay up by us, but an
Instrument to work with; and when we pray that God would assist us in our
endeavors, and endeavor not at all, we mock God, and trifle with him in our
Prayers: Endeavor then is necessary, and necessary in a degree so eminent,
that this is always included in Faith when it is taken in the highest and
noblest Evangelical sense, viz. for the Faith which justifies and saves; for
that comprehends all those endeavors, and their fruits, whereby we are made
happy.

We must not expect that God should do all (exclusively) in the work of our
Salvation. He does his part, and we must do ours; (though we do that, by his
help too.) He that made us without our selves, will not save us without our
selves, said the Father. We are commanded to seek, Mat. 7. 7. To Run, 1 Cor. 9.
24. To fight, 1 Timothy 6. 12. To give diligence, 2 Pet. 1. 10. These all import
Action and Endeavor. And that endeavor must not be only a faint purpose, or
formal service; but it must be employed in the highest degree of Care and
Diligence. The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, Mat. 11. 12. and this
violence must not be used in an heat, and sudden fit only, that cools and dies,
and contents it self with having been warm for a time: But it must be a steady
and constant course of Activity, a continual striving to overcome the remaining
difficulties of the way.

We must endeavor vigorously and constantly; and in that, (after our Faith is
strengthened by deep consideration, and Divine assistance implored by ardent
Prayer) our course is,

(1.) To abstain from all the outward actions of Sin, and to perform the
external acts of the contrary Virtues. To cease to do evil, Isa. 1. 16. is the
first step. When the Publicans asked John the Baptist, Luke 3. 12. what they
should do; His direction was, that they should not exact, verse. 13. and to the
Soldiers, asking the same question, he answers, Do violence to no man, verse.
14. These were the sins of their particular Professions, which were to be
quitted, before any thing could be done higher. We have ordinarily more power
over our actions, than our habits, and therefore we should begin here, and
resolve deeply, by divine help, to cut off those supplies that feed vicious
inclinations; for wicked habits are maintained by actions of Wickedness; when
they cease, the inclinations grow more faint, and weak: and when we are come
but thus far, to have confined our lusts, we shall be encouraged to proceed to
destroy them. It Is said, There is no great distance between a Princes Prison
and his Grave; The saying is most true in the case of Tyrants and Usurpers; and
the habits of sin are both; when they are restrained, they are not far from
being destroyed, if we employ our endeavors, and the divine aids, as we ought.

This then must be done First, and the other part of the advice must be taken
with it, viz. we must practice the outward actions of the contrary Virtues. We
must do well, when we cease to do evil. When we turn from darkness, it must be
to light, Acts 26. 18. Not from one kind of darkness to another. When we cease
to oppress, we must be charitable; when we leave to tyrannize over our
inferiors, we must be kind and helpful to them. When we forbear to slander, we
must speak all the good we can of our Neighbor.

The outward actions of Virtue are in our power; and it is somewhat to come so
far as this: What is more, viz. The inward love and delight in goodness, will
succeed in time, if we persevere. It Is not safe for us to propose to our selves
the greatest heights at first; if we do, we are discouraged, and fall back. God
accepts even of that little, if it be in order to more. He despises not the
day of small things, Zech. 4. 10. If thou do well, shall thou not be
accepted? Christ loved the young man who had kept the external part of the
Commandments, Mark 10. 12. If he had had the courage to have proceeded; what he
had done, would have steaded him much. The inward love of Virtue and Holiness
is promoted by the outward exercises of them, and hereby the contrary evils are
both pined and thrust out.

Thus of the First thing that Endeavor implies; upon this must follow,

(2.) An attempt upon evil habits, viz. Those that have been super-induced on
us by Carelessness and Temptation, bad Customs and evil Company. Every victory
is a means to another; we grow stronger, and the enemy weaker by it. To have
overcome the outward acts of sin, is a beginning in our spiritual warfare; but
our chief enemies are the habits; these must be attempted also, but with
Prudence; wild Beasts are not to be dealt with by main strength; Art and
Stratagem must be used in this War; and it is good policy, I think here, to
fight the least powerful foes first, the contracted habits, before we fall on
the inbred natural Inclinations. While our forces are weak, it is dangerous
setting upon the strongest holds, viz. the vices of Complexion, which are woven
into our very Natures. If a man apply all his force where he has not
resolution enough to go through with what he undertakes, he receives a foyl,
and it is odds but he sits down and faints. Prudence therefore is to be used,
where we distrust our strength: Fall upon Sin, where it is weakest, where it
has least of Nature, and least of Temptation; and where we have arguments from
Reputation and worldly Interests wherewith to war against it. If we prevail, we
are heartned by the success: Our Faith and Resolution will grow stronger by
this experience, when we have triumph't over the sins of evil Custom, Example,
and sensual Indulgence.

And when that is done, we must remember that it is not enough that those habits
are thrust out; others must be planted in their room: when the foyl is
prepared, the seed must be sown, and the seeds of virtuous habits, are the
actions of virtue. These I recommended under the last head, and shall say more
of the introducing of habits, under one that follows on purpose.

(3.) The next advance in our endeavors, is, In the Strength of God, and in
the Name of his Son, to assault the greater Devils, and to strive to cast out
them; I mean the Sins of Complexion, and particular Nature. This is a great
work, and will require strong Faith, and many Prayers, and much Time, and great
Watchfulness, and invincible Resolution: Employ these heartily; and though thou
now and then may receive a foyl, yet give not off so, but rise again in the
strength of God, implore new aid, and fortify thy self with more
considerations, and deeper resolves; and then renew the Combat upon the
encouragement of Divine Assistance, and Christ's Merits and Intercession, and
the promise that sin shall not have dominion over us, Romans 6. 14.

Remember, that this is the great work, and the biggest difficulty; if this be
not overcome, all our other labor has been in vain, and will be lost. If this
root remain, it will still bear poisonous fruit, which will be matter for
Temptation, and occasion of continual falling; and we shall be in danger of
being reconciled again to our old sins, and to undo all; and so our latter end
will be worse than our beginning, 2 Pet. 2. 20. Or, at least, though we stand
at a stay, and satisfy our selves with that; yet though we are contented, our
condition is not safe.

If we will endeavor to any purpose of duty, or security, we must proceed
still after our lesser conquests, till the sins of Complexion are laid dead at
our feet. He that is born of God, sins not, and he cannot sin, 1 John 3. 9.
Till we come to this, we are but struggling in the Birth.

Such a perfection as is mortifying of vicious temper, is I hope attainable,
and it is no doubt that which Religion aims at; and though it be a difficult
height, yet we must not sit down this side: At least we must be always pressing
on to this Mark: if Providence cut off our days before we have arrived to it,
we may expect acceptance of the sincerity of our endeavors, upon the account
of the merits of our Savior: For he has procured favor for those sincere
Believers and Endeavourers, whose Day is done before their work is completed;
this I mean, of subduing the darling sins of their particular Natures.

But then if we rest, and please our selves with the little Victories and
Seize, and let these our great Enemies quietly alone, it is an argument
our endeavors are not sincere, but much short of that striving, which will
procure an entrance into the strait Gate. The next thing (and it is the last I
shall mention) which is employed in striving, is,

(4.) To furnish our selves, through Divine Grace, with the Habits and
Inclinations of Holiness and Virtue. For Goodness to become a kind of Nature to
the Soul, is an height indeed; but such a one as may be reached: the new Nature,
and New Creature, Gal. 6. 15. are not mere names.

We have observed that some men are of a Natural Generosity, Veracity and
Sweetness; and they cannot act contrary to these Native Virtues, without a
mighty Violence: why now should not the New Nature be as powerful as the Old?
And why may not the Spirit of God, working by an active Faith and Endeavor,
fix Habits and Inclinations on the Soul, as prevalent as those? No doubt, it
may, and does, upon the Diviner Souls: For whom to do a wicked, or unworthy
Action, 'twould be as violent and unnatural, as for the meek and compassionate
temper to butcher the innocent; or for him, that is naturally just, to oppress
and make a prey of the Fatherless and the Widow: I say, such a degree of
perfection as this, should be aimed at, Heb. 6. 1. and we should not slacken or
intermit our endeavors till it be attained.

In order to it, we are to use frequent meditation on the excellency and
pleasure of Virtue and Religion; and earnest Prayer for the Grace of God; and
diligent attendance upon the public worship; and pious Company and Converses:
For this great design, these helps are requisite, and if we exercise our selves
in them as we ought, they will fire our Souls with the love of God and
Goodness; and so at last, all Christian Virtues will become as natural to us,
as sin was before. And to one that is so prepared, the Gate of Happiness will
be open, and of easy entrance; the difficulties are overcome, and from
henceforth the way is pleasant and plain before him, Prove. 3. 17.

Thus I have shown, that the formidable difficulties may be overcome, and How:
it is a plain course I have directed, that will not puzzle men's understandings
with needless niceties, nor distract their memories with multitudes. Let us
walk in this way, and do it constantly, with vigor and alacrity; and there is
no fear, but in the Strength of God, through the merits and mediation of his
Son, we shall overcome, and at last enter.

I had now done with this general Head, but that it is necessary to note three
things more.

(1.) Those Instruments of our Happiness which we must use in striving, viz.
Faith, Prayer, and active Endeavor, must all of them be employed. Not any one
singly, will do the great work; nor can the others, if any one be wanting. If
we believe, and do not pray; or pray, and do not endeavor; or endeavor,
without those, the Difficulties will remain, and 'twill be impossible for us to
enter.

(2.) We must be diligent in our course: If we do not exercise Faith
vigorously, and pray heartily, and endeavor with our whole might, the means
will not succeed; and it is as good not at all, as not to purpose. The
Difficulties will not be overcome by cold Faith, or sleepy Prayers, or remiss
Endeavors: A very intense degree of these is necessary.

(3.) Our striving must be constant; we must not begin, and look back, Heb. 10.
38. or run a while, and stop in midd course, 1 Cor. 9. 24. and content our
selves with some seize, and think we have arrived, Phil. 3. 14. If we do
so, we shall find our selves dangerously mistaken. The Crown is at the end of
the Warfare, and the Prize at the end of the Race. If we will succeed, we must
hold on: The life of one that strives as he ought, must be a continual motion
forwards; always proceeding, always growing.

If we strive thus, we cannot fail; if any of these qualifications be wanting,
we cannot but miscarry. And hence no doubt it is, that many that seek to enter,
shall not be able, and the presumed sons of the Kingdom are shut out, Mat. 8.
12. They seek, and are very desirous to be admitted; They do some thing, and
strive; but their striving is partial, or careless, or short; by reason of
which defects, they do not overcome, and shall not enter.

This is a dangerous Rock, and perhaps there are as many undone by cold and
half striving, as by not striving at all. He that has done some thing,
presumes he is secure; He goes the round of ordinary Duties, but advances
nothing in his way; He overcomes none of the great Difficulties, none of the
Habits or depraved Inclinations; He is contented with other things that make a
more glorious show; though they signify less; and perhaps despises these,
under the notion of Morality; and so presuming, that he is a Saint too soon, he
never comes to be one at all: such are the Seekers that shall not be able to
enter: Their seeking imports some striving; but it is such, as, though it be
specious, yet it is imperfect, and will not succeed. And hence the Third
Proposition arises, that I proposed to discourse,

(III.) THat there is a sort of Striving that will not procure an entrance:
employed in these words, For many will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.

It Is a dangerous thing to be flattered into a false peace; and to take up with
imperfect Godliness; to reconcile the hopes of Heaven to our beloved sins, and
to judge our condition safe upon insufficient grounds. This multitudes do, and
it is the great danger of our days; Men cannot be contented without doing
something in Religion; but they are contented with a little. And then they
reckon themselves godly, before they are virtuous; and take themselves to be
Saints, upon such things as will not distinguish a good man from a bad.

We seek after Marks of Godliness, and would be glad to know, how we might try
our state: The thing is of great importance; and if the Signs we judge by are
either false, or imperfect, we are deceived to our undoing. Mere Speculative
mistakes about Opinions, do no great hurt: but error in the Marks and Measures
of Religion is deadly. Now there are sundry things commonly taken for signs of
Godliness, which though they are something, yet they are not enough; They are
hopeful for beginnings, but nothing worth when they are our end and rest. They
are a kind of seeking and imperfect striving; but not such as overcomes the
difficulties of the way, or will procure us an entrance at the Gate. Therefore
to disable the flattering, insufficient Marks of Godliness, I shall discover in
pursuance of the Third Proposition, How far a man may strive in the exercises
of Religion, and yet be found at last among those seekers that shall not be
able to enter. And though I have intimated something of this in the general
before, yet I shall now more particularly show it in the instances that follow.
And in these I shall discover a Religion that may be called Animal, to which
the natural man may attain.

(1.) A Man may believe the Truths of the Gospel, and assent heartily to all
the Articles of the Creed: and if he proceeds not, he is no further by this,
than the faith of Devils, Jam. 2. 19.

(2.) He may go on, and have a great thirst to be more acquainted with Truth;
he may seek it diligently in Scripture, and Sermons, and good Books, and
knowing Company; And yet do this, by the motion of no higher Principle, than an
inbred Curiosity, and desire of Knowledge; and many times this earnestness
after Truth, proceeds from a proud affectation to be wiser than our Neighbors,
that we may pity their darkness; or the itch of a disputing humor, that we may
out-talk them; or a design to carry on, or make a party, that we may be called
Rabbi, or serve an Interest: and the zeal for Truth that is set on work by such
motives, is a spark of that fire that is from beneath: It Is dangerous to a man's
self, and to the public Weal of the Church and mankind, but the man proceeds,
and is,

(3.) Very much concerned to defend and propagate his Faith; and the Pharisees
were so in relation to theirs, Mat. 23. 15. and so have been many Professors of
all the Religions that are, or ever were. Men naturally love their own Tenants,
and are ambitious to mould others judgments according to theirs. There is
glory in being an Instructor of other men; and turning them to our ways and
opinions: So that here is nothing yet above Nature; nothing but what may be
found in many that seek, and are shut out.

(4.) Faith works greater effects than these, and Men offer themselves to
Martyrdom for it; This, one would think, should be the greatest height, and an
argument that all the difficulties of the way, are overcome by one that is so
resolved; and that the Gate cannot but be opened to him. And so, no doubt, it
is, when all things else are suitable; But otherwise these consequences by no
means follow. S. Paul supposes that a man may give his Body to be burned, and
not have Charity, without which his Martyrdom will not profit, 1 Cor. 13. For
one to deny his Religion, or what he believes to be certain, and of greatest
consequence, is dishonorable and base: and some out of principles of mere
natural bravery, will die rather than they will do it; and yet, upon other
accounts be far enough from being heroically virtuous. Besides, the desire of
the glory of Martyrdom and Saintship after it, may in some be stronger than the
terrors of Death: and we see frequently, that men will sacrifice their lives
to their Honor and Reputation; yea to the most contemptible shadows of it. And
there is no passion in us so weak, no lust so impotent, but has, in many
instances, prevailed over the fear of dying. Every Appetite has had its
Martyrs; and all Religions theirs; and though a man give his Body to be burnt
for the best, and have not Charity, viz. Prevalent love to God and Men, it will
not signify: So that Martyrdom is no infallible mark, nor will it avail any
thing, except sincere endeavor to overcome the greater difficulties, have gone
before it. Thus far Faith may go without effect: and yet one step further.

(5.) Men may confidently rely upon Christ for Salvation, and be firmly
persuaded that he has justified, and will make them happy. They may
appropriate him to themselves, and be pleased mightily in the opinion of his
being theirs. And yet notwithstanding this confidence may be in the number of
those seekers that shall not enter. For Christ is the Author of Eternal life,
only to those that obey him, Heb. 5. 9. and to obey him, is to strive
vigorously and constantly, to overcome all our sinful Inclinations and Habits.
And those that trust he will save them, though they have never seriously set
about this work, deceive themselves by vain presumption, and in effect say,
that he will dissolve or dispense with his Laws in their favor. For he
requires us to deny our selves, Mar. 8. 34. To mortify the body, Romans 8. 13.
To love enemies, Mat. 5. 44. To be meek, Mat. 11. 29. and patient, Jam. 5. 8.
and humble, 1 Pet. 5. 7. and just, Mat. 7. 12. and charitable, Heb. 13. 16. and
holy, as he that called us is holy, 1 Pet. 1. 15. And he has promised to save
upon no other terms; For all these are included in Faith, when it is taken in
the justifying sense; and this is the Way of Happiness and Salvation: If we
walk not in this, but in the paths of our own choosing, our relying upon Christ
is a mockery, and will deceive us.

We may indeed be confident, and we ought, that he will save all those that so
believe as to obey him; but may not trust that he will save us except we are
some of those. To rely upon Christ for our Salvation, must follow our sincere
and obedient striving, and not go before it. The mistake of this is exceeding
dangerous, and I doubt has been fatal to many. The sum is, to rely on Christ,
without a resolute and steady endeavor to overcome every sin and temptation,
will gain us nothing in the end but shame and disappointment: For it is not
every one that says unto him, Lord, Lord, shall enter into Heaven, but he that
does the will of his Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 7. 21. The foolish Virgins
relied upon him, and expected he should open to them; Lord, Lord, open to us,
Mat. 25. 11. but he kept them out, and would not know them, v. 11.

Thus of the First imperfect Mark of Godliness; A man may upon the account of
mere Nature, arrive to all the mentioned degrees of Faith; and yet, if his
endeavors in the practice of Christian virtues be not suitable, he will
certainly come short at last.

(II.) A man may be very devout, given much to Prayer, and be very frequent and
earnest in it; He may have the gift of expressing himself fluently, without the
help of Form or Meditation; yea, and so intent and taken up in these exercises,
that he may as it were be ravished out of himself by the fervours of his
Spirit; so that he really kindles very high Affections as well in others, as in
himself: And yet if he rests in this, and such like things, as Religion, and
reckons that he is accepted of God for it; if he allow himself in any
unmortified lusts, and thinks to compound for them by his Prayers, he is an
evil man notwithstanding, and one of those seekers that shall not be able to
enter. The Pharisees, we know, were much given to Prayer: They were long in
those Devotions, and very earnest in them, often repeating the same expressions
out of vehemence. Ignatius Loyola, founder of the Jesuits, was a man almost
ecstatical in his Prayers; and Hacket the Blasphemer, executed in the days of
Queen Elizabeth, was a person of Seraphical Devotion, and would pray those that
heard him even into transports. Basilides the cruel Duke of Mosco, is said to
have his hands almost continually lifted up in Prayer, except when they were
employed in some barbarous and bloody Execution: And we have known and felt one
not much unlike him. There are infinite instances in our days of this dangerous
sort of evil men.

And we may learn hence, that the greatest gift of Prayer, and earnestness and
frequency in it, is no good mark of Godliness, except it be attended with
sincere, constant and virtuous endeavors.

For some men have a natural spice of Devotion in a Religious Melancholy, which
is their temper; and such have commonly strong Imaginations and zealous
affections, which when they are heated, flame forth into great heights and
expressions of Devotion: The warm Fancy furnishes words and matter readily and
unexpectedly, which many times begets in the man a conceit that he is inspired,
and that his Prayers are the breathings of the Holy Ghost; or at least, that he
is extraordinarily assisted by it; which belief kindles his affections yet
more, and he is carried beyond himself, even into the third Heavens, and
Suburbs of Glory, as he fancies, and so he makes no doubt, but that he is a
Saint of the first rank, and special favorite of Heaven; when all this while,
he may be really a bad man full of Envy and Malice; Pride and Covetousness;
Scorn and ill Nature; contempt of his Betters, and disobedience to his
Governors: And while it is so, notwithstanding those glorious things, he is no
further than the Pharisee. Hearty and humble desire, though imperfectly
expressed, and without this pomp, and those wonders, is far more acceptable to
God, who delights not in the exercises of mere Nature, Psalm. 147. 10. but is
well pleased with the expressions of Grace in those that fear him.

So that a sincere and lowly-minded Christian that talks of no immediate
incomes, or communications; and perhaps durst not, out of reverence, trust to
his own present conceptions in a work so solemn, but uses the help of some
pious form of words suitable to his desire and wants, who is duly sensible of
his sins, and the necessity of overcoming them; and is truly and earnestly
desirous of the Divine aids, in order to it: such a one as this prays by the
Spirit, and will be assisted by it; while the other does all by mere Nature and
Imitation, and shall not have those spiritual aids which he never heartily
desires nor intends to use.

This, I think, I may truly and safely say: But for the Controversy between
Forms and Conceived Prayers, which of them is absolutely best, I determine
nothing of it here. And indeed I suppose that in their own nature, they are
alike indifferent, and are more or less accepted, as they partake more or less
of the Spirit of Prayer, viz. of Faith, Humility and holy desire of the good
things we pray for; and a man may have these that prays by a Form; and he may
want them that takes the other way, and thinks himself in a dispensation much
above it. So that my business is not to set up one of these ways of Devotion
against the other, but to show, that the heights and vehemencies of many warm
people in their unpremeditated Prayers, have nothing in them supernatural or
Divine; and consequently, of themselves, they are no marks of Godliness: which
I hope no one thinks I speak to discredit those pious ardours that are felt by
really devout Souls, when a vigorous sense of God, and Divine things, does even
sometimes transport them; Far be it from me to design any thing so impious; my
aim is only to note, that there are complexional heats raised many times by
fancy and self-admiration, that look like these, in persons who really have
little of God in them; and we should take care that we are not deceived by
them. Thus far also those may go that shall not enter. I add,

( III.) A man may endeavor somewhat, and strive in some degree, and yet his
work may miscarry, and himself with it.

(1.) There is no doubt, but that an evil man may be convinced of his sin and
vileness, and that even to anguish and torment. The Gentiles, says the
Apostle, Romans 2. 14. which have not the Law, show the works of the Law written
in their Hearts, their thoughts in the mean time accusing, or excusing one
another. Conscience often stings and disquiets the vilest sinners; and
sometimes extorts from them lamentable confession of their sins, and earnest
declamations against them. They may weep bitterly at their remembrance, and be
under great heaviness and dejection upon their occasion. They may speak
vehemently against sin themselves, and love to have others to handle it
severely. All this bad men may do upon the score of natural fear and self-love,
and the apprehension of a future judgment. And now such convictions will
naturally beget some endeavors: A convinced understanding will have some
influence upon the will and affections. The mind in the unregenerate, may lust
against the Flesh, as that does against it.

So that (2.) such a mere animal man may promise, and purpose, and endeavor in
some considerable measure; but then, he goes not on with full Resolution, but
wavers and stops, and turns about again; and lets the law of the members, that
of death and sin, to prevail over him. His endeavor is remiss, and
consequently ineffectual; it makes no conquests, and will not signify. He sins
on, though with some regret; and his very unwillingness to sin, while he
commits it, is so far from lessening, that it aggravates his fault: It argues
that he sins against conscience and conviction; and that sin is strong and
reigns.

It Is true indeed, St. Paul, Romans 7. makes such a description seemingly of
himself, as one might think concluded him under this state; he says verse. 8.
That sin wrought in him all manner of concupiscence: verse. 9. That sin revived,
and he died: verse. 14. That he was carnal; and again, sold under sin: verse. 20.
That sin dwelt in him, and wrought that which he would not: verse. 23. That the
Law of his members led him into captivity to the law of Sin: and verse. 25. That
he obeyed the law of sin.

If this be so, and St. Paul, a regenerate man, was in this state, it will
follow, that seeking and feeble endeavor, that overcomes no difficulty, may
yet procure an entrance, and he that is come hitherto, viz. to endeavor, is
safe enough though he do not conquer.

This objection presses not only against this head, but against my whole
Discourse, and the Text it self. Therefore to answer it, I say, That the St.
Paul here is not to be understood of himself; He describes the state of a
convinced, but unregenerate man, though he speaks in the first person; a Figure
that was ordinary with this Apostle, and frequent enough in common speech: Thus
we say, I am thus, and thus, and did so, and so, when we are describing a
state, or actions in which perhaps we, in person, are not concerned.

In this sense the best Expositors understand these expressions, and those
excellent Divines of our own, Bishop Tailor, and Dr. Hammond, and others have
noted to us, That this description is directly contrary to all the Characters
of a regenerate man, given elsewhere by this, and the other Apostles. As he is
said to be dead to sin, Romans 6. 11. Free from sin, and the servant of
Righteousness, Romans 6. 18. That he walks not after the Flesh, but after the
Spirit, Romans 8. 1. That the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has
made him free from the Law of sin and death, Romans 8. 2. That he overcomes the
world, Joh. 5. 4. He sins not, 1 John 3. 6. He has crucified the flesh with
its affections and lusts, Gal. 5. 24. Which Characters of a truly regenerate
person, if they be compared with those above cited out of Romans 7. it will
appear, that they are as contrary, as it is possible to speak, and by this it is
evident that they describe the two contrary states.

For can the regenerate be full of all manner of concupiscence, and at the same
time be crucified to the Flesh, and its affections and lusts? one in whom sin
revives while he dies; and yet one that is dead to sin? carnal, and yet not
walking after the flesh, but after the Spirit? sold under sin, and yet free
from sin? Having sin dwelling in him; and a captive to sin; and obeying the Law
of sin; and yet free from the law of sin and death? how can these things
consist? To tell us, It Is so, and it is not so, and to twist such contradictions
into Orthodox Paradoxes, are pretty things to please Fools and Children; but
wise men care not for riddles that are not sense. For my part I think it clear,
that the Apostle in that mistaken Chapter, relates the feeble, impotent
condition of one that was convinced and strove a little, but not to purpose.
And if we find our selves comprised under that description, though we may be
never so sensible of the evil and danger of a sinful course, and may endeavor
some small matter, but without success, we are yet under that evil, and
obnoxious to that danger: For he that strives in earnest, conquers at last, and
advances still, though all the work be not done at once. So that if we
endeavor and gain nothing, our endeavor is peccant, and wants Faith or Prayer
for Divine aids, or constancy, or vigor; and so, Though we may seek, we shall
not be able to enter.

But (3.) an imperfect Striver may overcome sin in some Instances, and yet in
that do no great matter neither, if he lies down, and goes no further: There
are some sins we outgrow by age, or are indisposed to them by bodily infirmity,
or diverted by occasions, and it may be by other sins; and some are contrary to
worldly Interests, to our credit, or health, or profit; and when we have in any
great degree been hurt by them in these, we fall out with those sins, and cease
from them, and so by resolution and disuse, we master them at last fully:
which, if we went on, and attempted upon all the rest, were something: But when
we stop short in these petty victories, our general state is not altered; He
that conquers some evil appetites, is yet a slave to others, and though he has
prevailed over some difficulties, yet the main ones are yet behind.

Thus the imperfect Striver masters, it may be, his beastly appetite to
intemperate drinking, but is yet under the power of Love and Riches, and vain
Pleasure. He cease from open debauchery, but entertains spiritual wickedness
in his heart: He will not Swear, but will backbite and rail: He will not be
Drunk, but will damn a man for not being of his opinion: He will not profane
the Sabbath, but will defraud his Neighbor.

Now these half conquests, when we rest in them, are as good as none at all.
Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have regard to all thy Commandments, says
the Kingly Prophet, Psalm. 119. 6. It Is shameful to give off, when our work is
but half done; what we do, cast the greater reproach upon us for what we omit.
To cease to be profane, is something as a passage, but nothing for an end. We
are not Saints as soon as we are civil. It Is not only gross sins that are to be
overcome: The wages of sin is death, not only of the great and capital, but of
the smallest, if they are indulged. The Pharisee applauded himself, that he was
not like the Extortioners, Adulterers and Unjust, nor like the Publican, that
came to pray with him, Luke 18. 11. and yet he went away never the more
justified. The unwise Virgins were no profligate Livers, and yet they were shut
out.

He that will enter, must strive against every corrupt appetite and
inclination. A less leak will sink a Ship, as well as a greater, if no care be
taken of it. A Consumption will kill, as well as the Plague; yea sometimes the
less Disease may in the event prove more deadly, than the greater; for small
distempers may be neglected, till they become incurable; whenas the great ones
awaken us to speedy care for a remedy. A small hurt in the finger slighted, may
prove a Gangreen, when a great wound in the Head by seasonable applications is
cured.

It Is unsafe then to content our selves with this, that our sins are not foul
and great; those we account little ones, may prove as fatal, yea, they are
sometimes more dangerous: For we are apt to think them none at all, or Venial
infirmities that may consist with a state of Grace, and Divine favor: we
excuse and make Apologies for them; and fancy that Hearing, and Prayer, and
Confession are atonements enough for these. Upon which accounts I am apt to
believe, that the less notorious Vices have ruined as many as the greatest
Abominations. Hell does not consist only of Drunkards, and Swearers, and
Sabbath Breakers: No, the demure Pharisee, the plausible Hypocrite, and formal
Professor, have their place also in that lake of fire. The great impieties do
often startle and awaken conscience, and beget strong convictions, and so
sometimes excite resolution and vigorous striving; while men hug themselves in
their lesser sins, and carry them unrepented of to their Graves.

The sum is, we may overcome some sins, and turn from the grosser sorts of
wickedness, and yet if we endeavor not to subdue the rest, we are still in the
condition of unregeneracy and death, and though we thus seek, we shall not
enter.

(4.) A man may perform many duties of Religion, and that with relish and
delight, and yet miscarry. As,

(1.) He may be earnest and swift to hear, and follow Sermons constantly from
one place to another, and be exceedingly pleased and affected with the Word,
and yet be an evil Man, and in a bad state. Herod heard John Baptist gladly,
Mark 6. 20. and he that received the seed into stony places, received it
joyfully, Mat. 13. 20. Zeal for hearing does not always arise from a
conscientious desire to learn in order to practice, but sometimes it proceeds
from an itch after novelty and notions, or an ambition to be famed for
Godliness; or the importunity of natural conscience, that will not be satisfied
except we do something; or a desire to get matter to feed our opinions, or to
furnish us with pious discourse? I say, earnestness to hear, arises very often
from some of these; and when it does so, we gain but little by it: yea, we are
dangerously tempted to take this for an infallible token of our Saintship, and
so to content our selves with this Religion of the Ear, and to disturb every
body with the abundance of our disputes and talk, while we neglect our own
Spirits, and let our unmortified affections and inclinations rest in quiet,
under the shadow of these specious services.

So that when a great affection to hearing seizes upon an evil man, it is odds
but it does him hurt; it puffs him up in the conceit of his Godliness, and
makes him pragmatical, troublesome and censorious; He turns his food into
poison: Among bad men, those are certainly the worst, that have an opinion of
their being godly; and such are those that have itching ears, under the power
of vicious habits and inclinations. Thus an earnest diligent hearer, may be one
of those who seeks, and is shut out. And so may

(2.) He that Fasts much, and severely: The Jews were exceedingly given to
fasting, and they were very severe in it. They abstained from all things
pleasant to them, and put on sackcloath, and sour looks, and mourned bitterly,
and hung down the head, and sat in ashes; so that one might have taken these
for very holy, penitent, mortified people that had a great antipathy against
their sins, and abhorrence of themselves for them: And yet God complains of
these strict severe Fasters, Zach. 7. 5. That they did not Fast unto him; but
fasted for strife and debate, Isa. 58. 4. Their Fasts were not such as he had
chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burden, and to let
the oppressed free, verse. 6. But they continued, notwithstanding their Fasts,
and God's admonitions by his Prophets, to oppress the Widow, and Fatherless,
and Poor, Zach. 7. 10.

Thus mere natural and evil men sometimes put on the garb of Mortification, and
exercise rigors upon their Bodies and external persons, in exchange for the
indulgences they allow their beloved appetites; and while the strict Discipline
reaches no further, though we keep days, and Fast often, yet this will not put
us beyond the condition of the Pharisee, who fasted twice in the week, as
himself boasted, Luke 18. 12. And,

(3.) An imperfect striver may be very much given to pious and religious
discourses: He may love to be talking of Divine things; especially of the love
of Christ to sinners, which he may frequently speak of with much earnestness
and affection, and have that dear name always at his tongues end to begin and
close all his sayings; and to fill up the void places, when he wants what to
say next; and yet this may be a bad man, who never felt those Divine things he
talks of; and never loved Christ heartily as he ought.

'Twas observed before, that there are some who have a sort of Devoutness, and
Religion in their particular Complexion; and if such are talkative (as many
times they are) they will easily run into such discourses, as agree with their
temper, and take pleasure in them for that reason; As also for this, because
they are apt to gain us reverence, and the good opinion of those with whom we
converse. And such as are by nature disposed for this faculty, may easily get
it by imitation and remembrance of the devout forms they hear and read: so that
there may be nothing Divine in all this; nothing but what may consist with
unmortified lusts and affections: And though such talk earnestly of the love of
Christ, and express a mighty love to his name, yet this may be without any real
conformity unto him in his Life and Laws. The Jews spoke much of Moses; in him
they believed, and in him they trusted, John 5. 45. His name was a sweet sound
to their ears, and 'twas very pleasant upon their Tongues; and yet they hated
the Spirit of Moses, and had no love to those Laws of his which condemned their
wicked actions. And we may see how many of those love Christ, that speak often
and affectionately of him, by observing how they keep his Commandments, John
14. 15. especially those of Meekness, Mercy, and universal Love.

Thus imperfect Strivers may employ themselves in the external offices of
Religion: I have instanced only in Three, the like may be said of the rest. And
to this, I add,

(IV.) That they may not only exercise themselves in the outward matters of
duty, but may arrive to some things that are accounted greater heights, and are
really more spiritual, and refined. To instance.

(1.) They may have some love to God, Goodness, and good Men. The Soul
naturally loves Beauty and Perfection; and all mankind apprehend God, to be of
all Beings, the most beautiful and perfect; and therefore must needs have an
intellectual love for him: The reason that that love takes no hold of the
passions in wicked men, is, partly because they are diverted from the thoughts
of Him, by the objects of Sense; but chiefly, because they consider him as
their enemy, and therefore can have no complacency or delight in him, who they
think has nothing but thoughts of enmity, and displeasure against them. But if
once they come to be persuaded (as many times, by such false marks, as I have
recited, they are) that God is their Father, and peculiar Friend; that they are
his chosen, and his darlings, whom he loved from Eternity, and to whom he has
given his Son and his Spirit, and will give Himself, in a way of the fullest
enjoyment; Then the Love that before was only an esteem in the understanding,
does kindle in the affections by the help of the conceit of Gods loving them so
dearly, and the passion thus heated, runs out, even into seraphick, and
rapturous Devotions; while yet all this, is but mere animal love, excited
chiefly, by the love of our selves, not of the Divine Perfections. And it
commonly goes no further, than to earnest expressions of extraordinary love to
God in our Prayers and Discourses, while it appears not in any singular
obedience to his Laws, or generous and universal love to mankind: which are the
ways whereby the true Divine Love is expressed: for, This is the love of God,
that we keep his Commandments, says the Apostle, 1 John 5. 3. And as to the
other, thus, If we love one another, God dwells in us, and his love is
perfected in us, 1 John 4. 12. And on the contrary, If a man say I love God,
and hates his brother, he is a liar, John 4. 20. Charity then and universal
obedience are the true arguments and expressions of our love to God; and these
suppose a victory over corrupt inclinations and self-will. But the other love
which arises from the conceit of our special dearness to God upon insufficient
grounds; that goes no further than to some suavities, and pleasant fancies
within our selves; and some passionate complements of the Image we have set up
in our imaginations. This Love will consist with Hatred and contempt of all
that are not like our selves; yea, and it will produce it: those poisonous
fruits, and vile affections may be encouraged, and cherished under it. So that
there may be some love to God in evil men: But while self-love is the only
motive, and the more prevalent passion, it signifies nothing to their
advantage.

And as the imperfect striver may have some love to God, so he may to piety and
virtue: every man loves these in Idea. The vilest sinner takes part in his
affections with the virtuous and religious, when he sees them described in
History or Romance; and has a detestation for those, who are charactered as
impious and immoral. Virtue is a great Beauty, and the mind is taken with it,
while it is considered at a distance; and our corrupt interests, and sensual
affections are not concerned. It Is These that recommend sin to our love, and
choice, while the mind stands on the side of virtue: with that we serve the Law
of God, but with the flesh the Law of Sin, Romans 7. 25. So that most wicked men,
that are not degenerated into mere Brutes, have this mental and intellectual
love to goodness: That is, they approve, and like it in their minds, and would
practice it also, were it not for the prevalent biass of flesh and sense.

And hence it will follow likewise, That the same may approve and respect good
men; They may reverence and love them for their Charity, Humility, Justice and
Temperance, though themselves are persons of the contrary Character; yea, they
may have a great and ardent affection for those that are eminently pious and
devout, though they are very irreligious themselves. The conscience of virtue,
and of the excellency of Religion, may produce this in the mere natural man,
who is under the dominion of vile inclinations and affections; and therefore,
neither is this a good mark of godliness. Our love to God and goodness will not
stead us, except it be prevalent. And as the love described, may be natural,
and a mere animal man may arrive unto it: So,

(2.) He may to an extraordinary zeal for the same things that are the objects
of his love. Hot tempers are eager, where they take either kindness or
displeasure. The natural man that has an animal love to Religion, may be
violent in speaking, and acting for things appertaining to it. If his temper be
devotional and passionate, he becomes a mighty zealot, and fills all places
with the same of his godliness: His natural fire moves this way, and makes a
mighty blaze. Ahab was very zealous, and it is like 'twas not only his own
interest that made him so, 2 Kings 10. 16. The Pharisees were zealous people,
and certainly their zeal was not always personated, and put on, but real;
though they were Hypocrites, yet they were such, as in many things deceived
themselves, as well as others. They were zealous for their Traditions, and they
believed 'twas their duty to be so. St. Paul while a persecutor, was zealous
against the Disciples, and he thought he ought to do many things against that
name. And our Savior foretells, that those zealous Murderers that should kill
his Saints, should think, They did God good service in it, John 16. 2. So that
all the zeal of the natural man is not feigning, and acting of a part; nor has
it always evil objects. The Pharisees were zealous against the wickedness of
the Publicans and Sinners. Zeal, and that in earnest, and for Religion may be
in bad men. But then, this is to be noted, that it is commonly about opinions or
external rites, and usages, and such matters as appertain to first Table
Duties, while usually the same men are very cold, in reference to the Duties of
the Second: And when Zeal is partial, and spent about the little things that
tend not to the overcoming the difficulties of our way, or the perfecting of
humane nature, it is a mere animal fervor, and no Divine Fire. And the natural
man, the Seeker that shall not enter, may grow up to another height that looks
gloriously, and seems to speak mighty things. As,

(3.) He may have great comforts in religious meditations, and that even to
rapturous excesses. He may take these, for sweet Communion with God, and the
joys of the Holy Ghost, and the earnest of Glory, and be lifted up on high by
them, and enabled to speak in wonderful ravishing strains; and yet
notwithstanding be an evil man, and in the state of such as shall be shut out.

For this we may observe, That those whose complexion inclines them to
devotion, are commonly much under the power of melancholy; and they that are
so, are mostly very various in their tempers; sometimes merry, and pleasant to
excess; and then plunged as deep into the other extreme of sadness and
dejection; one while the sweet humors enliven the imagination, and present it
with all things that are pleasant and agreeable; And then, the black blood
succeeds, which begets clouds and darkness, and fills the fancy with things
frightful and uncomfortable: And there are very few but feel such varieties, in
a degree, in themselves. Now while the sweet Blood and Humors prevail, the
person whose complexion inclines him to Religion, and who has arrived to the
degrees newly discoursed of (though a mere natural man) is full of inward
delight, and satisfaction; and fancies at this turn, that he is much in the
favor of God, and a sure Heir of the Kingdom of Glory; which must needs excite
in him many luscious, and pleasant thoughts: and these further warm his
imagination, which, by new, and taking suggestions still raises the affections
more; and so the man is as it were transported beyond himself; and speaks like
one dropped from the Clouds: His tongue flows with Light, and Glories, and
Communion, and Revelations, and Incomes; and then, believes that the Holy Ghost
is the Author of all this, and that God is in him of a Truth, in a special way
of Manifestation and Vouchsafement. But when melancholic vapors prevail
again; the Imagination is overcast, and the Fancy possessed by dismal and
uncomfortable thoughts; and the man, whose head was but just before among the
Clouds, is now grovelling in the Dust: He thinks all is lost, and his condition
miserable; He is a castaway, and undone; when in the mean while, as to Divine
favor, he is just where he was before, or rather in a better state, since it is
better to be humbled with reason, than to be lifted up without it. Such effects
as these do mere natural passions and imaginations produce, when they are
tinctured and heightened by religious melancholy. To deny ones self, and to
overcome ones passions, and to live in a course of a sober Virtue, is much more
Divine than all this.

It Is true indeed, and I am far from denying it, that holy men feel those joys
and communications of the Divine Spirit which are no fancies; and the Scripture
calls them great peace, Psalm. 119. 165. and joy in believing, Romans 15. 13. and
the peace of God that passes all understanding, Phil. 4. 7. But then, these
Divine Vouchsafements are not rapturous, or ecstatical: They are no sudden
flashes that are gone in a moment, leaving the Soul in the regions of sorrow,
and despair; but sober lasting comforts, that are the rewards and results of
virtue; the rejoycings of a good Conscience, 2 Cor. 1. 12. and the
manifestations of God to those rare souls, who have overcome the evils of their
natures, and the difficulties of the way, or are vigorously pressing on toward
the mark, Phil. 3. 14. But for such as have only the forms of Godliness I have
mentioned, while the evil inclinations and habits are indulged, (whatever they
may pretend) all the sweets they talk of, are but the imagery of dreams, and
the pleasant delusions of their fancies.

THus I have shown how far the mere animal Religion may go, in imperfect
striving: And now I must expect to hear,

(1.) That this is very severe, uncomfortable Doctrine; and if one that shall
eventually be shut out, may do all this, what shall become of the generality of
Religious men that never do so much? And if all this be short, what will be
available? who then shall be saved?

To which I Answer, That we are not to make the measures of Religion and
Happiness our selves; but to take those that Christ Jesus has made for us: And
he has told us, That except our Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, we shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven,
Mat. 5. 20. Now the Scribes and Pharisees did things in the way of Religion,
that were equal to all the particulars I have mentioned; yea they went beyond
many of our glorious Professors, who yet think themselves in an high form of
Godliness. They believed their Religion firmly, and Prayed frequently and
servently, and Fasted severely; They were exact, and exceeding strict in the
observation of their Sabbaths, and hated scandalous and gross sins; and were
very punctual in all the duties of outward Worship; and in many things
supererogated and went beyond what was commanded: Such zealous people were
They; and They separated from the conversations and customs of other Jews, upon
the account of their supposed greater Holiness and Purity. These were heights
to which the Pharisees arrived; and a good Christian must exceed all this: And
he that lives in a sober course of Piety and Virtue; of self Government, and
humble submission to God; of obedience to his Superiors, and charity to his
Neighbors: He does really exceed it, and shall enter, when the other shall be
shut out. So that, when our Savior says, that the Pharisaick Righteousness
must be exceeded, the meaning is not, That a greater degree of every thing the
Pharisees did, is necessary; but we must do that which in the nature and kind
of it is better, and more acceptable to God, viz. That whereas they placed
their Religion in strict Fastings, and nice observations of Festivals; in loud
and earnest Prayers, and zeal to get Proselytes; we should place ours, in
sincere subjection of our wills to the will of God; in imitation of the life of
Christ, and obedience of his Laws; in amending the faults of our natures and
lives: in subduing our Passions, and casting out the habits of evil: These are
much beyond the Religion of the Fanatic Pharisee; not in show and pomp; but in
real worth, and divine esteem. So that, upon the whole, we have no reason to be
discouraged, because They that do so much are cast out; since, though we find
not those heats, and specious things in our selves which we observe in them,
yet if we are more meek and modest, and patient, and charitable, and humble,
and just, our case is better; and we have the Power of Godliness, when theirs
is but the Form; And we, whom They accounted Aliens and Enemies, shall enter;
while they, the presumed friends and domestics, shall be shut out.

But (2.) I expect it should be again objected against this severity of
Discourse, That our Savior says, Mat. 11. 20. That his yoke is easy, and his
burden is light: which place seems to cross all that has been said about the
Difficulties of Religion. And it is true it has such an appearance, but it is no
more; For the words look as cross to the expressions of the same Divine Author,
concerning the straitness of the Gate, and narrowness of the Way, as to any
thing I have delivered from those infallible sayings. Therefore to remove the
semblance of contrariety, which the objected Text seems to have to those
others, and to my Discourse, we may observe,

That when our Savior says, that his yoke is easy, the word we read is
(...), which signifies very good, excellent, gracious; and the meaning I
suppose is, That his Precepts had a native beauty and goodness in them; That
they are congruous and suitable to our reasonable Natures, and apt instruments
to make us happy; In which sense, this expression has no antipathy to the
Text, or to any thing I have said. And whereas it is added, [My Burden is light]
I think by this we are to understand, That his Commands are not of that
burdensome nature, that the Ceremonies of the Jewish Laws were: Those were very
cumbersome, and had nothing in their nature to make them pleasant and
agreeable; whereas his Religion had no expensive, troublesome Rites appendant
to it; nor did it require any thing but our observation of those Laws which
eternal Reason obliges us to, and which of our selves we should choose to live
under, were we freed from the intanglements of the World, and interests of
Flesh. So that neither does this Objection signify any thing against the scope
of my Discourse.

ANd now I come to Apply what I have said; and the things I have to add will be
comprehended under these two Generals (1.) Inferences, and (2.) plain Advice in
order to practice. I begin with the Inferences and Corollaries that arise from
the whole Discourse. And,

(1.) We may collect, What is the state of Nature, and What the state of Grace.
We have seen that it is the great business of Religion to overcome evil
Inclinations, and the prevailing influence of sense and passion, and evil
customs and example and worldly affections; And therefore the state of Nature
consists in the power and prevalency of These. This is that the Scripture calls
the Old man, Ephesians. 4. 22. The Image of the earthy, 1 Cor. 15. Flesh, Gal. 5. 17.
Death, Romans 7. 24. Darkness, Joh. 3. 19. and old leven, 1 Cor. 5. 7. On the
contrary, The state of Grace is a state of sincere striving against them; which
if it keeps on, ends in Victory. And this is called Conversion, Acts 3. 19. and
Renovation, while it is in its first motions; And the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. 1.
4. the Image of the Heavenly, 1 Cor. 15. 20. The Spirit, Gal. 5. 16. Light,
Ephesians. 5. 8. and Life, 1 John 3. 14. when it is arrived to more compleatness and
perfection.

For our fuller understanding this, we may consider, That Grace is taken (1.)
for Divine favor; (2.) for Christian Virtue. As it signifies Divine favor, so
it is used,

(1.) For those helps and aids God affords us, viz. the Gospel, Joh. 1. 17. and
the influences of his Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 9. In this sense we are delivered from
the state of Nature by Baptism, viz. We are entitled to divine helps, which is
a kind of regeneration; for we are born in a condition of impotence, and
weakness, and destitution of spiritual assistances; This is the world of mere
nature; But then in Baptism, we are brought into the world of the Spirit, that
is, are put under its influences, and are assured of its aids, and so are
morally born again; Not that this Regeneration alone will save us, without our
endeavors; it imports only an external relation, and right to privileges, and
by these we may be powerfully assisted in our striving, if we use them.

But then (2.) Grace, as it signifies divine favor, implies his special love
and kindness, such as he vouchsafes to holy and virtuous men; so that we may
observe that there may be a distinction between a state of Grace, and a state
of salvation. A state of Grace in the former sense, is a condition assisted by
the influences of Gods Spirit, and all baptized persons are in that. But if
they use not those helps, they are not in Gods special favor; and so not in a
state of Salvation. But when those assistances are duly employed, and joined
with our sincere endeavor, then the person so using them, is in a state of
Salvation also; and in God's special love and favor. Thus of the state of
Grace in the first sense, as taken for divine favor.

(2.) The word is also used for Christian Virtue, 2 Pet. 3. 18. and Virtue is
called Grace, because it is wrought in us by the assistance of Gods Spirit and
the light of the Gospel, which are divine favors; and to be in a state of
grace in this sense, is to be a virtuous man, which supposes divine aids, and
intitles to divine love.

These things I have taken an occasion thus briefly to state; because there is
oft-times much confusion in means discourses about Grace and Nature, from which
much trouble and many controversies have arisen. And by what I have said also
in these brief hints, the doctrine of our Church in the office of Baptism, may
be understood clearly, and will appear to be very sound and true,
notwithstanding the petty exceptions of confident Dissenters.

(II.) I may infer, That the great Design of Religion and the Gospel is to
perfect humane nature. The perfection of our natures, consists in the
subjection and subordination of the affections and passions to the Mind, as it
is enlightened, and directed by the divine Laws, and those of Reason. This is
the state of integrity, in which we were first made; and we lost it by the
rebellion of our senses and inferior powers, which have usurpt the government
of us ever since. Here is the imperfection and corruption of our natures.

Now Religion designs to remove and cure these; and to restore us to our first,
and happy state. Its business is not to reform our looks, and our language; or
to model our actions, and gestures into a devout appearance; not only to
restrain the practice of open profaneness and villainy; nor to comfort us with
the assurance of Gods loving us we know not why: But to cure our ill natures,
to govern our passions, to moderate our desires, to throw out pride and envy,
and all uncharitable surmisals, with the other spiritual sorts of wickedness;
and thereby to make us like unto God, in whom there is no shadow of sin, or
imperfection; and so to render us fit objects of his delight, and love.

So that whatever does not tend to the making us, some way or other really
better: better in our selves, and better in all Relations, as fathers, and
children, and husbands and wives, and subjects, and governors, and neighbors
and friends, is not Religion; It may be a form of Godliness, but it is nothing
to the life, and power. And where we see not this effect of Religion, let the
professor of it be never so high and glorious in his profession, we may yet
conclude that either his Religion is not good, or that he only pretends, and
really has it not.

This I take to be a consideration of great moment and great certainty, viz.
That Christian Religion aims at the bettering and perfecting of our natures.
For the things it commands relate either to worship or virtue. The instances of
external worship are prayer, and praise; both which are high acts of gratitude
and justice, and they fit us for divine blessings, and keep us under a sense of
God, and prepare us for union with him, which is the highest perfection of
which the creature is capable. Thus the outward acts of worship tend to our
happiness; and the inward do infinitely the same.

These are, Faith, and Love, and Fear. Faith in God supports and relieves us in
all afflictions, and distresses. The love of him is a pleasure and solace to us
in all losses and disappointments, since he is an object most filling, and
satisfying; and one that cannot be lost, except we wilfully thrust him from us.
Fear of God has no torment; It Is no slavish dread of his greatness and Power;
but a reverence of his perfections, and a lothness to offend him; and this
disposes us also for the communications of his grace, and love, Psalm. 85. 9.
And this it does by congruity, and its own nature; which is to be said likewise
of the others. So that they would make those happy that practice them, whether
they had been positively enjoined, or not; And though no express rewards had
been annexed unto them.

There are other two acts of worship which Christianity requires, which are
instituted and positive, and respect Christ our Lord; They are, the Sacraments;
Baptism, and the Lords Supper; both which are holy Rites of high signification;
and seals of an excellent Covenant between God and us, assuring us of pardon of
sins, and all divine favors, upon the conditions of our Faith, and repentance;
and more firmly obliging us to holy obedience, and dependence; The only way in
which we can be happy. Whence we see briefly, that all the parts of worship
which Christianity binds upon us, tend to our perfection and Felicity.

And all the virtues that it commands do the same; both those that respect us
in a personal capacity, and those others that relate to us as members of
Societies. Thus humility, recommended Mat. 5. 3. Meekness blessed, ver. 5.
purity, ver. 8. are virtues that accomplish our particular persons, and make us
happy in our selves. For of Pride comes Contention, Prove. 13. 10. And a great
part of our troubles arise from stomach and self-will; which humility cures.
Meekness also takes away the occasion of the numerous mischiefs we run into
through the rage and disorder of our passions; and it is in it self a great
beauty and ornament, since it arises from the due order, and government of our
faculties. Purity which comprehends temperance of all sorts, frees us from the
tormenting importunity of those desires that drag us out of our selves, and
expose us to sin, and folly, and temptation, and make us exceeding miserable;
besides which it is a perfection that renders us like unto God, and the blessed
Spirits of the highest rank. And Christian virtues do not only accomplish, and
make us happy in our particular persons, but they do the same in our public
capacities; They dispose us to a quiet obedience to our governors without
murmuring, and complaining; and thereby the public peace is secured; and all
good things else in that.

But there are other virtues that Christianity enjoins, which have a more
direct tendency to the happiness of others, as Justice, Mat. 7. 12. Charity, 1
Cor. 13. Loyalty, Romans 13. and all other public virtues may, I think, be
comprehended under these. Where there is no Justice, every man preys upon
another, and no man's property is safe. Where Charity is wanting, Jealousies,
hatreds, envying, back-bitings, and cruelties abound, which render the world
deplorably unhappy. Where there is not Loyalty and conscionable submission to
Governors, the public is upon every occasion of commotion, involved in
infinite miseries, and disasters. So that all the precepts of our Religion are
in their own nature proper instruments to make us happy; and they had been
methods of Felicity to be chosen by all reasonable creatures, though they had
never been required by so great, and so sacred an Authority.

These things I have said, because I could not choose but take this occasion to
recommend the excellency, and reasonableness of our Religion; And I have done
it but only in brief hints, because it arises but upon a Corollary from my
main subject, and from this I infer further,

(III.) That Christianity is the height, and perfection of morality. They both
tend to the real bettering, and accomplishment of humane nature: But the rules
and measures of moral Philosophy were weak and imperfect till Christ Jesus
came; He confirmed and enforced all those precepts of virtue, that were written
upon our hearts; and cleared them from many corruptions that were grown upon
them, through ignorance and vice, the glosses of the Jews, and false conceits
of the Gentiles; and he enforced them anew by his Authority and the knowledge
he gave of divine aids, and greater rewards, and punishments, than were
understood before; yea he enlarged them in some instances; such as, loving
enemies and forgiving injuries. Thus Christ Jesus taught morality, viz. the way
of living like men; And the 5th Chapter of Matthew is an excellent Lecture of
this kind.

So that to disparage morality, is to disgrace Christianity it self; and to
vilify one of the ends of Christ's coming into the world. For all Religion and
all duties respect either God, our neighbor, or our selves; and the duties
that relate to these two last, are acknowledged moral virtues. The Apostle St.
James counted these Moralities of visiting the Widow and Fatherless, to be the
pure Religion and undefiled, Jam. 1. 17. and the Prophet Micah intimates, that
those moral virtues of Justice and mercy were some of the main things that God
required of us, Micah 6. 8. Our Savior says that the whole Law is summed up
in these two, to love God with all our souls, and our neighbor as our selves,
Matthew. 22. 13. which latter contains the duties of morality. And that which the
grace of God in the Gospel teaches, according to St. Paul is, to live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world, Tit. 2. 11. There is no godliness
without morality. All the fruits of the Spirit reckoned up Gal. 5. 22. are
moral virtues. And when we are commanded to grow in grace, 2 Pet. 3. 18. virtue
is partly understood. For one branch of what is called Grace in us, is moral
virtue, produced by divine aids, Christian principles, and encouragements;
though it is true, the world is extended to those duties that relate immediately
to God also.

By which we see how ignorantly, and dangerously those people talk, that
disparage morality as a dull, lame thing of no account, or reckoning. Upon this
the Religion of the second Table is by too many neglected; and the whole
mystery of the new Godliness is laid in frequent hearing, and devout seraphick
talk, luscious fancies, new lights, incomes, manifestations, in-dwellings,
sealings, and such like. Thus Antinomianism, and all kinds of Fanaticism have
made their way by the disparagement of morality, and men have learnt to believe
themselves the chosen, precious people, while their hearts have been full of
malice, and bitterness, and their hands of violence, while they despised
dominions, and spoke evil of dignities, rebelled against the Government,
destroyed public peace, and endeavored to bring all into misery and
confusions. It Is this diabolical project of dividing morality from Religion
that has given rise and occasion to all these villainies. And while the
Practisers of such things have assumed the name of the only Godly, Godliness it
self has been brought into disgrace by them; and Atheism encouraged to show it
self, in open defiance to Religion. Yea, through the indiscretions, and
inconsiderateness of some preachers, the fantastry, and vain babble of others,
and the general disposition of the people to admire what makes a great show,
and pretends to more than ordinary spirituality; things are, in many places,
come to that pass, that those who teach Christian virtue and Religion, in
plainness and simplicity without senseless phrases, and fantastic
affectations, shall be reckoned for dry moralists, and such as understand
nothing of the life, and power of Godliness. Yea, those people have been so
long used to gibberish and canting, that they cannot understand plain sense;
and virtue is become such a stranger to their ears, that when they hear it
spoken of in a Pulpit, they count the preacher a broacher of new divinity; and
one that would teach the way to heaven by Philosophy: And he escapes well, if
they do not say, That he is an Atheist, or that he would reconcile us to
Gentilism, and Heathen Worship. The danger and vanity of which ignorant humor,
the contempt of morality, is apparent in the whole scope of my Discourse, and
therefore I add no more concerning it here; but proceed to another Inference,
which is,

(IV.) That Grace and the new nature, make their way by degrees on the Soul;
for the difficulties will not be removed nor the corrupt nature subdued all at
once. Habits that grow by repeated acts, time, and continuance, will not be
expelled in a moment. No man can become greatly evil or good, on a sudden. The
Path of the just shines more and more to a perfect day, Prove. 4. 18. We do not
jump from darkness into full light. We are not fully sanctified and converted
in an instant. The day begins in an insensible dawn, and the Kingdom of heaven
is like a grain of Mustard seed, Mat. 13. 31. It does not start up presently to
the stature of a tree. The Divine birth begins like the Natural, in an
imperfect embryo.

There are some seeds of Knowledge and Goodness that God has sown in our
natures; these are excited by the Divine Grace and Spirit to convictions, which
proceed to purposes; these to resolutions, and thence we pass to abstinence
from all gross sins, and the performance of outward Duties; and so at last by
degrees, to vigorous attempts, for the destruction of evil habits and
inclinations. When Grace is arrived to this eminent growth, it is very visible,
as the Plant is when it is above the ground: But the beginnings of Conversion
are not ordinarily perceived.

So that to catechize men about the punctual time, and circumstances of their
Conversion, is an idle device, and a great temptation to vanity and lying. Who
can tell the exact moment when the night ends, and the dawn enters? It Is true
indeed, the passage from the excesses of Wickedness, which begins in some
extraordinary horrors and convictions, is sometimes very notable; but it is not
so in all, or most. The time of St. Paul's conversion was eminent, but that
change was from great contrarieties and miraculous, and therefore it is not to
be drawn into instance. Both the beginnings and minute progressions of Grace,
are usually undiscerned: We cannot see the Grass just putting out of the earth,
or actually growing; but yet we find that it does both. And Grace is better
known in its fruits, than in its rise. By their Fruits ye shall know them,
says our Savior, Mat. 12. 33. and the same way we may know our selves.

(V.) We see that there is an Animal, as well as a Divine Religion: A Religion
that is but the effect and modification of complexion, natural fear and
self-love. How far these will go, we have seen, and how short it will prove in
the end. The not noting this has been the sad occasion of deceiving many. Some
observing great heats of zeal and devotion in the modern Pharisees, take these
to be the Saints and good people; believing all the glorious things which they
assume to themselves: When others, that know them to be envious and malicious,
unjust and covetous, proud and ungovernable, and cannot therefore look on them
as such choice holy people, are apt to affirm all to be hypocrisy and
feigning. In which sentences, both are mistaken for want of knowing that there
is a mere Animal Religion, that will produce very specious and glorious
effects: So that though the Pharisee Prays vehemently, and Fasts severely, and
talks much of the love of God, and delights greatly in hearing, and pious
Discourse, and will suffer all things for what he calls his Conscience; yet he
is not to be concluded a Saint from hence, because the mere Animal Religion may
put it self forth in all these expressions.

And though this Professor be a bad man, proud and covetous, malicious and
censorious, Sacrilegious and Rebellious, yet we cannot thence be assured that
he is an Hypocrite, in one sense, viz. such an one as feigns all that he
pretends: But we may believe that he is really so affected with Hearing and
Praying, and devout Company, as he makes show, and yet for all this, not alter
our opinion of his being an evil man: since the Animal Religion will go as far
as the things in which he glories.

There is nothing whereby the common people are drawn more easily into the ways
of Sects and Separations, than by the observation of the zeal and devotion of
those of the factions: These they take to be Religion, and the great matters of
Godliness, and those the religious and only godly people. And so first they
conceive a great opinion of them, and then follow them whithersoever they lead.
For the generality of men are tempted into Schism and Parties, not so much by
the arguments of dissenters, as by the opinion of their Godliness, which
opinion is grounded upon things which may arise from the mere Animal Religion,
and very commonly do so. This they understand not, and by this ignorance are
betrayed into the snare of Separation, to the disturbance of the Peace of the
Church, and their own great hurt and inconvenience. Whereas could they be made
to know and consider, that complexion and natural passions may bring forth all
these fruits, they might be secured by this means against the tempting
imposture; and learn, that Meekness and Patience, Affability and Charity,
Justice, and a Peaceable, humble temper, are better arguments of Saintship than
all these. Thus a great mischief might be prevented; and there is another that
might be remedied by the same Observation: The inconvenience is this,

While the enemies of Factions object Hypocrisy to them, affirming that all
they do and say, is mere personating and pretense; they confirm and settle
those people in their way; for many of them know, that they are in earnest, and
consequently, that their opposers are mistaken in their judgments concerning
them; by which they are better established in their own good opinion, and
hardened against conviction; whereas, did they consider such things as I have
suggested, about the Animal Religion, and grant to them that they may be
serious, believe themselves infinitely, and feel all those Warmths which they
pretend, and yet be evil men, and far enough from being Godly; Did they show
them, that all their zeal and Devotion, and more and greater than theirs, may
arise from a principle that has nothing Divine and supernatural in it: They
would thereby strike them in the right vein, and bring them down from the high
perch, whereon, by their false marks, they had placed themselves; and thereby
disabuse them, and prevent the abuse of others.

( VI.) We see how we may know our state, whether it be that of Grace and Life;
or the other sad one of Unregeneracy and Death. The state of Grace is a motion
toward the recovery of the Divine Image, and a victory over our selves, and
all corrupt inclinations and affections. The state of Unregeneracy and Death,
is the continuance under the power and prevalency of sense, passion, and evil
habits. Now when it is questioned by our selves in which of these states we are;
it must be supposed that we are arrived at something of Religion: For the
grossly wicked cannot but know what their condition is. And the way I would
propose to those others, who are yet uncertain, is this, viz. To take notice,

Whether they really design, and make any progress in Goodness. Every motion
indeed cannot be felt or perceived; but if we go on, though never so
insensibly, time will show that we are grown. If we consider what are our
particular defects, and studiously apply proper instruments to remove them: if
we find success in those endeavors, and that we are better this year than we
were the former; That our Passions are better governed, and our inordinate
affections more restrained, and our evil habits and inclinations less powerful
with us, it is an infallible sign, that we live and are in a state of Grace;
that we shall at last arrive to a perfect man in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 4. 13. and
shall attain if we faint not, 2 Cor. 4. 1. Whereas on the other hand, if we
come to some hopeful pitch, and stand still there; if sin and temptation be as
powerful with us now, as they were a year ago, and our inclinations and
passions just at the same pass; we are in a bad state, and dead. While the
Plant grows, it lives, and may become a great tree, though at present it be but
small: whereas that whose stature is bigger, and more promising, if it proceeds
not, decays and comes to nothing.

Though we are imperfect, if we are striving and going toward perfection; God
overlooks our Infirmities, and pardons them for Christ's sake. This is our
sincerity, and an effect of true Faith. But if on the other hand, we think our
selves well, and do not always attempt forwards, our state is bad, and our sins
will be imputed: Be our pretenses what they will, our Faith is not sincere, and
will not stead us.

When we get to a certain pitch in Religion, and make that our state, it is an
argument that our Religion was merely Animal; and but a mode of complexion,
self-love, and natural fear. When we overcome some sins, and are willing to
spare and cherish others, it is a sign that we are not sincere in our attempts
upon any, and that what we have done, was not performed upon good and divine
motives.

Sincerity is discovered by growth, and this is the surest mark that I know of
Trial. So that we have no reason to presume, though, as we think, we have gone
a great way, if we go not on. Nor on the other side, have we any to despair,
though our present seize are but small, if we are proceeding. The buds
and tenderest blossoms of Divine Grace, are acceptable to God; when the fairest
leaves of the mere Animal Religion are nothing in his esteem.

This is a great advantage we have from the Gospel, that imperfection will be
accepted, where there is sincerity; whereas according to the measures of exact
and regorous Justice, no man could be made happy in the high degree of glory,
but he that was perfect, and whose victories were absolute.

(VII.) It may be collected from our Discourse, Wherein the Power of Godliness
consists, viz. In a progress toward perfection, and an entire victory over all
the evils of our Natures. The Forms of Godliness are not only in the ceremonies
of Worship, and external actions of feigned Piety; But all the fine things of
the Animal Religion are of this kind; and they are the worst sort: By the
grosser Forms men hardly deceive others; by these they effectually gull
themselves. So that many that vehemently oppose Forms, are the greatest
Formalists. Forms of Worship may well agree with the Power of Godliness; whenas
zeal against Forms, may be a Form it self; whatever makes show of Religion, and
does not make us better, that is a Form, at least to us. There are Spiritual
Forms, as well as those of the other sort, and these are most deadly. Poison is
worst in Aqua Vitae. He that speaks his Prayers ex tempore with vehemence and
loudness, if he strive not against ill nature and self-will, is as much a
Formalist, as he that tells his Prayers by his Beads, and understands not one
word he says. And those that run away from Forms in Churches, meet more
dangerous ones in Barns and private corners. Orthodox Opinions, devout Phrases,
set Looks, melting Tones, affected Sighs, and vehement Raptures, are often mere
Forms of Godliness, that proceed from the Animal Religion, which it self is a
Form likewise. O that the observers of so many motes in their Brethrens eyes,
would learn to throw out the Beams of their own!

The Form of Godliness that pretends it self to be no more, is not so hurtful:
But the Forms, that call themselves the Power, are deadly. It Is the Formality
and Superstition of Separatists that keeps on the Separation: They contend for
fancies and arbitrary trifles; We for order and obedience. The people are
abused by names, and being frighted by the shadows of Superstition and
Formality, they run into the worst Formality, and silliest Superstition in the
World. The Kingdom of Heaven consists not in meats and drinks, Romans 14. 17.
neither in Circumcision, nor Uncircumcision, 1 Cor. 7. 19. not in zeal for
little things, nor in zeal against them; both the one and the other are equally
formal.

The power of Religion lies in using Divine aids heartily and constantly, in
order to the overcoming the Difficulties of our way. This Godliness is not
exercised so much in reforming others, as our selves: The chief design is to
govern within, and not to make Laws for the World without us. This is that
Wisdom that is from above, which is pure and peaceable, Jam. 3. 17. It makes no
noise and bluster abroad, but quietly minds its own business at home.

So that certainly the best men have not always had the greatest fame for
Godliness; as the wisest have very seldom been the most popular. They are the
effects of the Animal Religion that make the biggest show. The voice of true
Religion is heard in quiet, it sounds not in the corners of the street. The
power of Godliness is seen in Justice, Meekness, Humility, and Charity, things
that look not so splendidly as the Spiritual Forms.

And thus of the Inferences and Corollaries that may be drawn from my
Discourse, which though they cannot all be inferred from any of its minute and
separated parts, yet they lie in the design and contexture of the whole.

I Come now to the Advice for Practice. The way of Happiness is difficult, but
the difficulties may be overcome by striving. A little will not do; many
seekers are shut out; what remains then, but that we persuade our selves to
strive, and that diligently; with constant resolution and endeavor?

We were made for Happiness, and Happiness all the World seeks: who will show
us any good? Psalm. 4. 6. is the voice of all the Creatures. We have sought it
long in emptiness, and shadows; and that search has still ended in shame and
disappointment. Where true substantial Felicity is, we know, and the Way we
know, Joh. 14. 4. It is not hid from us in Clouds and thick Darkness; or if it
were, 'twere worth our pains to search after it. It is not at so great a
distance, but it may be seen, yea, it may be brought so near as to be felt.
Though the way is strait, yet it is certain; or if it were otherwise, who would
not venture his pains upon the possibility of such an issue? Many difficulties
are in it; but our Encouragements and Assistances are infinite. The love of
God, and the gift of his son; the blood of Christ, and his intercession; the
aids of the Spirit, and the directions of the Gospel; the Invitations and
Promises, the rare Precepts, and incomparable Examples of those holy men that
have gone before us: These are mighty helps and great motives to assist us in
striving, and to quicken us to it.

Let us then arise in the strength of Faith, and in the encouragement of those
aids, and attempt with courage upon the Difficulties of our way. Let us engage
our deepest Resolutions, and most diligent endeavors. Here is no need to
deliberate, the things are necessary, the benefits unspeakable, and the event
will be glorious. It is no Question, I hope, whether God, or the Creature is to
be first chosen; whether Heaven or Hell be better? and therefore there is no
cause that we should stay and consider; we cannot be rash here, we cannot hurt
our selves by a too sudden engagement; we have delayed too long already, and
every moment we sit still, is one loss to our Duty, and our Happiness. Let us
resolve then, and begin with courage, and proceed with diligence, it is our End
and Felicity for which we are to strive; and every thing is active for its End
and Perfection.

All Creatures are diligent in serving the Designs of Providence; the Heavens
are in restless motion, and the Clouds are still carrying about their fruitful
Waters; the sluggish Earth it self is always putting forth in variety of Trees,
and Grass, and Flowers; the Rivers run toward the Sea, the Brooks move toward
them, and the Sea within it self. Thus all things even in inanimate Nature may
mind us of acting toward our end. And if we look a little higher, the Beasts
of the Field, the Fowls, and Cattle, and creeping things are diligent in
striving after the good and perfection of their Natures, and Solomon sends the
Sluggard to those little Insects, the Ant and Be, to teach him activity and
diligence, Prove. 6. 6. And shall the Beasts act more reasonably than the
professed Sons of Reason? May it not shame us, that we need Instruction from
the Creatures that have no understanding? With what face can we carry our heads
so high, and look down with contempt upon inferior Animals, when they live
more wisely and more regularly than we?

The Sum is, All things are incessantly moving toward an End; and Happiness is
ours, which therefore should engage our most careful Thoughts, and most active
Endeavors.

We are sollicitous and diligent about things of infinitely less moment, and in
effect of none, viz. uncertain Riches, sensual Pleasures, and worldly Honors;
though the way to these is sufficiently difficult and uneasy, yet we are not
discouraged; we attempt all those Difficulties with an obstinate Courage,
though without promise of any equal assistance, or assurance of success. We are
often defeated in our pursuits, and yet we go on. We are overmaster'd by cross
events, and yet we try again. We miss our happiness, when we have attained our
end, and yet we are as active in courting disappointment another time; either
we attain not the things we seek, or find no true satisfaction in them, or they
die in our hands presently, and yet we strive. And does not this activity about
uncertain, unsatisfying Trifles, shamefully reprove our Negligence in reference
to our great End, Happiness and Perfection? In striving for which we have all
the powers of Heaven to aid us, and the Word of God, and the Blood of his Son,
and the experience of all that ever tried, to assure us that we shall neither
fail of the things we seek, nor of the pleasure that we expect from them. And
why then do we lazily sit down, and with the Sluggard say, There is a Lion in
the way, while we despise greater discouragements, when vain things are to be
sought? The Merchant does not give off, because there are Storms, and the
numerous Dangers of the Deep to be met with in his way to the Indies; nor the
Soldier lay by his Arms, because of the hazards and toils of War. And do we
act courageously for petty purchases; and faint and despond when we are to
strive for Crowns and eternal Glories?

It Is true indeed our own natural strength is small, in proportion to the
Difficulties we are to encounter; but the Grace of God is sufficient for us, 2
Cor. 12. 9. and we may do all things through Christ that strengthens us, Phil.
4. 13. Nature is weak, and imperfect, but we are not left in the condition of
mere nature: For we are not under the Law but under Grace, Romans 6. 14. We are
under the influences of the holy Spirit, which will remove the mountains, and
plain the way before us, if we take care to engage those aids by Faith and
sincere endeavor.

For this we may be sure of, that God will never be wanting to us, if we are
not so unto our selves. So that the case as to our natural inability, and the
assistance of Gods Spirit, seems to be thus. A man in a Boat is carried from
the Harbor he designs, by the violence of the Current; he is not able only by
plying the Oar, to overcome the resistance of the Tide; but a gentle Gale blows
with him, which will not of it self carry him up against the Torrent; Neither
of them will do it single: But if he hoist the sail, and use the Oar too, this
united force prevails; and he gets happily to the Harbor. This methinks
resembles our Condition; we are carried down the Torrent of evil inclinations
and Affections, our own unaided powers are too little for that great force: but
the Holy Spirit is with us, It breaths upon us, and is ready to assist, if we
are so to use it, and by the superaddition and engagement of those blessed
Aids, there is no evil in our natures but may be overcome. So that we have no
reason to be discouraged at the apprehension of our impotence, out of weakness
we shall be made strong, Heb. 11. 24. If we employ our Talent, though it be but
a very small one, we shall have more, Mat. 25. 29. And if we accept of those
divine helps, and use them, what was before, to mere natural consideration,
uneasy, will be pleasant and sweetly relishing.

One of the greatest Difficulties in the way of Religion, is to begin: the
first steps are roughest to those feet that have been unaccustomed to it. The
helps and manifold encouragements we shall meet with in the Progress, will
render it more agreeable and delightsome. Those very toils will be grateful;
there is scarce any great sense of pleasure, but where there is some Difficulty
and Pain. Even our Work it self will be Wages. And it is not only the End of
Wisdom that is pleasantness, but the very way, Prove. 3. 17. So that though we
are called upon to strive, and to run, and to fight, (which words import
Labor) yet we are not required to Quit our pleasures, but to change the
objects of them; to leave the delights of Swine for those of Angels; sensual
for spiritual Satisfactions.

Thus all things encourage, and invite us to strive; God calls upon us, and our
own Interests call; Christ Jesus came to engage us to this Work, and the Holy
Spirit waits to assist it. If notwithstanding all this, we sit still, our
Negligence will be inexcusable and fatal: or if we arise and go a little
forward, and then lay us down to take our ease and rest, our state (in the
judgment of one that knew) will be worse, more desperate, and excuseless, 2
Pet. 2. 21.

I Conclude all then, in the words of the Blessed Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. Therefore
my beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work
of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your Labor is not in vain in the Lord:
To him be Glory and Honor henceforth, and for ever. Amen.

SERMON II. Catholic Charity. Preached to the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen OF
LONDON.

The Third Edition.

SERMON II. OF Catholic Charity.
1 Pet. I. part of xxii. v. See that ye Love one another.
HOW many, and how great, have been the Feuds, and still are, of this
tottering, and broken Age, there is no man here so happy as to be ignorant:
That such Strifes among Brethren are Unnatural, and Diabolical; and that it is a
lovely thing to see Christians live together in Charity, and Love; there is no
Christian but will grant: but how the fatal Evil is to be cured, and the lovely
thing is to be compast; here is the Knot, here is the Difficulty: To endeavor
the reconciling Extremes that are so divided, looks like a design to persuade a
friendship between the Winds and Waves: It Is very strange that Christians
should be so at odds, whose Religion is Peace, and Love, and the reasons of
whose differences are so small, in proportion to the degree of their
Animosities: Our GOD is One, and we have the same common SAVIOR; we profess
one GOSPEL, and believe the same Creeds; we have the same SACRAMENTS, and the
same fundamental ORDINANCES: And since we are agreed in These, what is there
left, that is worth the heat of a Dispute? what, that can justify a Division?
Certainly, it is not men's Principles that keep them so at odds, there is
somewhat more in the matter; there is something wanting that would heal our
Breaches, and compose our Divisions: Love would heal us, if we would be healed.

Now in a general Combustion, it is every Christians Duty to bring what Water he
can, to throw upon the Flames; especially it is the office of the Ministers of
Peace, to endeavor to promote it. It Is a plain subject; but such are most
necessary, and this is most seasonable; seasonable at all times, but
principally in these, wherein it is hard to discern by the practice of
Christians that the Duty of Love has any thing to do with Christianity: And
yet this is a vital grace of our Religion: It Is the Law and Gospel in a word;
for Love is the fulfilling of the Law, and the Gospel is a Law of Love; And
it is very strange, and very sad, that an Age, which has so much of light and
faith in the pretense, should have so little of Charity and love in the
practice; especially, since that light, which is from above, is full of
Benignity, and Goodness; and that Faith, which is truly Divine, works by
love. This is that which our Apostle recommends in the words, and I have chosen
it for my present subject: In Discoursing it, I shall show you,

(1.) The Necessity of the Duty, (2.) Its Extent, (3.) The Excellency of it;
and (4.) propose some Means to assist us toward the attainment of this
Generous, and Catholic Spirit.

FOR the (1.) The Necessity of the Duty; the whole Scripture is so full, and so
express in enjoining it, that methinks I might be excused from a labor, that
would seem superfluous to one, that knows the Gospel, and not the practice of
those that profess it: But because the Christianity of most Christians is, (if
I may so speak) quite another thing from the Christianity of CHRIST; it will be
necessary to mind them what HIS was, that they may be persuaded to conform
theirs unto it: and though men's understandings are convinced already that
Charity is their Duty; yet there is but too much need to represent some of the
vast heap of injunctions that make it so, to incline their Wills. I shall
therefore briefly lay together a few of the chief instances of this kind; that
you may have the distincter sense of the reasons of your Duty, and from them,
the most powerful motives to enforce it. In order to this, let us consider in
short, the Injunctions of Christ, and the teachings of his Apostles.

Our Savior urges it as his New Commandment; John 13. 34. and inculcates it
again under the obliging form of his Command, John 15. 12. He makes it a
distinguishing note of his Disciples, John 13. 35. and enjoins them to love
their Enemies, Mat. 5. 24. He mentions it as the great qualification of those
on his Right hand, that shall be received into his Kingdom, Mat. 25. 34, 35.
and the want of it, as the reason of the dreadful Curse pronounced upon those
miserable ones on the Left, at the solemn Judgment, ver. 41, 42. St. Paul
calls Love the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13. 8, 9, 10. and sets it in the
first place among the fruits of the Spirit, Gal. 5. 22. yea, reckons it five
times over under other Names in the Catalogue, viz. those of Peace,
Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Meekness, ver. 22, 23. He advances it
above all Gifts and Graces, 1 Cor. 13. above the Tongues of Men and Angels,
ver. 1. and above Prophecy, and Mysteries, and Knowledge, and Faith, ver. 2.
And the beloved Disciple St. John, who lay in the Bosom of his Dear Lord, and
seems to partake most of his Spirit, is transported in the commendation of this
Grace. He tells us, that God is love, 1 John 4. 7. and repeats it again, ver.
16. He makes it an Argument of our being born of God, and Knowing Him, ver. 7.
and the want of this an evidence of not Knowing God, ver. 8. He counts it the
mark of Discipleship; and the contrary, a sign of one that abides in Death, 1
John 3. 14. He calls him a Murderer that hates another, ver. 15. and a Liar,
if he pretends to Love God, and loves not his Brother, 1 John 4. 20. In fine,
he out-speaks the greatest heights of Praise, when he says God is Love, and he
that loves dwells in God, and God in him, 1 John 4. 16. I might represent
further, that we are commanded to Love without dissimulation, Romans 12. 9. to be
kindly affectioned one toward another, ver. 10. to put on the Breast Plate of
Faith, and Love, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 8. to be pitiful, and courteous, 1 Pet. 3. 8. to
provoke one another to love, and to good works, Heb. 10. 24. to serve one
another, Gal. 5. 13. to love as Brethren, 1 Pet. 3. 8. We are minded of
Christ's New Commandment, 1 John 3. 23. and of the Message which was from the
beginning, That we should love one another, ver. 11. and are urged by the
consideration of Gods loving us, 1 John 4. 1. Thus the Apostles exhort, and
teach: and they Pray, that our Love may abound, Phil. 1. 9. and 1 Thessalonians. 3. 12.
and give solemn Thanks for it, when they have found it, 2 Thessalonians. 1. 3.

And now considering the expresness of all these places, I cannot see, but that
any Duty of Religion may be more easily evaded than this; and those who can
fancy themselves Christians, and yet continue in the contrary Spirit, and
Practice, may conceit themselves religious, though they live in the constant
commission of the greatest sins. And if such can quiet their Consciences, and
shuffle from all these plain Recommendations and Injunctions; they have found a
way to escape all the Laws of God, and may, when they please, become
Christians, without Christianity: For the evidence, I have suggested to prove
the necessity of this Duty, does not consist in half Sentences, and doubtful
Phrases, in fancied Analogies, and far-fetcht Interpretations; but in plain
Commands, and frequent Inculcations; in earnest Entreaties, and pressing
Importunities; in repeated Advices, and passionate Commendations: And those
whom all these will not move, are Incapable of being persuaded, against their
humor, or their interest, to any Duty of Religion. So that, though I see never
so much eagerness for an Opinion, or Heat for an indifferent Circumstance
without the conscience of Christian Love; I shall never call that forwardness
for those little things, Zeal, or Religion: Yea, though those warm men should
sacrifice their Lives to their beloved Trifles, I should not think them
Martyrs; but fear rather, that they went from one Fire to another, and a Worse.
And in this I have the great Apostle to warrant me, who says: Though I give my
body to be burned, and have not Charity, it profits me nothing, 1 Cor. 13. 3.
Thus of the First Head, the Necessity of the duty.

I Come to the II. the Extent. Our Love ought, (1.) To be extended to all
Mankind. The more general it is, the more Christian, and the more like unto the
Love of God, who causes his Sun to shine, and his Rain to fall upon the Good,
and upon the Evil. And though our Arms be very short, and the ordinary
influence of our kindness and good will, can reach but to a very few, yet we
may pray for all men, and desire the good of all the world; and in these we may
be charitable without bounds. But these are not all. Love obliges us to
relieve the Needy, and help the Distressed, to visit the Sick, and succor the
Fatherless and Widows, to strengthen the Weak, and to confirm the Staggering
and Doubting, to encourage the Virtuous, and to reprove the Faulty; and in
short, to be ready in all the offices of Kindness, that may promote the good of
any man, Spiritual, or Temporal, according to the utmost of our power, and
capacity. The good man is Merciful to his Beast, and the Christian ought to be
Charitable to his Brother, and his Neighbor; and every man is our Brother, and
every one that Needs us, is our Neighbor: And so our Love ought to extend to
all men universally, without limitation; though with this distinction.

(II.) That the more especial Objects of our Love ought to be those that agree
with us in a common Faith, Gal. 6. 10. that is, All Christians, as Christians,
and because such. Whatever makes our Brother a Member of the Church Catholic,
that gives him a title to our nearer affections, which ought to be as large as
that. Our Love must not be confined by names, and petty agreements, and the
interests of Parties, to the corners of a Sect: but ought to reach as far as
Christianity it self, in the largest notion of it. To love those that are of
our Way, Humor, and Opinion, is not Charity, but Self-love; it is not for
Christ's sake, but our own. To Love like Christians, is to Love his Image from
whom we are so called, And that consists not in demure Looks and affected
Phrases, in melting Tones and mimick Gestures, in Heats and Vehemence, in
Rapture, and Ecstasie, in systems of Opinion, and scrupulosity about Nothing:
But in Faith, and Patience, Innocence, and Integrity; in Love to God, and
Charity to all the World; in a modest sweetness, and humble Deportment; in a
peaceable Spirit, and readiness to obey God, and Those He has set over Us:
Wherever These are, there is the Image of our Lord, and There ought to be our
Love; though the persons thus affected, are Ignorant of many things, and err in
many; though they differ from us in some Opinions we count Orthodox, and walk
not in the particular ways or Circumstances which We esteem Best. And thus
briefly of the Extent of the Duty, we ought to Love ALL MEN, but especially ALL
Christians, I descend to the Third general, viz.

(III.) The Excellency of Christian Love, which I represent in the following
particulars.

(I.) IT is the Image of God; and of all the graces renders us most like our
Maker: For God is love, and the Lover of men; and his tender Mercies are over
all his Works: And the most suitable apprehension we can form of his Being, is,
to look on him as an Omnipotent, Omniscient, Immutable Goodness. And is it not
a glorious Excellency, that makes Men like the fountain of all perfection? Our
unhappy first Parents lost Paradise, by aspiring to be like God in Knowledge:
and if we endeavor to be like him in Love, we shall be in the way of gaining a
better Paradise than they lost.

(II.) LOVE is the Spirit of Angels, Glorified Souls, and the best of Men.
There is nothing by which the Angelical nature is so much distinguished from
the Diabolical, as Love, and Goodness; for the Devils have Spiritual, and
Immortal natures, and great degrees of Power and Knowledge; and those perhaps
not much inferior to what is to be found in some of the better Spirits: so
that the great difference is not in the excess of natural perfections, which
the Angels of Light have above those of Darkness; but in this, that the former
abound in Love, Sweetness, and Benignity; and the latter, in Malice, Cruelty,
and Revenge; these are the very Image of Satan, and Spirit of Hell. Whereas all
the Celestial Inhabitants live in the joyful exercise of uninterrupted Love and
endearments: Nor is that Love confined to the blessed and glorified Company,
but it sheds it self abroad upon the nether world; and they are Ministering
Spirits for our good, Heb. 1. 14. They so far Love us, that they can stoop from
Heaven to serve us. There is Joy there at the Conversion of a Sinner; and no
doubt there is Love to converted Saints, and care and pity for all the rest of
Men. For the spirits of the just made perfect are freed from their froward
humors, and pettish natures, their mistaken Zeal, and fondness of Opinions,
which straightened their Affections while they were on Earth: and now they are
enlarged by the vast improvements of their Knowledge, and accomplishment of
their Virtue; by a fuller sense of Divine Love, and of their Duty; by the
genius of their company, and the employment of the happy Place. So that in
Heaven all are truly Catholic in their Affections:

And the better any man is, the more he is so upon Earth: The good man makes
not himself his center, nor are his thoughts wholly engrost about his own
concernments; but he is carefully solicitous for the general benefit, and never
so much pleased as when he is made an instrument of Divine Goodness, to promote
the interests of his Christian brethren. 'Twas an high strain of Love in Moses,
expressed toward the Transgressing Israelites, when he was content to be blotted
out of Gods Book, rather than that their Sin should not be blotted out, Exodus
32. 32. And St. Paul was no less Zealously affectionate toward the Jews, when
he said, he could wish himself accursed from Christ, viz. separated from
Christian communion as a most vile and abject person, for their sakes, Romans 9.
3. These were spirits whom Religion and Divine Love had enlarged: and the more
any man advances in Christianity, the nearer he approaches to this generous,
heroic temper.

(III.) LOVE is an eminent branch of the Divine Life, and Nature. Love is of
God, and every one that Loves, is born of God, says the Apostle, 1 John 4. 7,
8. The Divine Nature in us, is the Image of God Portrayed, and lively drawn
upon the regenerated Soul; and I noted before, that Love is the vital Image of
our Maker; it is His spirit infused into us, and growing in us; and upon that
account to be preferred before all Gifts, and natural Perfections: as St. Paul
has done it in the mentioned 1 Cor. 13. And the common Gifts of the Spirit
differ from this special Grace, as the Painters Picture does from his Son: His
Counterfeit may indeed, in a superficial appearance to the Eye, resemble him
more than his Child; but yet it is but an empty shadow, destitute, and
incapable of his Life, and Nature: So there are a sort of Gifts, that have a
spiritual appearance, and may, to those that see things at distance, or have
not their senses exercised, seem more like the divine nature, than this modest
virtue: But those that come near them, and are better able to discern, perceive
that in themselves they are without the Divine Life, and Motion, and are mere
Lifeless Pictures. And here I dare say, that the happiest faculty to Preach
Plausibly, and Pray with Fluency, and Eloquence; to Discourse Devoutly, and
readily to Interpret Scripture, if it be not joined with a benign and
charitable spirit, is no participation of the God-like life and nature; nor
indeed any more Divine, than those common gifts, and natural parts, which those
that think highly of themselves upon these accounts, despise. For very Evil men
have been eminent in these accomplishments, and Wicked Spirits are without
question endowed with them; and they are of themselves arguments of nothing but
a faculty of Imitation, a devotional Complexion, and warm Imagination: Whereas
on the other hand, Charity, and Christian Love are good Evidence of a Renewed
state, and nature. Our Savior made it a Character, Joh. 13. and the Apostle
concludes from it, 1 John 3. 14. By this we know that we are passed from death
to life, because we love the Brethren. And if this be a Mark, and St. John be
not mistaken, I doubt that some who are very gracious, by many Signs of their
own, will want one of Christ's, to prove their comfortable presumption.

(IV.) LOVE is the bond and tie of Christian Communion; How can two walk
together except they are agreed? The Church is a Body consisting of many
Members, which unless they Unite, and send their mutual supplies one to
another, the whole is distempered, and in the ready way to Death and
Dissolution. Now Charity is that vital Cement whereby they are United, and the
Soul by which the common body lives; that whereby the League between the
members is preserved, and health with it. When this decays, sad symptoms, and
mortal evils follow. We see in Nature, the great Fabric of the World is
maintained by the mutual Friendship, and conspiracy of its parts; which should
they universally fall out, and break the bond of Amity that is between them;
should they act their Antipathies upon each other; yea, should they but cease
to serve one another for the general good; the whole frame would be dissolved,
and all things shuffled into their old Chaos, and Abyss. And the greatest evils
that have, or can happen to the Church, have been the effects of the Decay of
Charity, and those intestine Divisions that have grown up in it. From these she
has always suffered more, than from external persecutions: The flames within
have consumed her, when those from without, have only sindg'd her garments.

(V.) LOVE is the most Catholic grace, and upon that account the most
excellent; since that which promotes the good of the whole, is better than any
private perfection: for which reason, things in nature will quit their
particular interests, when the common good so requires; as heavy bodies will
ascend, and light bodies descend, to prevent a chasm, and breach in Nature. Now
of all the divine virtues, there is none of so large an influence, as Love;
it is a grace designed for the good of the community, as the principle of
self-Love is for the preservation of particular beings. This stirs up our
endeavors for the good of others, and especially for the general good. The
Church receives no wound, but Love feels the smart of it; nor is any member of
it afflicted, but Love is grieved. This is the very Spirit of our dear Lord,
who was touched with a feeling of our Infirmities. And to these I add this last.

(VI.) LOVE commends Christianity to those without, and cleanses the
Profession of it from many Spots it has contracted within. The generality of
men are not able to judge of Religions themselves, but usually reckon of them,
as they do of their Professors. Whatever is excellent, or else unworthy, in a
Votary of Religion, redounds to the credit, or disparagement, of the Religion
he has adopted: So that, were the charity and goodness of Christianity
transcribed into the lives of Christians, it would ravish the eyes of all
Beholders, and outshine all other Professions. Men would more easily be
persuaded to believe that Religion to be from God, whose Professors they saw to
be so God-like. Love and goodness prevail where nothing else will; these win
and captivate the Soul; And such conquests are better, and more noble than
either those of Arts, or Arms, which only bring the body under. It Is but small
credit to any Religion to cut its way by the Sword, or gain upon the world by
Power, or Policy; That which opens it self a passage by its native loveliness,
and beauty, is the most Illustrious, and makes the surest, and most generous
Conquests. And were Christendom but Christian in this regard, and the
Professors of the true Religion, truly Religious, that is, abounding in that
charity, and goodness, which Christianity enjoins; our Religion would spread
its wings through the World, and all contrary Professions would lie in the dust
before it: Whereas the Divisions, and fatal feuds of Paganized, degenerated
Christendom, are now the great Partition Wall between Us, and the
Heathen-World; yea, they are more particularly the great scandal of the
Reformation, and make us the scorn of Those of Rome.

And O that They that speak and pray much against the Beast, would not prove
instrumental to uphold his Throne! We expect, and hope for glorious times when
the Man of Sin is fallen; and doubtless there shall be such: But then the glory
of those times consists not in external rule, or dominion of the Church, but in
the Universal Restoration of it to its primitive Simplicity, and Purity: Then
will the Church be Glorious indeed, when all Christians shall unite upon the
Foundation of an Holy Life, and the joint Profession of the few, plain,
Fundamentals of Faith: When they shall make real Goodness the Object of their
affections toward each other; and all Differences in Opinions and dispensable
Practices, the Objects of their mutual Forbearance: When such times as these
shall come, then does the Reign of Christ begin: And this is the true, and
wished Millennium. Now we cannot expect those glorious days which are to
Commence upon the Fall of Antichrist, till we see all Christians sincerely set
upon Destroying what is Antichristian in themselves. Antichrist will not be
overthrown by our declaiming against Him, and spitting the fire of Rage at the
Infallible Chair. It will be to better purpose for us to examine what of
Anti-christianism remains in our selves: And while Rancour, and Bitterness,
Rage, and Animosities upon the Account of Difference in smaller Opinions are in
our Borders, Antichrist has a Throne among us; and there is nothing could be
so Effectual a Blow at the Root of Anti-christianism, as the exercise of
Charity and Catholic Goodness. And when we see these take place, then may we
Triumphantly sing forth, BABYLON IS FALLEN.

I Come now Fourthly to the Means of attaining this excellent and Catholic
Temper; And I propose them by way of DIRECTION, CONSIDERATION, and CAUTION. The
DIRECTIONS are these:

(I.) Acknowledge worth in any man. Whatever is good is from God, and He is to
be loved, and owned in all things; as well in the Paint upon the Butter-flies
wing, as in the glorious, uniform luster of the Sun; as well in the composure
of the little Ant, as in the vast Bodies of the Whale, or Elephant; In the
least Herb under our feet, as well as in the Stupendous Fabric of the Heavens
over us: And moral Perfections are to be acknowledged, as well as these natural
ones: We are to love Virtue in an Heathen, and whatever is Well, or Worthy in
those, whose Apprehensions are most distant from our own: And we must take care
that we make not our Relish, the Measure of Worth and Goodness: Say not this is
excellent, because it is agreeable to your particular Palates; and that on the
other hand is Vile, and Loathsome, because it is distastful to your Gust and
Genius: There are various kinds, and degrees of Excellency, which differently
affect the diversity of Tempers, and Constitutions; And, at the best, we are
Imperfectly good, and therefore cannot be the Measure of it. Let us then be so
Ingenuous as to own the virtue and the goodness that is in all parties, and
Opinions, Let us commend and love it: This will be a means to sweeten our
Spirits, and to remove the Animosities we are apt to conceive against the
Persons of Dissenters; and 'twill engage them on the other hand, to a greater
kindness for us, and so Lessen our Distance, and Disagreements.

There is a kind of Spirit among some, which is so different from that Charity,
which thinks no Evil, 1 Cor. 13. that it thinks nothing else concerning those
of a differing Judgment, but that their Virtues are dull Morality; and their
Piety, Hypocritical Pretensions; or whatever Worse Ill Will can Invent, and
Rage can say: They will not believe that to be a Jewel, which they find among
so much supposed Rubbish. But let us take Care, that we deny not God the Honor
of his Gifts, and Graces; or proudly fancy that he has given us the Monopoly:
This is contrary to that Charity which is not puffed up, and does not behave it
self unseemly. Or, if we could modestly suppose, that there is nothing but
Ignorance, and mistake among all those who are not of our Opinion; yet however,
their Virtues ought to be acknowledged: The Son of God was to be Worshipped,
even when he lay in the Stable; and the Ark to be owned, when among the
Philistines. ('It Is a sign that we love God for himself, if we Love him every
where) And indeed, that Worth is more to be admired that grows up in an
uncultivated Soil, and among the Weeds of Error, and false Principles: To find
a Rose, or Tulip in a Garden, is a common thing, and merits less of our regard;
but to meet with them in the Highway, or open Fields, this ingageth our nearer
Notice, and recommends the Flowers to our more particular Kindness: Thus
Virtue, though in all men excellent, yet it is no more than is expected to be in
Persons of Knowledge, and right Judgment; But in the Ignorant, and Mistaken,
it thrives under Disadvantages, and deserves more to be Cherished, and
Encouraged. And now if 'twere possible to bring the divided World to these
Ingenuous Acknowledgements, men would find their Spirits composed, and their
Animosities qualified; They would see they have Friends, even in the Tents of
their Enemies; and this, Apprehended and Owned mutually, would be a very
hopeful way to endear and reconcile us.

(II.) Be much in the Contemplation of the Love of God. He that knows how much
God has Loved him, has a mighty Reason to Love his Brother; The Apostle
urges the Argument, 1 John 4. 11. If God so Loved us, we ought also to Love
one another: and he that considers, cannot choose; for he must needs find
himself sweetly Engaged to Love God, of whose Love he is sensible; and he that
loves Him, loves all things in him: For all things are his, and he tenders
every thing he has made. The Love of God does not confine us to his single
abstracted Essence, but requires our Kindness to all that bear his Image, yea
and produces it. Seraphick Love will be Catholic; It does not burn like a
Lamp in a Sepulcher, but it is like the Stars of Heaven, that impart themselves
to all things: And as the Planets, that receive their Light from the Sun, do
not suck it in, and ingross it, but disperse, and shed it abroad upon the most
distant Bodies; in like manner, a Christian Soul that is warmed and lightened by
Divine Love does not keep it within it self, but communicates its benign
Influences to all the Objects that are within its reach. The Love of God in its
proper Nature is diffusive, and very opposite to Envy and Animosity; It Dispels
the Clouds, and Allays the Tempests that arise from the Body, and its
Appetites; and composeth the Soul to the Sweetest, and most even Temper; It
Inlarges our Minds, and Softens our Affections, and Calms our Passions, and
Smooths the Ruggedness of our Natures; It destroys our Pride and Selfishness,
and so strikes up the Roots of Enmity, and Divisions; and thus disposes us to
the most Generous and Comprehensive Charity.

(III.) Make the great Design of Religion, yours; and know, that the Intent of
that, is, not to fill our heads with Notion, or to teach us Systems of Opinion;
to resolve us a Body of Difficult Points, or to Enable us to talk plausibly for
lesser Truths; But to furnish our minds with encouragements of Virtue and
instances of Duty; to direct us to govern our Passions, and subdue our
appetites and self-wills, in order to the glory of God, the good of Societies,
and our own present and eternal Interests: And if Christians would take this to
be their business, and conscientiously apply themselves unto it; they would
find work enough in their own hearts to employ them, and neither have time, nor
occasion to pry into the Infirmities of others, nor inclination to quarrel with
them: they would see how unwise it is to be seeking, and making Enemies, when
they have so many within themselves; and how dangerous, to be diverted to a
needless, and unjust foreign War, while a deadly domestic Foe is strengthened by
it. And methinks it is wonderful, and it is sad, that we should be so mild and
indulgent to the Enemies that we are bound to engage against by our Duty to
God, and to our selves, by his Laws, and our own Reasons, by the precepts and
examples of his Son our Savior, by his Sacraments, and by his Blood, by all
things in Religion, and all things in Interest; and at the same time, be so
eager against those, whom we ought to consider as Friends, upon the account of
our relation to God, and the tie of common nature, and the obligations of
Divine Commands, and the interests of Societies, and the practice of the best
times past, and the hopes of a future happiness.

This is lamentable in it self, and yet the more so, for being common: And it
seems to me such a kind of madness, as if a man should be picking causless
quarrels with his Neighbors about a chip of Wood, or a broken Hedge, when a
Fire in his house is consuming his Goods, and Children: Such Frenzies, and much
greater, are our mutual enmities and oppositions, while we quietly sit down in
our unmortified Affections. And we should know them to be so, did we understand
our Danger, or our Duty, and seriously mind either the one, or other: We should
find then that a Christian has no such enemies as the Flesh, the world, and
the Devil; that these will require all our care, and employ all our strength,
and diligence: and he that knows this, and considers, and acts suitably, will
find too much in himself to censure, and oppose, and too little to admire
himself for above other men; He will see sufficient reason to incline him to
pardon his erring brother, and be the more easily induced to exercise charity,
which himself so many ways needs. The last Direction is this.

(IV.) Study the moderate pacifick ways, and principles, and run not in
extremes: both Truth, and Love are in the middle; Extremes are dangerous. After
all the swaggering, and confidence of Disputers, there will be uncertainty in
lesser matters: and when we travel in uncertain Roads, it is safest to choose
the Middle. In this, though we should miss a lesser truth, (which yet is not
very likely) we shall meet with Charity, and our gain will be greater than our
loss. He that is extreme in his Principles, must needs be narrow in his
Affections: whereas he that stands on the middle path, may extend the arms of
his Charity to those on both sides: It is indeed very natural to most, to run
into extremes: and when men are fallen Out with a Practice, or Opinion, they
think they can never remove to too great a distance from it; being frighted by
the steep before them, they run so far back, till they fall into a precipice
behind them. Every Truth is near an Error; for it lies between two Falsehoods:
and he that goes far from One, is apt to slip into the other; and while he
flies from a Bear, a Lion meets him. So that the best way to avoid the Danger
is to steer the middle Course; in which we may be sure there is Charity and
Peace, and, very probably, Truth in their Company. Thus of my Directions.

FOr CONSIDERATIONS, I Will propose such, as show the Unreasonableness of our
Enmities, and Disagreements upon the account of different Opinions; which will
prove that our Affections ought to meet, though our Judgments cannot. My first
is this,

(I.) Love is part of Religion; but Opinions for the sake of which we lose
Charity, are not so. The First, I have proved already: and for the other, we
may consider, That Religion consists not in knowing many things, but in
practicing the few plain things we know. THE NECESSARY PRINCIPLES OF FAITH LIE
IN A LITTLE ROOM. This is Life Eternal to know thee the only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent; Says he that best knew what was Eternal
Life, and what necessary unto it, Joh. 17. 3. And the Apostle St. Paul draws up
all into the same two Principles. He that comes unto God must know that he is,
and that he is a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him; Heb. 11. 6. St.
Peter was pronounced blessed upon the single Profession, that Jesus was Christ,
the Son of the Living God, Mat. 16. 16. and the Eunuch was baptized upon the
same, Act. 8. 37. St. Paul reckons these as the only Necessaries to Salvation,
Romans 10. 9. If thou confess with thy Mouth the Lord Jesus, and believe in thy
heart that God has raised him from the Dead, thou shall be save. And St. John
to the same purpose, Whosever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is born of
God, This Faith indeed must suppose the general Principles of natural Religion,
and produce the Real Fruits of Righteousness to make it effectual to its end;
and these supposed, the Apostles speak as if it contained all that is
essentially necessary to be believed, and known, in order to our Happiness.
Thus the Fundamentals of belief are few, and plain: For certainly the Divine
Goodness would not lay our Eternal Interests in Difficulties, and multitudes;
things hard to be understood, and retained. The difficult work of Religion is
not in the Understanding, but in the Affections, and Will. So that the
Principles, in which Religion consists, are the clearly revealed Articles in
which we are agreed. For the others about which we differ, and dispute, though
some of them may be consequences of those, and good helps to the practice of
Religion, yet I should be loath to make them a necessary and essential part of
it: For he that says they are, concludes all men under a state of Ruin and
Damnation, who either do not know, or are not able to receive them: An
uncharitableness, that is as bad as Heresy, if it be not one it self. The sum
is, Religion lies in few Principles, I mean as to the Essence of it; and that
principally consists in Practice. So the Prophet reckons, Mic. 6. 8. He has
showed thee O man what is good: and what does the Lord require of thee, but to
do Justice, and love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? And St. James
gives an Account of Religion like it, Jam. 1. 17. True Religion, and undefiled
before God and the Father is this, to Visit the Widow, and Fatherless in their
Afflictions, and to keep himself unspotted from the World. Religion is an Holy
Life, and Charity is a main branch of that; But Opinions are no vital part, nor
do they appertain to the substance of it. And shall we lose a Limb for an
Excrescence, or an Ornament; An Essential of Religion for that which is but
accessory, and extrinsick; Charity, for an Opinion? I think it is not
reasonable, and I hope you think so likewise. But I offer to your Consideration,

(II.) Charity is certainly our Duty, but many of the Opinions, about which we
fall out, are uncertainly true; viz. as to us. The main, and Fundamental Points
of Faith are indeed as firm as the Center, but the Opinions of men are as
fluctuating as the Waves of the Ocean. The Root, and body of a Tree is fast,
and unshaken; while the Leaves are made the sport of every Wind: And Colors
sometimes vary with every position of the Object, and the Eye, though the Light
of the Sun be an uniform Splendor. The Foundation of God stands sure, but
men often build upon it what is very Tottering, and uncertain. The great Truths
of Religion are easily discernable, but the smaller, and remoter ones require
more sagacity and acuteness to descry them; and the best sight may be deceived
about such obscure, and distant Objects. And methinks it is very strange, that
men should be so excessively confident of the Truth, and Certainty of their
Opinions, since they cannot but know the Weakness of Humane understanding in
general, and cannot but often have found the Fallibility of their own. The
Apostle tells us, that we know but in part, 1 Cor. 13. 9. and makes Confidence
an Argument of Ignorance, 1 Cor. 8. 2. If any man think that he knows any
thing, he knows nothing yet, as he ought to know. And Solomon reckons it as
an argument of Folly; The Fool rages, and is confident: and there is nothing
that discovers it more;

For let us consider; The Scripture has not been so clear, and express in
defining lesser Points; and the words, in which they are thought to be Lodged,
are many times figurative, and obscure, and of various meaning, spoken only by
the by, or agreeably to forms of speech, or customs, that we do not know; or by
way of condescension to common Apprehension: And therefore we see that
Interpretations are infinite, and there is no sort of men less agreed, than
Commentators: All Opinions plead Scripture, and many pretend to reason, and
most to Antiquity. The Learned, and the Prudent; Churches, and Councils;
Confessors, and Fathers; the former, and the latter Ages; the Virtuous, and the
Devout; the Credulous, and the Inquisitive, they have all differed in the
lesser matters of Belief: And every man differs from almost every other in some
thing, and every man differs often from himself in many things: Age has
altered our Judgments, or we are children still: Our Affections change our
Thoughts, and our Imaginations shift the Scene: and what we call Reason is many
times but a chain of Phantasms. And we are guided by prejudices, and overruled
by Authority, and formed by Education; and suck in our Opinions Carelessly, and
by accident: We are deeply settled, before we have examined; and when we
examine, it is but by halves; we see but few things, and judge all things by
those we see: We either seek not Truth at all, or are unable to manage a due,
and impartial search; when we stumble upon it, we do not know it; and when it is
in sight we boggle, and are afraid, and run away from it; or stand, to pelt it
with dirt, and vile Names: In the mean while, we catch at shadows, and grow
fond of the Images of our own Fancies, and cry up these for Truth, and Faith;
and disturb Societies, and the Peace of mankind, to gain credit to our Dreams.
Such a thing is man, and such reasons have we to be confident of our Opinions;
and to hate those that are not of our Persuasion; and to forsake a certain Duty
for Doubtful Tenants. These things, well considered, might lessen our fondness
toward Opinions, and promote our Charity toward each other; which will grow
by the same degrees, by which the other decreaseth. And that it may, I add this
further to be considered, viz.

(III.) Christian Love is necessary, but Agreement in Opinions is neither
necessary, nor possible. It Is very true indeed, that the WAY to HEAVEN is but
One, and to walk in that, is the one thing necessary: but then that is not the
particular Path of this Sect, or another: but the way of an Holy Life; which
may be practiced under very different Forms of Apprehension, and Belief. Though
the way be not broad in respect of Practice, or sensual Indulgence; yet it has
a Latitude in respect of Judgment, and Circumstantial Opinion. The Paths may
be many in this Royal Road; and it is not absolutely necessary, that we should
measure Footsteps, and all exactly tread the same: He that goes in the
plainest, and nearest, is in the best condition for Pleasure, and Safety; but
another that goes about, or in the rugged and uneven Path, may come to the same
journeys end, though with more difficulty, and danger: And I shall not deny to
afford him Pardon for the folly of his choice, lest possibly I should need it
my self.

It Is true, we are commanded to hold the Unity of the Spirit, and that is
necessary: but this is in the Essentials of Faith, and Life, in which all good
men are agreed, notwithstanding that their forward Zeal will not permit them to
see it: Unity in the lesser things may be requisite for Peace, and the
Interests of Societies; but it is not absolutely so, for the Salvation of men's
Souls: Yea different Apprehension about Opinions in Religion might consist well
enough with Peace, and public safety likewise, could men be persuaded to be
modest, to keep their Apprehensions to themselves, or not to fancy their
Conceits necessary for all the rest of mankind; and so vex their Neighbors,
provoke their Rulers, and dissettle Government, for the Propagation of them.

It Is a frequent Wish with some, That all men were once of one mind: but then
it must be theirs, no doubt; for they would not judge it reasonable upon other
terms: They may as well wish that we were all of one Age, Complexion, Humor,
and Degree of Understanding: In these we see Providence has ordered a great
diversity, and in this there is both Beauty and Convenience: Perhaps variety of
Opinions may be contrived into us for the same reasons; and much of the
pleasure of Conversation, and inquiry would be lost, if there were an universal
Harmony in our Conceptions: But however this is, it is enough, that such an
agreement is not necessary; Yea, I take the other Step, it is impossible,

Our Tempers, Capacities, Educations, Genius's, Converses, Interests, and
Accidents are strangely diverse; and therefore our Apprehensions must needs be
different. There is scarce any exact likeness in Nature: and all the variety
that is, arises from the various mixture of a few Elements: How great a
diversity then must needs proceed from the different Combination of so many
things as influence our Belief, and Judgments? Since the World began to this
day, men have been of different Opinions; and, no doubt, they will be so to the
end of it: For circumstances considered, it is morally impossible it should be
otherwise.

Seeing then that Charity is necessary, and agreement in Opinions is neither
necessary, nor possible; we ought to comply with our main Duty, notwithstanding
any lesser difference. If this were considered, there might be some Hope of
reconciling; and Contenders would see, that though they differ, yet they need
not, they ought not to divide; but Unity of Affection might be preserved amid
diversity of Opinions: For which happy Christian temper men would see more
reason, if they would Consider,

(IV.) That Errors, of themselves, are Infirmities of the Understanding, and
not Enormities of the Will: For no man is willing to be deceived: So that they
ought not to be the Objects of our hatred, but our pity. We hate no man for
being Poor, or Blind, or Lame: and Error is the Poverty, and Blindness, and
Lameness of the mind. We all are Pilgrims in our Way to the Jerusalem that is
above: If some will go in this Path, some in the other, these in a Circuit, and
those amongst the Rocks; we may be sure, it is because they know not the danger,
and Inconveniences, which they Choose: So that we may, and we ought to persuade
them, all we can, not to divert into those Ways: But if they will, upon the
Supposition, and Belief of their being best; we may lament their unhappy
mistake, but must not beat them, or throw Stones at them for it.

Error is founded in Ignorance; even that gross one of the Sadducees about the
Resurrection is imputed to their not knowing the Scriptures, nor the power of
God, Mat. 22. 29. and both Reason, and Charity requires us to pity Ignorance,
and to pardon it. Our Savior makes it the motive of his Prayer for the
forgiveness of the Jews that Murdered him, Luke 23. 34. Father forgive them,
for they know not what they do. It Is very true, that Error many times is
occasioned by a corrupt Bias in the Will, and Affections; But then if our
erring Brother be sincere in other matters, we are not to conclude that his
Understanding is this way corrupted; and we can scarce be certain of it in any
case: Or, if it be, (if he believes himself) he does not know that his Interest
or Inclination are the things, which prevail with his Judgment: and so
Ignorance is at the bottom still: For it is a Contradiction that any man should
believe that, which he does not think is true, though he have never so much
Appetite, or Interest to incline him: And if these oblige a man to profess
against the Dictates of his mind, or to suspend the exercise of it, (as
oftentimes they do) such men are to be reckoned under the Character of Vicious,
and not barely erroneous; and so are not to be counted among mere Dissenters in
Opinion, concerning whom I am now discoursing. And that you may not rashly
judge that your Brother speaks against his Conscience, because he professes
the belief of things that to us seem very wild and absurd, and so hate him as a
timeserver, and an Hypocrite; when heis but an innocently mistaken person; I
add this other Consideration, viz.

(V.) That we ought to make allowance for Education, Authority, and fair
pretenses; which have a mighty power, even over honest minds, and do often
unavoidably lead them into Error. For let us consider, how easily we receive
the first impressions, and how deeply they sink into our souls: Childhood
refuses no folly, examines no absurdity; Education makes it any thing; The
first is entertained as best, and whatever offers after, is execrated and
despised, if it be not like it. This is the condition of all Mankind in their
tender age, and the far greatest part carry the apprehensions to their graves,
that they sucked in infancy; And hence it comes about, that there is nothing
more impossible, or ridiculous, even in dreams, and distracted imaginations,
than the things which have been entertained by great numbers of men, as Sacred:
There are no conceits in Bedlam more wild and extravagant, than many about
Religion, which have been believed firmly, and zealously promoted, and fiercely
contended for, even to Blood and Desolation, by mighty Nations, and whole
Empires; by Princes and People; by Great men, and Learned; by Devout, and
Prudent, in long Successions from Father to Son, many Ages together. And all
these follies have been first imposed by Education, and confirmed by Authority,
and Custom; The power of which is very great, and very few have strength enough
in their Understandings to overcome it: And in matters of Religion they are
afraid to use their Reasons against those Follies which are taught to be Divine
Dictates, above all humane Intellect, and not to be tried or examined by it.
Upon which accounts it has been, that Mankind has been more extravagantly
mad in many Tenants about Religion, than in any thing else whatsoever: For in
other things the use of Reason is permitted, but in Religion it has been
almost Universally denied.

Thus then, the far greatest part of men, are slaves to the Principles in which
they were bred; and our constitution, infirmity, and circumstances are such,
that very few can help it; and error in the most is in a manner unavoidable,
at least in the weaker sort, and Herd of men: For they have no doubts, about
what they have been always Taught; and have little or no capacity, inclination,
or opportunity, to Examine: So that it is morally impossible for them to free
themselves from the prejudices they lie under; And consequently we ought not to
judge them Insincere, because they profess things incredible, and ridiculous;
or hate them for believing them, when it is so difficult, and so almost
impossible, that they should do otherwise.

And yet we are further to consider, how much those that differ from us, and
err in the things in which they differ, are to be allowed upon the account of
the Authority, and Example of many learned, wise, pious, and devout Men that
instruct, and encourage them in their way; and deeply threaten any diversion
from it: This is a mighty prejudice, when it is on the side of Error, and, no
doubt, many honest minds are carried away by it. We are naturally apt to follow
others, especially those that we esteem; and it is reasonable to do so in
things, that we are not so well able to judge of our selves; and modest to
permit our judgments to be inclined by the sense of those that are wiser, and
better. So that He may be a good man, and a lover of Truth, that yet is much
Mistaken in his Opinion; which, in such a case as this, is his Unhappiness, not
his Fault.

And I may add the other thing mentioned, viz. that we ought to allow our
erring brother for the fair, and specious pretenses which many errors plead
for themselves; as Antiquity, Piety, Consent of Churches, Reverend Names,
Spirituality, Gods Glory, Gospel Light, and Liberty, and many other such, which
sound well, and sway much with many very pious people who are taken with the
pretense, but are not able to discern the fallacy; and so swallow the error
for the sake of those fine Names, wherewith it is gilded: In which case also,
there is Infirmity, and Misfortune, that require our Pity, and our Charity; but
nothing that can justify our Rage or Hatred. Yea, why should we not Love him
for the Zeal and Respect he has to those good things, the shadows of which
have deceived him, rather than Hate him for his weakness in Mistaking? And for
those that are so Rigid to the Infirmities of Mistaken Judgments, I wish they
would Consider,

(VI.) That in many things they may err themselves; and therefore shall have
need of the Charity of others. There is none of us, I hope, so immodest, as to
say, or think, that he is mistaken in nothing: If any do, that person errs
more, than most of those whose Errors he censures: And if he acknowledges
that he errs in some things, though he knows not the particulars: he is himself
concerned in the plea for Charity toward the erroneous. If we were infallible,
and all our Opinions were Certainties, and Demonstrations, we might then have
more pretense for our Stifness, and Severities; But to confess the Infirmities
of our own understandings, and to give no candid allowances to other men's
failings, this is utterly inexcusable, and contrary to our own interests: For
in this rigorous way, every man condemns himself, and puts a weapon into every
other man's hand to destroy him. Let him that is without Error, throw the first
Stone at the Erroneous; but if he begins, that is obnoxious himself, what
favor can he expect? The same reason he has to Assault those before him, all
the rest have to Pelt him: So that to hate, and reproach our Brother for his
supposed Errors, is, besides the other evil things, very unwise, and
unpolitick, and contrary to the principles of Safety, and Self-love. If this
were well considered, Interest might perhaps effect that in some, which sense
of Duty cannot.

Now in all this, I have no intention to make Apologies for Error, but to lay
sure grounds for Universal Love; and what I have said, is not for the Interest
of any particular Sect, but it is the joint concern of all parties in Religion;
since they all equally need each others Charity. If any man be Angry, and think
I would have him be too kind to the Erroneous; he will, I hope, be pacified,
when he considers, that I also design to make them kind to him; and the
kindness I plead for, respects men's Persons, and Virtuous Qualities, and my
Charity is to the Infirmities of their Understandings: but for the fondness,
and bitter Zeal; the pride, and narrowness; the malice, scorn, and separation,
that uses to go with the opinions of Sects; these I confess are very odious,
and detestable; and it is very hard not to be warmed to Indignation by them:
These are Vices, and Immoralities; and a True Catholic, that loves God, and
his Neighbor heartily, may, and ought, to manifest his resentments against
them, in order to the discountenancing and curing such hateful and deadly
evils. Thus of my Considerations.

I Propose the CAUTIONS under the following Heads;

(I.) Beware of inordinate Admiration, and Love of any Sect: When we
passionately Admire a Party, we are apt to Despise them that differ from it;
and to confine the Church to those of that particular way: Hence it is that
fond Opinators invest their beloved Congregation, with all the glorious
Privileges, and Titles, making Angels of their own men; whenas for others,
they lookdown upon them, as heretical, or carnal, as formal people, or merely
moral, who are strangers to Gods Grace, and Covenant, and ignorant of the
mysteries of Faith and Religion; and therefore they will not defile themselves
with their Conversation, nor come into their Assemblies. They look upon the
rest of Christians with an eye of pride, and scorn; and affectedly thank God
that they are not like these Publicans, these men of the world: They hug
themselves in the dear opinion of their own Light; and conclude all others to
be in Darkness. They heap up Teachers to themselves, 2 Timothy 4. 3. and dote upon
their own Apostles; I am for Paul, or I am for Apollos, or I am for Cephas:
This is a precious man, or that is a Gospel-Preacher; such a one is very
Powerful, and such a one is very Sweet, and Spiritual; and O how Beautiful are
the Feet of those Messengers of good tidings to them, while they assure them by
the Marks of their Sect, that they are Gods Peculiar, and Chosen People!

Which Fondness were not so Mischievous, if at the same time all others were
not counted Reprobates and Cast-aways; But this follows, and many other fatal
evils: endless Enmities are begun, and Charity is destroyed, and the foundation
is laid for Cruelty, and Persecution: and Gods goodness, which is to his whole
Church, is wronged by being narrowed, and Christ's Blood is undervalued, and the
greatest part of his Purchase is by these men given to the Devil, and
Christianity is undermined, and the Peace of Mankind is overthrown: All this we
have sadly seen; and I have said nothing here out of any Animosity, or
Bitterness; nor have I any design to render any good man, or number of men
Odious, or Contemptible; but to represent the Vanity, and the Mischief of this
fond spirit, of admiring Parties; which has been very fatal to Charity, and to
the whole body of Religion.

And we shall understand more of the evil of it, if we consider St. Jude's
description of the Sectaries of his time, who looked upon themselves as the
only illuminated people, and despised all other Christians: These the Apostle
describes (1.) by the groundlesness, and vanity of their conceits; They were
Dreamers, ver. 8. (2.) by their insolence against Government; They Despised
Dominion, and spoke Evil of Dignities; in the same Verse: (3.) by their
ignorant malice, ver. 10. They spoke evil of things they knew not; (4.) by
their Cruelty and Unmercifulness to their Brethren; They have gone in the way
of Cain; (5.) by their Murmuring, and Projecting against their Rulers, ver. 11.
And perished in the gain saying of Core; (6.) By the speciousness of their
shows, and appearances; They were Clouds, ver. 12. (7.) By their emptiness, and
want of real virtue, notwithstanding their pretenses; They were Clouds without
water: (8.) By their unconstancy, and unsetledness; They were carried about of
winds: (9.) By their violence and fury, ver. 13. Raging waves of the Sea: (10.)
By their eminency, and pretended Light; They were Stars: (11.) By the
irregularity of their motions, and their running up and down; they were
Wandering Stars: (12.) By their discontentedness; They were Murmurers,
Complainers, ver. 16. (13.) by their Stubbornness in the way of their own
wills, Walking after their own Lusts: (14.) By their Proud expressions
concerning themselves, and their Party; by their Canting, and Mysteriousness of
their Phrases; Their Mouth speaks great swelling Words: (15.) By their fond
Admiration of their own People, Having men's Persons in Admiration: (16.) By
their Proud Scorn, they are called Mockers, ver. 18. (17.) By their Separation,
ver. 19. These be they who Separate themselves: (18.) By their real Sensuality,
and self-pleasing, under great Boasts, and pretensions to the Spirit; sensual,
having not the Spirit. This is the Apostles description of the first
Separatists, the Gnostics, who admired themselves, and withdrew from the
Communion of other Christians, under pretense of greater Holiness: And I could
wish they had had no Successors among us; and they will have the fewer, if we
learn to avoid the undue Admiration of any particular Sect.

My next Caution is,

(II.) That you avoid eager, and passionate Disputes; in these, Charity is
always lost, and Truth seldom, or never found: When the Passion is raised, the
Judgment is gone; and there is no seeing to the bottom in disturbed, and
muddied waters. It Is the calm, and quiet considerer that finds Truth, while the
hot, and confident disputer loses both himself, and it; when his passion is
once kindled, he cannot speak any thing pertinently himself, nor understand
what is spoken to purpose, by another; and so can neither convince, nor be
convinced. If thou differ with thy brother then, do not ruffle with him in
vehement disputes, but remember the Apologue: The Sun and Wind contended for
the Travelers Cloak; the Wind bluster'd about him, and endeavored to prevail
by violence; but with this bad success, that the man held his Garment the
faster for it: At length, the Sun shines forth with a calm and insinuating
beam, which warmed him gently, and caused him at last to throw his Cloak from
him. If thou art desirous to prevail with thy friend to lay down his Opinion,
assault him not by the fierceness of disputes; For such attempts will but raise
his passion, and that will make him stick the closer to his Error; but shine
upon him with a calm light, insinuate thy better principle by modest, and
gentle suggestions. He that has wedded any falsehood, has many prejudices
against the contrary Truth; and these are not to be torn off all at once, but
softly, and by degrees to be unwound: This is the likeliest way to prevail upon
Dissenters; or, if at any time it fails of its success, there is however no
hurt done: Charity and Peace are preserved, which are much better, than most
Opinions, for which we contend: Whereas by Disputes men are mutually provoked,
and tempted to pour forth many Idle, and many bitter words; the quiet and
temper of their minds is disturbed, and likely the Peace of others also: They
are brought no whit nearer each other, in their Judgments, but put at a much
greater distance, in their Affections: Whereas by the other method of calm
proceeding all these evils are avoided.

It Is true, we are commanded to contend earnestly for the faith that was once
delivered to the Saints, Jude 3. But the Faith there meant, does not consist in
points of doubtful disputation, but in the Fundamental Article That Christ
Jesus is the Messiah, joined with a virtuous and holy conversation; and the
persons against whom those primitive Christians were to contend, were Ungodly
Men that denied the only Lord God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, ver. 5. For these
Essential matters, we may, and we ought to be earnest; but Contention about
lesser things, is called by the Apostle, Perverse-Disputing, and reckoned as
the effect of pride, and ignorance, 1 Timothy 6. 5. And hence I pass to a Third
Caution, which is this,

(III.) Beware of Zeal about Opinions; by which, I mean all the Propositions of
less certainty, or consequence: About these we may, no doubt, be inquisitive
and thoughtful; and our search will be commendable, while we manage it with
modesty, and caution, in order to the gaining more Motives, and directions for
a virtuous Practice: But to be eager in them, and to disturb the peace of
Societies for their sakes; this is a vicious, and dangerous excess, destructive
to Christian Charity, and the public weal, and order.

There is nothing has done the world more mischief, than indiscreet,
unseasonable Zeal for Truths, while men have not made a difference between
those, that are necessary to be believed, and known; and those others, which
may safely be doubted, and denied: It Is a great and dangerous mistake to think,
that we ought to publish, and propagate all the Truth we know; For every man
thinks his own Opinions about Religion, Gods Truth; and nature inclines men to
desire to beget their own image upon other men's minds; and if this be made a
Duty too, every man will be a Teacher of all the rest; and no man will let his
brother be at quiet; This man is ready to burst till he has given himself
vent; and the other is as impatient, till he has contradicted what he has
said: Both are zealous to Proselyte each other, and neither can be contented
with a single conquest, till the public be disturbed. These are some of the
effects of opinionative zeal, and we know it by a dear experience. Here is the
source of all Divisions, and Sects. Gods Truth is the pretense of every Party,
and being enlightened themselves, they all think they ought to enlighten all
others; and these Lights meeting, and being infinitely reflected, beget a flame
between them, in which all of them are scorched, and Charity, and Peace are
consumed.

If therefore we are friends to Christian Love, let us avoid, and oppose this
its most fatal enemy; and consider, That we need not be zealous for more truth,
than what God has made necessary; and ought not to be zealous for more, than
what Scripture and Reason have made certain; That the Necessary, and certain
things are very few, and the remoter doctrines difficult, and deep; That we may
easily be deceived in speculative points, where so much acuteness, and freedom,
and care, and diligence is needful; That the greatest part embrace Shadows, and
their Zeal is for folly, and falsehood: That our brethren may be good men,
though they understand not many things that we know; or err in many in which we
judge aright; That the benefits of an Opinion, if true, will not make amends
for the trouble, and disturbance, that is made to promote it; and That Charity
is more valuable than Knowledge, 1 Cor. 8. 1. 1 Cor. 13.

If we thus Consider, we shall be contented with the satisfactions of our own
minds, and not be Angry with others because they will not take us for their
Guides; we shall exercise our Zeal upon the necessary, certain things; and our
Charity about the rest; we shall inform our brother who needs, or desires it;
and let him alone when it may do him, or others hurt to disturb him; we shall
propose our Opinions seasonably, and modestly, and be willing that men should
receive them, as they can; we shall not be concerned at any man's Mistake, that
does not minister to Vice, and when it does, we shall prudently, and calmly
endeavor to rectify his thoughts; we shall converse indifferently with all
Persuasions without wrangling, and discord; and exercise our Charity, and Good
Will toward the Good men of any sort: Thus our Zeal will be rightly tempered,
and directed, and Charity promoted. And yet further in order to it, I propose
this last Caution:

(IV.) Beware of censuring, and affixing odious Names and consequences upon the
persons or opinions of Dissenters. He that Censures another, in part Hates him;
and wants many degrees of that Charity the Apostle commends, and describes, 1
Cor. 13. 4, 5, 6, 7. which bears all things, hops all things, believes all
things, endures all things. He that Rails at his Neighbor for his Opinion,
wants only power to Persecute him for it: yea, even this is a kind of
Persecution; for there is a persecution of the Tongue, as well as of the Hand;
and He that Injures his Brother in his Name, is a Persecutor, as well as the
other, that hurts him in his Body or Estate. Let us take heed then, lest we
become guilty by fastening names of Reproach upon those of different Judgment;
and imposing the odious consequences that we our selves make, upon our
Neighbor, as his Opinion: Both these are very common, and the Spite, and
Injustice of them do exceedingly exasperate our Spirits, and inflame our
Disagreements: By this way, Truth is exposed to contempt, and scorn, as well as
Falsehood; and there is none so Sacred, but its Adversaries have made it a
deformed Vizard, to bring it under the Hatred and Reproaches of the Ignorant;
and that which has an Ugly Face, is more than half condemned among the
generality of men, who cannot distinguish the true complexion, from the dirt
that is thrown upon it: This the Zealots of all Parties very well understand,
when they run down many things by a Vile name which they cannot Confute by
Argument: It Is but raising the Cry of Arminianism, Socinianism, Popery,
Pelagianism, and such like upon them; and all other Refutation is Superfluous:
These I mention not out of Favor, but for Instance; and it is the like in many
other cases.

Thus apt are men to be frighted by Bugbear Names, from Truth, and Charity: And
this is Superstition in the true sense, to be afraid of things in which there
is no hurt; and it is promoted by the Uncharitable fastening of our own
consequences upon our brothers Opinion; This we think follows, and then make no
Scruple to say, it is his Opinion; when he hates, and disowns it, and would quit
his Tenent, if he thought any such thing were a consequence from it: And thus
also are our differences heightened, and rendered almost incurable.

If then we have any kindness for Charity and Christian Love, let us take care
of such dis-ingenuous practices: A true Catholic should not take any Name to
himself, but that of a Christian; nor Reproach any other with any Style of
Infamy. He should not, and cannot in Modesty, or Justice, charge his brother
with any Opinion which he will not own, though he never so clearly see that it
may be concluded, from what he believes and teaches. If men would learn to be
thus Fair, and Candid, to each other, our Differences would be reduced to a
narrower Circle; and there might be some hopes that Peace and Love would
revive, and flourish in our Borders.

IF any now should ask me, Whether this Doctrine of Universal Love do not tend
to Universal Toleration? I should answer, that thus far it does, viz. that all
private persons should Tolerate each other, and bear with their brothers
Infirmities; That every man should allow another that Liberty, which he desires
himself, in things wherein the Laws of God, and the Land, have left him Free;
and permit him his own Opinion without Censure, or Displeasure: Such a
Toleration, I think, Christianity requires in Private men;

But as to the Public, I do by no means think it Modest for Us to determine
what the Government should do: And in This case, it is as unfit as in Any
whatsoever; since this matter depends upon the Consideration of so many Things,
that it is very Difficult to state the Bounds of Just Permission, and Restraint:
Leaving That therefore to Their Prudence, whom Providence has called to
determine in It; I shall only say, that so much Toleration, as may consist with
the Interests of Religion, and Public Safety, may be Granted: But such a
Liberty as is prejudicial to any of These, should not be expected: For
Christianity, and all other Considerations, oblige the Government to provide
for the Common Good. And were the Duty of Catholic Charity duly practiced; and
Private Christians once persuaded to Tolerate one another; it might then be
safer for the Government to give a Larger public Toleration than possibly now
is fit. In the mean while, without troubling our selves with fancies about the
Duty of our Governors, Let us mind our Own; especially this great one, of
Charity and Christian Love: And if we mind this, and practice sutably, God will
be Glorified, and Religion Advanced; the Church will be Edified, and our Souls
Comforted; Government will be Established, and the Peace of the world Promoted;
And the Peace of God which passes all Understanding, will keep our hearts, and
minds, in Christ Jesus: To whom, with God the Father, and God the Holy Ghost,
be ascribed all Glory, and Worship, henceforth, and for ever.

SERMON III.

Christian Loyalty. Preached on the KING'S MARTYRDOM.

The Second Edition.

SERMON III. A FAST SERMON ON THE King's Martyrdom.
ROMANS XIII. 2. -- And they that resist shall receive to themselves Damnation.
AS there are some Ages and Times that are more infested than others with
unhappy influences from the Heavens, and noxious reeks from the Earth, which,
by poisoning the Air, Roots, and Herbs, convey that pestilential venom into
men's bodies, that even wearies Death, and gluts the Grave with its slaughters,
and was matter of our late miseries:

In like manner there are Times when poisonous Doctrines from the Pulpit, and
malign humors in the Populace, infect the Public Air, and spread a fatal
Contagion into men's Principles and Manners, which flies like Infection, and
destroys like the Plague.

And if ever Times were under cross and unlucky Aspects, if ever there were a
public Spirit of Frenzy and mischief in the World in any days, since the
first; certainly this Lot is fallen upon ours; wherein men's Principles and
Practices contend, which shall outdo the other in the degree of Evil: And it is
hard to say which are worse, Men's actions or opinions.

We are fallen into Times, wherein among some, it is a piece of Gallantry to
defy God, and a kind of Wit to be an Atheist; among others, it is Religion to
be Humorous and Fantastic, and Conscience to be Turbulent, and Ungovernable.
Nor have men's Practices come short of the malignity of their Belief; but if
possible have outdone it. Atheism has not rested in the judgment, but
proceeded to all enormities, and debauches: And we had not been called to the
sad solemnity of this Day, if Rebellion had stopped in Opinion.

But alas, the venom of the Asp has swollen into deadly Tumors; and those
seditious Principles have shot their poisonous arrows into the vitals of the
public Body. We yet feel the smart of those wounds, and the Generations to
come will wear the scars and the marks of our misery, and our guilt.

What is past we may lament, but cannot help. What we may do, and what we
ought, is to inform our selves better of the Duty we owe to God, and those he
has appointed over us; and to endeavor the suppressing those principles, and
affections which breathed the Plagues that destroyed the Nation, and would
again burn us up in hotter Flames than those. And if that fatal Fire which so
lately preyed upon our Peace, and our Properties, our Religion, and our
Government, our Persons and our Friends, has not yet convinced us of the evils
and danger of Resistance; yet there is another and a greater, one as certain,
and more fatal, threatened by the Apostle, They that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation.

Which words were spoken in the days of NERO, who besides that he was an
Heathen, was a Persecutor, and a Tyrant, and the most infamous instance in
Nature; and yet this Monster is not excepted as to the Tribute of Obedience.
Whereas had this been said in the days of such a Prince as our CHARLES the
First, it might have been supposed that the virtue of the person claimed the
reverence and subjection, and not the character of the Prince. And that 'twas
damnable to resist because he was Good, not because he was Supreme; because he
was a Nursing Father of the Church, not because the Ruling Father of his
Country. 'Twas an happy coincidence therefore to secure the Authority of the
Magistrate, which answers the greatest pretensions of Rebellion. If Religion be
pretended, an Heathen must not be resisted: If Tyranny, it is damnation to
oppose a Nero. They that resist shall receive -- (...), the wrath and judgment
of God, which implies the guilt, and expresses the danger.

Now to resist lawful Authority, is so sinful, and so dangerous, principally
upon this threefold account. RESISTANCE,

1. Affronts the Authority of God.

2. It Is contrary to the Spirit of Religion. And

3. Destructive to the Interest of Societies.

The two former express the Guilt, and the latter both the Sin and the
Punishment. Of each in order.

1. RESISTANCE is an affront to the authority of God. (...), the Lord sets up
Kings, says the Father. And (...) Kings are from God, says the Heathen. And a
greater than both acknowledges Pilate's power to be from above.

The Scripture intitles God to all the Royal adjuncts; and both Christian and
Heathen Antiquity agree in this with the sacred Oracles.

1. The Kings person is said to be God's, Great deliverance gives He to HIS
King, 2 Samuel xxii. 51. and He shall give strength unto HIS King, 1 Samuel ii. 10.
Yea, I have said ye are Gods, says the Text; and consonantly Plato calls the
King, (...), a kind of God among men. And as the name of God is called upon his
person, so also is it (2.) upon his Throne. Then Solomon sat upon the Throne
of the Lord as King, instead of DAVID his Father, 1 Chronicles. xxix. 23. And says
the Queen of Sheba, Blessed be the Lord thy God which delights in thee, to
set thee on HIS Throne, 2 Chronicles. ix. 8. To a like sense also is that of Nestor
to Agamemnon in Homer, (...)
(...) --
Jove lent thee thy Scepter and Jurisdiction. (3.) The Kings Titles also relate
him to God, viz. those of Gods Anointed, and his Servant: The former given even
to Saul, 1 Samuel xii. 3. and Cyrus, Isa. xlv. 1. and the later to
Nebuchadnezzar, Jer. xxv. 9. The same also Athanasius gives to Constantius the
great Favourer of the Arrians. (4.) The Kings power likewise is from God; There
is no power but of God, and the powers that are, are ordained of God, says the
Apostle. And the Pythagorean, (...), God has given him Dominion. Upon which
account also Themistius, (...), God sent Regal Power from Heaven. And that a
Kingdom is (...), a Divine Good, is the assertion of Plato, and the confession
of Cyrus: All the Kingdoms of the Earth has the Lord of Heaven given me, 2 Chronicles. xxxvi. Yea, and Tiberius acknowledges, (...), our Kingdom is from God.
And Daniel minds Nebuchadnezzar, The God of Heaven has given thee a Kingdom,
Power, and Strength, and Glory, Dan. ii. 27. And Athanasius in his Prayer for
Constantius, (...), Thou have given this Kingdom to Constantius thy servant.

These, I think, are testimonies enough to prove that Kings wear Gods Image and
Authority. And therefore Menander calls the King, (...), God's living Image;
and the Pythagorean, (...), The King is the Figure of God among Men. But
besides all this, there is evidence enough in the nature of the thing to prove,
that Kings have their Power and Authority from God, and are no Substitutes of
the People: which I thus infer.

God made the World, and consequently the World is his, and his alone is the
Right to Govern it: But he being of such immense perfections, that our Frailty
cannot bear his immediate converses; it is necessary that he rule us by men like
our selves, and put the Sword into the hands of Creatures of our own make. This
he does, and hence it follows, that they that Rule are Gods Substitutes, and no
Creatures of the People: For the People have no power to Govern themselves, and
consequently cannot devolve any upon another.

Upon the whole I conclude, that the same Commands and Authority that oblige us
to obey God, bind us to revere those that so signally wear his Image: and he
that disobeys the Viceroy, affronts the Sovereign. He that resists, resists
the Ordinance of God, says the Apostle; and who can lift up himself against
the Lords Anointed and be guiltless? says David in the case of Saul.

And thus I have dispatched the first, viz. Resistance affronts the authority
of God, with which Kings are invested; as I think I have made evident from
testimony, and the nature of the thing.

Secondly, RESISTANCE is opposite to the Spirit of RELIGION: Religion is of a
calm and pacifick temper, like that of its Author, whose voice was not heard in
the street. It subdues our passions, and governs our appetites; it destroys our
pride and sordid selfishness; it allays the tempests, and speaks down the
storms of our natures; it sweetens our Humors, and polisheth the roughness of
our tempers: it makes men gentle and peaceable, meek and compliant. This was
the Spirit of the great exemplar of our Religion; this was the genius of his
Doctrine and his Practice.

He commands the payment of all Duties to Caesar; He acknowledges Pilates
Power to be from above; He commands his Disciples to pray for their
Persecutors; He permits them to fly, not to oppose. He rebukes Peter's violence
to the High Priests servant; and the revenge of the Disciples, when they called
for Fire from Heaven.

He paid Tribute, submitted to the Laws of the Sanhedrim, and to that unjust
sentence against his life.

This was his temper: and the Apostles who lived among his enemies and theirs,
and met with severity enough to have sowred their Spirits, and exasperated
their Pens to contrary resolutions and instructions; Yet as true Followers of
their dear Lord, they faithfully transmit to us what they had learnt from him,
viz. That we should obey those that have the rule over us; submit to every
ordinance of man; pray for Kings and all in authority; submit to Principalities
and Powers, and to obey Magistrates.

And those Noble Spirits of the first Ages after, who began to be Martyrs as
soon as to be Christians; who lived in the Fire, and went to Heaven wrapped in
those Flames that had less ardor than their love: These, I say, amidst the
greatest and fiercest Fires that Cruelty and Barbarism had kindled, paid the
Tribute of a peaceable and quiet subjection to their Murderers, and made
unforced acknowledgements of the right they had to their obedience. Nor do we
ever read of any attempts they made to free themselves by resistance, though
(as Tertullian says) they were in powerful numbers mingled in their Villages,
and in their Cities; yea, in their Castles, and in their Armies. Yea, there is
an illustrious instance of passive obedience in the Thebaean Legion, whose
tenth man being executed for not offering Sacrifice to Idols, they quietly
submitted to the cruelty. And a second Decimation being commanded by
Maximiniam, the Author of the first, one of their great Commanders, (an
excellent Christian) persuades them to suffer it with the same patience:
because it was not with their Swords they could make their way to the Kingdom
of Heaven, but by another kind of Warfare.

And now if after all this, and infinitely more that might be said on this
subject, for men to pretend Religion, and plead Scripture for Rebellion, is
impudent and shameless, an affront to Religion, and a Lie in the face of
Conscience. And those that cannot discern those great lines of their Duty which
are set upon the High places, and shone upon with a full beam, and yet can find
sin in little harmless circumstances, which nothing has forbidden, but the
coyness and perverseness of their own fancies; are like him that could see the
Stars at noon, but could not see the Sun; and could spy the shadows made by the
Mountains in the Moon, but could not discern the greater spots upon its visible
surface. And for men to strain at the decency of an Habit, or the usage of a
Ceremony, when they can swallow Rebellion and Sacrilege without chewing; is to
be like him who durst not eat an Egg on Saturday, but made nothing to kill a
Man. Doubtless had the Scripture said by a thousandth part so much for the Jus
Divinum of Presbytery, as it has for obedience to Authority; had there been
one plain word against Conformity, as there are many against Rebellion; that
would have been worn bare upon the tongue, and the World would have rung with
it.

But the Injunctions and Commands of Obedience are against our humors and
opinions, against the darlings of our fancies, and the interest of our Party:
and therefore here we must shuffle, and evade, cogg, and interpret by Analogies
of our own making, by the Rules of our Sect, and the Authority we worship, by
Necessity and Providence, and any thing that will color Sin, and cozen
Conscience, that will turn Religion into the Current of our appetites, and make
Scripture speak the language of our humors, and our interests.

Thus Religion and divine Authority shall be reverenced, and pleaded when they
agree with men's fancies, and send light or advantage to the Favorites of their
affections: But when they cross their Models, oppose the people of their
imaginations, and call them to duties that are displeasant; the case is
altered, the great motives of persuasion have lost their power, and influence,
and Religion can do nothing with them.

Thus briefly of the two first Heads, viz. Resistance (1.) affronts the
Authority of God, and (2.) is opposite to the Spirit of Religion. From which I
come to the third, which makes resistance both a great sin, and a great
punishment, viz.

(3.) It is ruinous to the INTEREST of SOCIETIES. This I must more largely
prosecute, because it will lead us into the sad occasion of our present
meeting. Man is a Creature made for Society; and what is against the interest
of Societies, is destructive to Humane Nature. And if the greatness of a sin,
and a mischief be to be measured by its reference to the Public, for ought I
know, Rebellion will be the next sin to that which is unpardonable, in the
degree of guilt, as well as it is near it in the penalty threatened.

Now there are two great interests of Societies, viz. GOVERNMENT and RELIGION,
to both which Resistance is fatal both in the doctrine and practice of it.

To begin with Government in order.

(1.) Resistance is destructive to Government: For if Subjects may resist the
Powers over them, no Government in the World can stand longer, than till the
next opportunity to overthrow it. Every man will resist what he does not like,
and endeavor to pluck down what comports not with his humor. Thus every fit
of discontent will stir up the various, and inconstant People to seek an
alteration: And there was never any Government so exactly framed in the World,
but in the menage, and administration of it, many things would displease. Now
the generality of men are led by their present senses; and if they feel
themselves pained by any thing (though the Grief be but in their Imagination)
they are for present deliverance from that Evil by any means; never considering
whether the way of Cure draws not greater Evils after it than the distemper:
and so upon every discontent the people are inflamed, and upon every occasion,
rebel. And thus is a Kingdom laid open to inevitable devastation and ruin: and
by a dear experience we have learnt, that it is better to endure any
inconveniences in a settled Government, than to endeavor violent alterations.
When the Sword is drawn, no man knows where, and when it will be sheathed: When
the Stone is out of a man's hand, he cannot direct it as he pleases. Men with
Swords by their sides, will do what likes themselves, and not what is enjoined
by those that employ them.

Or, could we suppose (what our own unhappy experience has confuted) that
Armies would be obedient; yet the Murders and Rapes, the Spoils and
devastations, which are the natural issues of a Civil War, are worse than any
inconveniences in any Government possible: And though, as my Lord Bacon notes,
Foreign War is like the heat of exercise, good and healthful for the Body; yet
Civil War is like the heat of a Fever, ruinous, and destructive.

Besides, those that resist, either overcome the supreme Power, or are
conquered by it. If the former, their Instruments in all likelihood conquer
them, as well as those they served them against: and so from the just authority
of their lawful Rulers, they fall under the insolence of their licentious
Vassals. Or suppose they get the Government to themselves, all the evils will
follow, which usually do upon Competitions and variety of Claims, which will
breed everlasting disturbance, and eternal fears. Such evils will follow if the
resisters prevail: and if they chance to be suppressed and overcome by the Powers
they oppose, they can expect nothing less than to be crushed, and ruined. So
that those that resist, whether they conquer, or are overcome, draw inevitable
ruin upon themselves, and probably on the common Body. For Laws and Government
are the great Charter of our Lives and Libenties, our Properties, and our All;
and as the Father, (...). Murders, rapes, violence, and all kind of mischief
invade the World with Anarchy and Disorder.

And how far all this has been verified in our Land: a little recollection
will inform us. For,

WHEN fair Weather and a warm Sun, the indulgence of Heaven, and a long
tranquillity, had made us fat and frolic, rich and full, our prosperity made
us wanton, and our riches insolent. We began to murmur, we knew not why; and to
complain, because we had nothing to complain of. Discontents grew upon the
stock of our ill Nature, and the perverseness of our humors; and every little
occasion was Fuel to the Fire that was kindling in the distempered Body. We
began to invade the Government with malicious whispers, and private
Preachments, with Libels and Declamations, with Insolences and Tumults: And
when Sedition had encouraged it self by Noise and Numbers, by Popular zeal and
loud talk of Reformation, it flew into the highest irreverences toward the
King, and the most violent proceedings against his Ministers, that the nearest
Trees being removed, they might have a full stroke at the Cedar. Nor did things
stop here.

The Sparks grew into mighty Flames, and those Vapors into Thunder and
Tempests: The whispers of the Corner past into the noise of a Camp; and the
murmurs of the Street into the sound of the Trumpet. The Cloud like an hand,
became a Magazine of Storms; and our New lights set us all on Fire. The Pulpit
sounded as much War as the Drum; and the Preacher spit as much flame as the
Cannon. Curse ye Meroz was the Text, and Blood and Plunder the Comment and the
Use.

Thus began our happy Reformation: From Law to Licentiousness; from Religion to
Frenzy; from an happy Government, to a wretched Hurry and Confusion: and the
progress and the end were suitable to those hopeful beginnings.

God was worshipped with the Devils Sacrifices, humane blood and slaughter: and
glorified by being affronted in his Authority and his Laws. The King was
honored by the persecution of his Person, and murder of his Friends; submisly
addressed by the civilities of a Rabble; and petitioned in the humble form of
Drums, and Grenades; Welcomed at his Cities, by the shutting of their Gates;
and entertained in the Country with the glittering of Swords, and the noise of
War: Fought against for his defense; and his life sought, for the preservation
of the King.

Thus happy were our Reformers in twisting Contradictions, and they would be so
indeed, could they reconcile one more, viz. That they are the good People and
sure Heirs of Heaven; because the Apostle says, They that resist shall receive
to themselves damnation.

But we are not yet at the end of the line, the most fatal part of the Story is
to come.

Therefore, after ten thousand butcheries, and devastations, miseries, and
disorders, which cannot be described, but they will in part be felt; prosperous
wickedness finally prevailed, the friends of Loyalty and Justice were
scattered, and destroyed: Majesty is made a prey to the sons of a Dunghill; and
afflicted innocence falls into the hands of the Hunters: And after He had been
infamously sold like a Slave, and imprisoned like a vile Malefactor: after He
had been ravished from his Friends, blasphemed in his name, and robbed of the
ensigns of his dignity: after He had been tossed up and down from one place to
another, according as the designs, and insolences of his cruel Jaylors would
have it; after He had been mocked by Conditions of Peace, and terms of
Accommodation, that were never meant; after He had made concessions to all
their Demands, and for the sake of the Peace and Settlement of his Kingdoms,
had granted things that Subjects had never the insolence to ask; I say, after
these, and a thousand instances of barbarism, and indignity more; that his
cruel Persecutors might transcend all examples of wickedness; that Generations
to come might honor them, as they do that HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE, whereof
PONTIUS PILATE was PRESIDENT, and that they might deserve a deeper damnation
than that threatened by the Apostle to bare Resisters; They summon their
SOVEREIGN to their Bar, and try Him by a company of Pettyfellows, that called
themselves by a great Name: They buffet him with their insolent Taunts, and
bait him with the mercenary noise of JUSTICE, JUSTICE, like CRUCIFY him,
CRUCIFY him; They upbraid him with their own faults, and charge him with the
guilt of that blood which themselves had spilt; that they might add the guilt
of his to all the rest; which BLACK TREASON, not to be thought on without
horror, nor named without a tear, this Day they accomplished, beyond any
president of former times, and perhaps the belief of the future; contrary to
their Allegiance, and their Covenant, to their duty to God, and their
professions to the People, to the obligation of all Laws and Common Right.

Therefore let this Day be darkness, let the covering of the blackest Grief be
upon it; because this Day fell a Prince, the best, the wisest; the most pious,
most gracious that ever swayed these Scepters. He fell, and fell by violence,
and the violent hands of his own, who ought to have sacrificed their lives to
the preservation of His: He fell, to the dishonor of God, to the grief of good
Men, to the scandal of Religion, to the shame of Protestantism, to the
overthrow of Government, and ruin of the Nation. This is a Lamentation, and to
all Generations it shall be for a LAMENTATION.

But Oh Heavens! oh Providence! must Virtue be dethroned, and Villainy be
crowned! must Victory and Success wait upon Treasons, and Parricides, while
infamy and loss dog Innocence to the Grave! Must the most righteous of Princes
be the most miserable of Men; and Religion and a good Cause be the only way to
be unfortunate, and undone! Will the Searcher of hearts abet hypocrites! and
Providence lend it self for an argument to legitimate Rebellion! Shall the
Pharisee pray, and prosper; and the righteous cry, and be forsaken! Shall
Treason carry Religion in Triumph upon its gilded Banners! and shall the wicked
lift up their hands in an appeal to Heaven, and bring them down to the
destruction of the Just! Shall Villainy raise its head to the Clouds, and meet
no Thunderbolts there; while the Devotions of the Innocent return upon him in
storms and flames!

Thus Sense and Nature would complain on this occasion: But Providence is just,
though we are blind. Prosperous Villainy crows and triumphs for a moment, but is
covered with shame, and eternal darkness in the issue: The end of things will
disentangle Providence, and rectify all disorders. Then shall we see that
afflicted Virtue shoots up on the other side the Grave, and sends its branches
into a flowring Paradise, where they shall be green and verdant in an eternal
Spring, while every Tree that Virtue has not planted shall be rooted up, and
wither in a moment.

This briefly I thought fit to suggest as an Apology for Providence; lest the
successes of the wicked, and misfortunes of the Just, in instances so great and
so near, might tempt any to think, that there is no GOD that judges in the
Earth.

And thus I am arrived at the first period of the miseries that we brought upon
our selves by Resistance, which concludes in the ruin and dissolution of
Government, and this runs into all the mischiefs to which humane Nature is
obnoxious. For Government is the great interest of mankind; that which bounds
our passions, and secures our rights; prevents confusion, and that deluge of
Debauches that Anarchy lets in upon the World. And how far we felt this also in
the consequent Calamities, would be considered.

When the Nation then had lost its Head, and its Glory, 'twas turned with its
Heels upwards, and governed by a Thing as infamous in its quality, as its Name.
The Dreggs of the Populace, the Creatures of a Sectarian Army, the worst part
of a Body, that was bad enough in its best; these were our Senators, and our
Patriots, the preservers of our Peace, and the Keepers of our Liberties: and
keep them they did, but not for us, but from us. And was not this a Liberty
worth the Blood, and Treasure that was spent to purchase it?

O the blessed Reformation, that filled our Pulpits, and emptied our Purses;
that quickened our endeavors, and inspired our zeal; and that was so glorious
in our mouths, and so pleasant in our hopes! Were not all miscarriages of
Government well mended, when Government was thrown up by the roots? and was not
the disease well cured, when the Body was destroyed? Were we not well freed
from evil Counselors, when we made Kings of the worst we had? And was not
Tyranny well extirpated, when we were under an Army of Tyrants?

But the glorious things are to come, and we must be cast into New Models: And
when the Birds of Prey have divided the Spoil, and satisfied the cravings of
their appetites and ambition, the Nation shall be made happy with New-nothings,
and golden Mountains; with Chimaera's of Commonwealths, and fine names for
Slavery. In the mean while Loyalty must be scourged with the Scorpions that are
due to Rebellion: And those that feared the damnation of the Apostle, shall be
sure to incur the damnation of the Reformers; and they that would not hazard
their Souls, must compound for their Estates.

But when the JUNCTO had run to the length of their Line; that is, as far as
their MASTER would permit them; when they were as odious as they deserved, and
his designs as ripe as he could wish; then up steps the single TYRANT, kicks
them out of their Seats, and BEELZEBUB dispossesseth the LEGION. He engrosseth
the prey to himself, and assumes the sole privilege of completing our
miseries. He made himself after the Image of a King, and invested his Sword
with the authority of Law: He ruled us with the Rod of Iron we deserved; and
made us feel a difference between the silken Reins of a lawful Authority, and
the heavy yoke of an insolent Usurpation.

And when Providence had freed us from this Plague, and called him to account
for his Villainies, we fell back into our old disorders; we reeled to and fro,
and staggered like a Drunken man, and were at our wits end. We knew not this
week, who would be our Lords the next; nor did our Lords themselves know to
day, by what Laws they would Rule to morrow. Confusion was in their Councils,
as well as Tyranny in their Actions; and there was but one thing they seemed to
be agreed upon, which was to inslave the Nation. And if we would not believe
that this was Liberty, we must be knocked on the head with our chains; if the
Sheep would not take the Wolves for their Guardians, 'twas fault enough, and
good reason why they should be devoured.

And were not things come at length to a good pass, when men in Buff durst
proclaim themselves the only Legal Authority of the Nation? when our Armed
Masters murdered men in the Streets, and threatened the ancient Metropolis of
the Nation, with Gunpowder and Grenades? Fire and Sword must be our portion,
if we would not be in love with infamous Usurpers; and a worse Powder Plot than
Faux's was acting in the face of the Sun: The strength, the riches, the beauty,
yea, the almost All of the Nation was designed a Sacrifice to the rage and
revenge of our Oppressors; and Plunder and Massacres were almost the least
evils we feared.

Thus were we tossed up and down from one wave to another, and made the sport of
the proud and insulting billows, till Almighty Goodness settled us again upon
our old basis, and by a Miracle of Providence restored us our PRINCE and our
Government which our sins had deprived us of, to reestablish us upon the sure
Foundations of Righteousness and Peace.

These are some sprinklings of that deluge of Woe that we brought upon our
selves by resistance, which I have briefly described to this purpose, that the
remembrance of these miseries may beget a sense of our sins, and the truth of
the particular Proposition I have been discoursing under this Head, viz. That
Resistance is fatal to Government.

And though Government may be fixed again upon its Foundations, and Laws turned
into their ancient Channel, after the violence they have suffered; yet they
lose much of their reverence and strength by such dissettlements: And the
People that have rebelled once, and successfully, will be ready to do so often.
As water that has been boiled, will boil again the sooner.

And thus we see how ruinous resistance is to Government, and how destructive
to that first great Interest of Societies, as it is also,

(2.) TO RELIGION, which is the other. That Rebellion is contrary to the Spirit
of Religion, we have seen; and consequently, that it is destructive of its
Being, will not need much proof; since contraries destroy one another.
Rebellion lays the Reins on men's necks, and takes off the restraints of their
appetites; it opens the floodgates of Impiety, and lets loose the brats of
extravagant Imagination: It destroys the reverence of all things sacred, and
drives Virtue to Corners: It gathers men's lusts into a common storm, and fills
all things with Chaos and confusion. Religion cannot be heard in the noise of a
battle, but is trampled under-foot in the hurry and tumult. Faith and love,
humility and meekness, purity and patience are overcast and silenced by Atheism
and Cruelty, pride and barbarism, lust and revenge. Thus Rebellion by breaking
up the foundations of the Earth, lets in an Hell upon us, and brings a kind of
present damnation upon the World. And that this is another fatal mischief of
Resistance, we have felt also by an experience that will keep it in our
memories. And what execution it has done upon Religion must be considered next.

But this is a tender thing, and I am willing to keep my self within bounds
that are charitable, and sober; and therefore must premise to what I have to
say about it; that I charge not the whole Body of the People of the late Times,
with the guilt of all the Follies and corruptions I describe. Nor do I believe,
or say, that the whole Mass of their Religion was so monstrously vitiated, and
depraved. I profess Universal Charity, and have perhaps, more for the worst of
them, than they generally will own for any that are not of their own party, or
opinion. And therefore at present I shall say no more, than what the sober and
intelligent among themselves will acknowledge to be justly chargeable upon some
or other of the Sects bred by our late Disorders; and this will be enough for
my purpose, which is only to prove by near and deplorable instances, that
resistance brings mischiefs upon Religion; and not to expose to hatred, or
contempt the persons of any that are serious in the way of their profession,
though I judge it never so obnoxious, and mistaken: And having said this out of
a tender charity, that none may be wronged by misinterpretation, nor any
offended that are not concerned; I come with freedom to describe some of the
injuries our unhappy resistance has done Religion, not withstanding that both
Arms and Tongues so highly pretended its defense.

And indeed men fought for Religion till they had destroyed it; and disputed
about it, till they had lost it. Midtiplicity of Opinion had quite confounded
the simplicity of Life and Faith; and 'twas most peoples business to chatter
like Pyes, rather than to live like Christians, or like Men. If Religion had
been computed by men's talk, and dispute about it, those later days of the
declining World had been its best; and this in its growth and ways of highest
improvement, when all things else were verging to their Set, and Period. But
alas, the Tongue was the most, if not the only religious Member. And many of
the Pretenders, like the Egyptian Temples, were fair without, but Beasts and
Serpents, and Crocodiles within. Or like the Bird of Paradise, they had Wings
to fly in the Clouds of Imagination, but no Feet to walk on the Ground of a
virtuous practice. Yea, some had found the way to swim to Heaven in the Current
of their appetites, and to reconcile Covetousness, Rapine, Cruelty, and
Spiritual Pride, with the glorious names of the Elect, the People of God, the
Church of Christ, and the good Party: Religion with Rebellion; and Sacrilege
with Saintship. Men had learnt to be godly, without goodness; and Christians
without Christianity.

They were lovers of God, and yet haters of their Brother: haters of open
Profaneness, but not of spiritual wickedness: Very godly, though cruel, and
unjust: True penitents, though they returned to their sins, as soon as they had
complained, and wept: Their hearts were good, though their actions were
dishonest; and they had the root of the matter in them, though that root were a
dry stump, and had no branches: They were regenerated, but not reformed;
converted, but not a jot the better: Devout Worshippers, but bad Neighbors:
Lovers of God, but no haters of Covetousness: Had power in Heaven, but none
over themselves: They were Gods Servants, though they obeyed their appetites;
and his children, though no better than those, that are of their Father the
Devil. Thus had men got the knack to be religious without religion, and were in
the way to be saved, without salvation.

These were gross disorders whereby Religion was taken from its foundation of
Virtue, and Holy living, and placed in emotions, raptures, and swelling words
of vanity.

And when these had kindled the imagination, and raised the fancy to the
Clouds, to flutter there in mystical nonsense: and when that was mounted on
the Wings of the Wind, and got into the Revelations to loosen the seals, pour
out the vials, and phantastically to interpret the fates of Kingdoms; when it
flew into the Tongue in an extravagant ramble; and abused the Name and Word of
God, mingling it with canting, unintelligible babble: I say, when the diseased
and disturbed fancy thus variously displayed it self, many made themselves
believe that they were acted by the Spirit, and that those wild agitations of
sick Imaginations, were divine motions: And when this fire was descended from
the fancy to the affections, and these being exceedingly moved by those vain
and proud conceits, caused tremblings, and foamings, convulsions and ecstasies
in the body, (all which are but natural diseases, if not worse; and just like
those odd ecstatical motions of the Devils Priests when they came foaming from
his Altars) these, I say, the wild phantasticks had learnt to ascribe to the
blessed and adorable Spirit: And when their phansies being full of turgid
notions, and their bodies in an ecstasie, they dreamed of strange sights,
voices, and wonderful discoveries, which were nothing but the unquiet
agitations of their own disordered brains: These also were taken for divine
Revelations, and the effects of the Spirit of God, showing it self miraculously
in them.

Briefly, and in sum; Every humor and fantastic unaccountable motion, was by
some represented as the work of that Spirit, to which they are most opposite:
Thus when warm and brisk sanguine presented a cheerful Scene, and filled the
imagination with pleasant Dreams; these were divine Illapses, the Joys and
Incomes of the Holy Ghost: When heated Melancholy had kindled the busy and
active fancy, the Enthusiast talks of Illuminations, New Lights, Revelations,
and many wonderful fine things, which were ascribed to the same Spirit: and
when Phlegm prevailed, and had quenched the fantastic Fire, rendering the Mad
man more dull and unactive; then the Spirit was withdrawn, and the man under
spiritual darkness, and desertion: And when again Choler was boiled up into
rage and fury against every thing that was not of the Fanatique genius; this
also was presumed to be an Holy Fervor kindled by that Spirit, whose real
Fruits are gentleness, and love.

And now, after that which I have said on this occasion, it may perhaps be
necessary to add, that I hope none here will be so uncharitable, or so unjust,
as to think that I go about to disparage the Spirit of God, and its influence;
which (as I ought) I adore and reverence: and because I do so, I think it fit
to represent, and shame the blasphemous abuses of it, which would expose the
most Divine things to scorn, and make them ridiculous. And that the Holy Spirit
has been thus traduced and injured, and is still by great numbers among us,
'twould be shameful not to acknowledge: And I add, that my zeal and reverence
for the realities, make me thus justly sharp against the Counterfeits. Nor do I
think that folly and phantastry is to be spared, because they wear the stolen
Livery of things venerable, and sacred.

Therefore, to go on; such a Religion had the corruption of it bred among us: A
Religion conceived in the Imagination, and begot by Pride, and Self-Love, which
gilded the Professors of it with all the glorious names, and privileges of the
Gospel: And when they had encircled their Heads with their own fantastic
rays, and swollen their Imaginations into a Tympany of ridiculous greatness, they
scornfully contemned all but their Darling-selves, under the notion of the
Formal, the Moral, and the Wicked: and proudly pitied the poor and carnal
World, that is, all that were not of their conceited pitch, and elevation. And
having thus dignified themselves, and debased others: they herded together,
drew the Church into their little Corners, and withdrew from the communion of
others, who had less conceit, though more Christianity. They bid us stand off,
lest we should have polluted them by our unhallowed approaches; and having made
us as the Heathen and the Publican, they cried, Come out from among them. The
true Church, soundness of Judgment, purity of Doctrine and of Worship (if men
would believe them) was confined to their clans, just as they we to the
Corners of Africa of old, when their Friends the Donatists were there. Thus did
the Votaries of each Sect swell in their Imaginations, till some other sort as
well conceited as themselves, endeavored to take their Plumes from them, and
to appropriate those glorious prerogatives to their own party.

And this went for the power of Godliness, and the spirituality of Religion,
under pretense of which, all reverence to things sacred was destroyed. For when
this Spirit had got into the Pulpit, and set up the Cry of the Purity, and
Spirituality of Worship, it never left canting on the Subject, till men's
Tongues and Minds were fired against every matter of decency and order, as
formal, and Antichristian: And so far had it prevailed, as to drive those of
warm affections and weak heads, from all external Reverence to God, and Holy
things: And the well meaning people being frighted with the terrible noise of
Popery, Superstition, and Antichristianism, (words they had learnt to hate,
though not to understand) boggled and flew off from every thing their furious
Guides had marked with these abhorred Characters, though it were never so
innocent and becoming. And thus a rude and slovenly Religion had made its way
into the World, and such a sordid carelessness in matters of divine Worship*
that should a Stranger have come into the Assemblies that were acted by this
Spirit, he would not have imagined what they had been doing: and that they were
about Holy Offices, would perhaps have been one of the last things in his
Conjecture. Thus bold and saucy talk had crept into men's Prayers, under
pretense of Holy Familiarity with God; nauseous impertinent Gibberish, under
the notion of Praying by the Spirit; and all kind of irreverences in external
demeanor, under the shelter of a pretended spiritual Worship.

Men had subtilized Religion, till they had destroyed it, made it first
invisible, and then Nothing.

AND now it being thus multiplied, corrupted, and debaucht; being made the Game
of the Tongue, and the Frolic of Imagination; fantastic in its principles,
sordid in its practices; separated from the foundation of a virtuous life, and
made to serve the ends of Pride, and Avarice; what was like to follow,
according to the nature and order of things, but Atheism and contempt of all
Religion? And when one says, here is Religion, and another says, there is
Religion; a third will scornfully ask, where is Religion, and what is Religion?
When the Heathen Deities were so multiplied, that every thing was made a God;
Protagoras, Diagoras, and others, first began to question, and next to affirm
that there was NONE. Religions have been multiplied in our days, as much as
Gods in theirs; and we have seen much of the same fatal event, and issue. They
made their Gods contemptible and vile, by deifying things that were so, and we
had no less detracted from the credit of Religion, by bringing it down to
things of the lowest and vilest rank and nature: Our Idolized Opinions were no
better than their Garlic and Onyons. The diseases of the Mind, Frenzy and
Enthusiasm, which our days have worshipped, were no better than those of the
Body which they adored: And they never raised Altars to worse Vices than
REBELLION, FRAUD, and VIOLENCE, which our Age has hallowed and made sacred. So
that notwithstanding all the glorious pretensions of those Times, Religion was,
among many, taken off all its Foundations, and the World prepared for Atheism.
The Follies and Divisions of one Age, make way for Atheism in the next.

Thus also briefly of the Condition of our RELIGION.

AND thus I have shown how much RESISTANCE of the Authority that is over us, is
against our DUTY and our INTEREST. The former God has plainly told us; and the
latter we have sadly felt.

It remains that we humble our selves under the sense of the public guilt, as
well as complain of the consequent miseries. That we may not draw down new
judgments, by repeating old provocations; and adding our particular sins to
the common score. And I think we shall do well to consider, what we, who abhor
Rebellion, have contributed to the fatal evils that followed it. We can perhaps
be well enough content that the visible actors of those mischiefs should be
lasht, and exposed; and it may be, are well pleased and tickled with our
reprehensions in which we think our selves not concerned. But if we will be
just, if we will have this Fast to signify, we must turn our reproofs upon our
selves also, and with grief and shame acknowledge that our sins and Debauches,
our contempt of God and scorn of Religion, have helped toward the plucking down
that sad judgment upon the Nation, which we lament this Day: And it must be
confessed, that there were those that fought against the KING, who yet spent
their blood in his service: and many by their vices, endeavored to engage
Heaven against that Cause, which themselves strove in another way, to less
purpose, to promote. And therefore we ought not to think, that this Fast is
appointed to inveigh against the faults of others, and to make them and their
actions odious; but to humble our selves under the apprehension of our own, and
to teach us to show our love to the King, and readiness to obey him, by
subjecting our selves first unto God, whose Vicegerent HE is. And we may be
assured that they that are not Loyal to the UNIVERSAL LORD of all the World,
can scarce possibly be so to their particular SOVEREIGN. And 'twill need a
great deal of Charity to help us to believe, that those who make no scruple to
blaspheme the Name of God, and to break the plainest, most earnest, and most
express of his Laws, will be withheld by considerations of Duty or Conscience
from rebelling against their King, or affronting His, when there is any
powerful interest to oblige them to it. If therefore we would give any evidence
of a serious humiliation at present, or any security of a future loyalty, let
us do so by confessing our particular sins, and forsaking them; and then there
will be hope that the Authority of God may oblige us quietly and peaceably to
submit to his MINISTER; and in doing so we shall be blessed with his influence,
and deserve his protection. And thus demeaning our selves like Professors of
the Gospel of Peace, and Subjects of the Prince of Peace, the Peace He left
with his Disciples will be with us here, and everlasting Peace will encircle
our heads with rays of glory in the Kingdom of Peace. And so the Peace of God
which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus: To
whom with God the Father, and God the Holy Ghost, be ascribed all Glory,
Honor, and adoration henceforth and for ever. Amen and Amen.

SERMON IV.

THE SIN and DANGER OF SCOFFING AT RELIGION.

The Second Edition.

SERMON IV. AGAINST SCOFFING AT RELIGION.
2 PET. III. 3. -- There shall come in the last days Scoffers, walking after
their own Lusts.
IT is a question that has much exercised the wits of the Curious, whether
there be any decay in nature? or whether all things are not still, as they were
from the beginning, in all their kinds, and in all the degrees of their vigor,
and perfection? I shall not undertake to determine ought in this Theory; Be the
matter how it will as to* the natural world, we have cause to believe, that
there are degeneracies in the moral: This our Savior supposes in the
Question, Luke 18. 8. When the Son of man comes, shall he find faith on earth?
Implying, that in the last Times, there shall be remarkable fallings from the
Faith, and a general Reign of unbelief; which cannot be without great defection
in manners also. And St. Paul, 2* Tim. 3. 1. tells us, That the last days
should be perilous, that men should be Lovers of their own selves, Covetous,
Boasters, Proud, Blasphemers; and our Apostle in the Text, -- Scoffers, walking
after their own lusts.

Now we are not to think, that the holy Writers supposed, that these evils were
not in other days, as well as in the last: No, the same catalogue of Vices
runs* through all Ages, which more, or less, are infected with them: But the
meaning, I conceive, is, That in the latter, they should be more notorious, and
more numerous, acted in higher degrees of impudence, and with more
circumstances of guilt. There is no doubt but there were always scoffers; but
never such, nor so many, as in the last days; (The last of the world simply,
and not only those of the Jewish State) scoffers, walking after their own lusts
-- viz. as absolute slaves to their Appetites, and Passions. For the word
Lusts, takes in all unruly desires, and inclinations.

In treating of the words I shall show,

1. What sort of Scoffers we may suppose here meant?

2. What is the evil and malignity of the humor?

3. What are the consequences, and effects of it? And thence

4. Pass to improvement for practice.

FOr the First, Who are the scoffers meant? I take direction in it, from the
character annexed, Scoffers, walking after their own lusts. Now the lusts of men
would be boundless, and are impatient of any check, or stop: They hate all
restraints that are laid upon them; and the greatest restraints of appetite,
are from Religion: Religion hinders men most from walking after their own
lusts, and these are most resolved on that: so that we may suppose the scoffers
in the Text, who walk after their own lusts, to be scoffers at Religion, which
would hinder and disturb them most in that course. And that they were such,
appears from the following verse; in which they argue scoffingly, against the
Christian belief, and expectations: Saying, Where is the promise of his coming?
for since the Fathers fell a-sleep, all things continue as they were from the
beginning -- verse. 4.

Now generally the less impudent sort of sinners endeavor to reconcile
Religion to their Lusts, by walking in some of the forms of godliness; so did
the Pharisees among the Jews, and diverse Heretics among the ancient
Christians; and their modern successors do the same still: But there are an
other sort, who are more bold, and impatient, they will not give themselves the
trouble of reconciling Religion to their Lusts, but take the shorter course of
opposing it, in favor of them. This some do by engaging their parts, and
knowledge, gravely, and seriously to reason it out of the world; but these are
the few: Reason is a severe thing, and does as little comport with men's Lusts,
as Religion: And the same Lusts that make them willing to reason against
Religion, make them incapable of it: For debauchery is almost as great an enemy
to men's intellectuals, as to their morals.

And therefore others, and the most, go an easier way, and fight against
Religion by scoffing and buffoonry: This is the game the Devil seems to be
playing in the present Age. He has tried the power and rage of the mighty; and
the wit, and knowledge of the learned; but these have not succeeded for the
destruction of Religion. And therefore now he is making an experiment by an
other sort of enemies, and sets the Apes, and Drollers upon it. And certainly
there was never any other Age, in which sacred and serious things have been so
rudely, and impudently assaulted by the profane abuses of Jesters, and
Buffoons, who have been the contempt of all wise Times, but are the darlings,
and wits of these.

O the Invention! the rare invention of this happy Age! How easy has it made
the way to this glorious reputation? It Is but laughing gracefully at the Fopps;
the grave, the learned, the religious Fopps; and a man cannot fail of being a
Wit, in spite of ignorance, and impertinence. Away with the pedantry, and dull
formalities of former days! we are Wits upon terms more generous, and more
easy. Our Age has more spirit and flame: our conversation; yes! our virtuous
conversation has refined and improved us; We see the folly and ignorance of
our forefathers; and laugh at the Tales with which crafty Priests abused their
easiness, and credulity. Spiritual substance! Immortal souls! Authority of
Scripture! Fictions, Ideas, Phantomes, Iargon: Here is demonstration against
the spiritual Trade, and spiritual men. The rest of the work is for Songs and
Plays; for the wit and humor of agreeable conversation.

Thus far we are come, and the infection spreads; so that there is scarce a
little vain Thing that has a mind to be modish, but sets up for a derider of
God, and of Religion; and makes a scoff of the most serious thoughts, and
profession of the wisest men of all Ages. Heaven and Hell are become words of
sport: and Devils and Angels, Fairyes and Chimaera's: It Is Foppish to speak of
Religion, but in Railery; or to mention such a thing as Scripture; except it be
to burlesque and deride it.

It Is dreadful to consider, and a man may tremble to describe this monstrous
humor of many in our Age, which I believe has outdone all former in the
heights of this amazing sort of wickedness, and sadly proves that in the last
days shall come Scoffers, and such as have not been from the beginning: For
though former Ages, no doubt, have had deriders of Religion, yet in those times
they hid their heads, and did it covertly behind the curtain; in their
privacies, and among their Confidents; But in these, they face the Sun, and
impudently vent their folly in all companies, and places, as if it were a
matter of renown and glory, and they expected to be counted Hero's for it.

Thus we see what sort of Scoffers they are that are to come in the last days,
impudent deriders of Religion, because they are resolved on walking after their
own Lusts. I come,

II. To show the malignity, and aggravations of this humor.

1. It Is an open defiance of God, and a direct opposition of his Glory. His
glory, namely the derivative, consists in those praises, and acknowledgements
that are due to his perfections; and those are paid in the exercises of
Religion; so that to buffoon this, is to shoot the arrows of our scorn directly
at the Throne of God. Indeed all sins are oppositions of him, and of his Glory,
but in most, they are so in the consequence of the sin, not in the intention of
the sinner: The Drunkard, the Oppressor, and the unclean person, design only
their own satisfactions, not any immediate affront to their Maker: But the
Scoffer with prodigious impudence does that. He derides the love and obedience,
fear and reverence of the most High; which is a direct contempt of his
perfections.

Now scorn is one of the greatest indignities; especially, it is sore and
provoking, when one is contemned by his inferiors; and more, when they are his
dependants, that have their bread from his Bounty? such is the case here, in
all possible degrees of aggravation; vilest worms and lowest dust, scoff at the
highest Majesty, and fullest perfection: The universal King our Sovereign,
before whom Angels bow, and Devils tremble, is derided by the slaves of his
Kingdom and Creation: The general Father and Benefactor flouted by those that
have their Being, and all their comforts from his goodness, and cannot live, or
move, or breathe without him, Acts 17. 28. Instead of lowest reverence,
gratitude, and prostrations, they lift up their heads in proud scorn and
defiance of him; and as the Royal Psalmist speaks of them, Psalm. 73. 18. They
set their mouth against the Heavens.

2. This is a sin that is a step beyond Atheism it self. It Is greater impiety
to say, God is a careless, or a contemptible Being, than to say, He is not. As
the Moralist tells us, He would rather it should be affirmed, that there was no
such man as Plutarch, than that it should be believed that there was such a
man, but that he was a vile and worthless person.

Now to deride Religion while we allow there is a God, is to say by immediate
consequence, either that he is a careless and idle Greatness that heeds not his
Creatures; and so worship is an impertinence: or that he is so bad, or so mean
a Being, that he deserves not to be worshipped, that is, that we owe him no
acknowledgement of his Being, or his Bounty; and which is more, that it is
ridiculous to pay him any. To deny the existence of God is gross and
unreasonable; but to acknowledge that, and to scoff at the expressions of love
and veneration of him, is downright madness. So that if the scoffer be not an
Atheist, he is the more inexcusable in his scoffing; and if possible, he is
worse.

3. The humor of deriding Religion is monstrousness in the soul: All sin is
deformity, but this is Horrid. For a man to have his parts and members
misplaced; His legs, suppose, on his shoulders, his eyes in his neck, and his
arms growing out of his belly, is frightful; but there is a misplacing in the
soul that is more ugly. Man has such powers given him as scorn and derision,
and while they are exercised against sin and folly, there is nothing amiss in
them: But when they are misplaced upon holiness and wisdom, upon the greatest
and the purest, upon the most visible, and most universally acknowledged
perfections; they are then an excess of deformity in the soul, and such
scorners are greater monsters than the man that has horns and hoofs.

4. It is a wickedness beyond the degeneracy of Devils. We read that They
fought against the Angels, the Ministers of God, Rev. 12. 7. but never that
they derided them for their Ministeries. They oppose Gods ends, and interests
in the world, but we find them not scoffing at Him. No, they believe and
tremble, Jam. 2. 19. This Fear is not a virtue indeed, in those Apostate
spirits, and yet it proceeds from a sense, and apprehension of divine power and
vengeance: But the impious Scoffers at Religion have out-grown that, and are
more bold than all the Legions of darkness. They have so little dread of the
wrath of God, that by their scoffs they endeavor to provoke, and as it were to
dare him to pour his displeasure on them: As if they had a mind to challenge
the field with Him, and to try the reality, and force of his power and terrors.

Thus briefly of the malignity and aggravations of the sin of Scoffing at
Religion: There will be an occasion of saying more of it in the sequel; I
therefore descend now,

III. To an account of some Effects and Consequences of it; and shall confine
my self here also within the bounds of that, which is mentioned as the
character of these Scoffers in the Text -- Walking after their own Lusts -- We
have seen that men's lusts are the ground and occasion of their scoffing; and I
add, that this again is a cause of the greater heights, and boldness of their
Lusts; like Water and Ice they produce one another. Men's lusts put them upon
scoffing at that which should restrain them; and this, through the judgment of
God, and the nature of the thing, brings them at last to walk after their lusts
in such obsequiousness and intireness, that they follow them,

1. Without any check, or restraint upon their Lusts.

2. Without power to forsake, or disobey them.

3. Without, or with very little, hope of remedy, or deliverance from the
dominion, and sad consequences of them.

These are all dreadful things, and such as frequently (if not mostly) follow
upon the impious humor of scoffing at Relgion.

As to the first, The Scoffers walk after their own lusts, (1.) Without
restraint, or check from the Spirit of God. This strives long with sinners; but
it will not always strive with them that strive against it, Genesis 6. 3. When men
move with their Lusts, as those that are joined to them, the holy Spirit will
let them alone, Hos. 4. 17. And this impiety, in the very nature of it, is of
all sins most likely to provoke Him to a dereliction of the sinner: Since it is
the greatest, most direct, and most intolerable affront of the most High; and
if any thing be a fighting against the Holy Spirit, a vexing, yea a blaspheming
of Him, This is. Moreover, such a sinner becomes a subject incapable of His
communications. Nothing that is sacr^d or serious makes any impression upon
such whiffling spirits; 'twere as good attempt writing on the water, or
painting with a Pencil on the air, as to think of fastening any sober sense
upon the scoffer. And when it is come to this, that the sinner has made
himself incapable of any benefit from the influences of the Spirit, He
withdraws his solicitations from that miserable person. He will not plough upon
a rock, nor sow upon the sands. So that the man has the advantage now of not
being disturbed in his pursuits by the grand Enemy of his lusts; but is
suffered to run upon the wrath of God, and everlasting torments without
control from Him.

2. The scoffer gets this privilege also, to walk after his own Lusts, without
check from his Conscience. This is an Inward Judge, that summons, censures, and
condemns; and while there is such a Court, and such transactions in the sinners
breast, he cannot walk after his lusts in quiet. But the scoffer takes a course
with Conscience:

1. He debauches it. And,

2. He makes it stupid.

As to the First, it may be considered, That when He enters upon the trade of
deriding Religion, he does not believe it to be really so contemptible, and
ridiculous; only he follows a fashion, and thinks it is witty to Scoff at it:
But in process of time and practice, his understanding, through the withcraft
of this vice, and the secret judgment of God, grows into the very nature and
temper of the sin; And he comes insensibly at last, to believe that in earnest,
which he entered on at first in jest: and so Satan and his Lusts have decoyed
him into a down right, serious Infidelity. If the horrid Articles of impiety
and unbelief had been offered him at the beginning, in a way of serious
argument, he would have entertained them with some intellectual detestation and
abhorrence: But having a long time droll'd upon Religion, and represented it as
ridiculous; rather than so much wit and sport should be lost, he is willing to
believe it is so; and such a will quickly draws such an understanding to it.
But especially the consideration of full liberty in his Lusts, indears and
recommends the opinion to him; and the intellect so prepared is quickly
convinced, having so great an interest to incline it; so that now the foolish
mind is darkened, Romans 1. 21. and the Conscience made a party with the lusts.
It is become reprobate, Romans 1. 28. and given up to strong delusions, 2 These.
2. 11. The Scoffer now believes his Jests as if they were arguments of Reason,
and pleads for his lusts, as if they were actions of virtue: And thus his
Conscience is debauched: Or, if he have not proceeded so far as this, Yet,

2. He stupifieth it at least. There are two main acts of Conscience: to inform
us what is our Duty; and to judge how far we do it, or do it not. And this sort
of wicked men deal so with Conscience as to stupifie both. For Duty, they think
of none; who is Lord over them! and for reflection on their actions, they are
strangers to it. They follow on with their eyes and thoughts upon their Lusts,
but never consider whither the way leads. They pursue sense and appetite, but
reflect and think no more than Beasts. Whither am I going? and what have I
done? are no questions with them. All the soul and mind they have is employed
in seeking means to gratify and please their Lusts; and while those are
satisfied, the men are content and quiet, be their actions what they will. They
feel no inward trouble, or disturbance from the greatest villainies: They can
blaspheme the name of God by horrid Oaths every moment; and debauch themselves
by drunkenness, and vile sensuality every day, without the least remorse or
sense that any thing is a-miss; yea, they make sport of their Sin, Prove. 14. 9.
and glory in their shame, Phil. 3. 19. They live undisturbedly in a course of
hellish wickedness, and die in the same, without any thought or apprehension of
Sin, Death, or Judgment. They laugh and debauch themselves into a state past
feeling, Ephesians. 4. 19. and sear their Consciences as with an hot iron, 1 Timothy
4. 2. They are twice dead, plucked up by the roots, Jude 12. dead by nature to
the spiritual Life; and now by these vile usages, dead to the moral also. And
when they are come thus far, they are freed too,

3. From the Restraints of the Ministers of Gods Providence, the Holy Angels.
They are Instruments in the distribution of mercies and judgments, by which
God restrains sinners from their Lusts; Ministering spirits for our good, Heb.
1. 14. and are perhaps concerned about us in more things than we imagine;
throwing bars a-thwart the way where danger or temptation lies; inwardly and
secretly exciting good thoughts and desires, as Satan does evil ones, and
defending us, in many instances, from the power and subtilty of that enemy: But
the derider of Religion, who is forsaken of God and Conscience, is also left by
These. And that there is such a dereliction of incurable sinners, we may see
Jer. 51. 9. We would have healed Babylon; but she is not healed, forsake her,
and let her go. Spoken, as some of the learned Ancients suppose, by the
Presidential Angels; like the voice in the Temple, a little before the last
destruction of it, Let us go hence. Thus Psalm. 71. 9. the Septuagint reads --
They that keep my soul take counsel together, saying, God has forsaken him,
let us persecute and take him, for there is none to deliver him. The good
Spirits depart from the incorrigible sinner, and leave him to the evil ones.

Thus of the first dreadful consequence of Scoffing at Religion; the Scoffers
are given up to follow their Lusts without restraint. Another is,

2. That they follow without power to leave or disobey them. They follow as
Vassals and Slaves; yea they follow as a Beast that is led. Their wills are but
the motions of their Lust; their Reasons, but the impure Phantasms and
Imaginations that are raised by their Lusts; and their affections, but the
various inclinations of their Lusts. So that what ever may be said of the
liberty of less degenerate men, these have none.

Our power consists in the aids of the Spirit of God, in the informations,
convictions and reproofs of Conscience, and in the offices of kindness we
receive from the Ministering Spirits: When these are gone, all our power is
gone. So that those reprobate men are dead in sin, Ephesians. 2. 1. and Sold unto it,
Romans 7. 14. They are led into Captivity, by the Law of sin and death, Romans 7.
23.

They are slaves, and slaves to the worst of Tyrants, and the worst of slaves:
even to him that is held in the chains of darkness, to the judgment of the
great day. Being left of God and good Angels, the evil ones take possession of
them; on which account they are truly Demoniacks, and those of the worst sort:
they are moved and acted by the Devil, as if they had no other Soul. And so,

3. They follow their Lusts with none, or very little hope of Remedy. The
condition of the Scoffers (of some of them at least) is quite or very near
desperate. This follows from what has been said already; and we may consider
further;

1. That there is a day of Grace; a time in which there is ground for hope:
when that is done, hope is at an end. Now this day is the time, and possibility
of repentance: When ever a sinner repents and turns, he shall be accepted and
live: But men may outlive, and sin away the power and capacity of repentance;
And then their Sun is set, their day is done.

Now Repentance begins in Sense, and conviction of sin; but when a man is
arrived at a state past feeling, he is incapable of that: the most powerful
word, most terrible judgments, and most alluring mercies have no effect on
such; the best Physic in the world will not work on a dead carcass; the
loudest voice will not rouse a Marble Statue; nor the most sovereign Salve,
close up a cut in the stump of a Tree.

The sum is, When one is past the inward sense of Duty and danger, Sin and
Misery, he is past Repentance, Grace, and Hope: And this very often is the
condition of the Scoffer, who has debauched and jested away all feeling of
these Interests.

Yea (2.) there is great cause to think that he commits the Sin against the
Holy Ghost (or a sin that is very near it) For that consists in the Disbelief
and contempt of the great and last Testimony that was given by the Spirit, to
the truth of Christianity: And that I may not seem to speak this without
ground, let us look into the place where the first and fullest account of this
sin is.

We have it Matthew. 12. Our Savior had cured one that was possessed, ver. 22. The
people marvell'd, and were inclined to believe upon it, ver. 23. But the
Pharisees reviled, saying, that he cast out Devils by Beelzebub, ver. 24. Christ
shows the absurdity and falsehood of their suggestion, arguing that then Satan
would be divided against himself, and his Kingdom, so divided, could not stand,
ver. 25, 26.

And having reasoned against that malicious account of his Miracle, he infers
from the contrary, and true way of his performing it, ver. 28. If I by the
Spirit of God, cast out Devils, then is the Kingdom of God come unto you, viz.
then I, that have done this, am the Messiah: And he concludes by a serious
application to them to show the sad consequence of such bold, and impious
suggestions, 31. Wherefore I say unto you, All manner of sin, and blasphemy
shall be forgiven unto men: but the blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not
be forgiven unto men.

Where by Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost must be understood, according to the
context, That of imputing the operation of the Spirit in Miracles to the Devil,
which is therefore so heinous, because it is an expression of the greatest
contempt of it, and a bar against the being persuaded by it.

Now to apply this; Though the Scoffer does not impute the Spirits Testimony in
Miracles to the Devil; yet that is not because he has a greater esteem of the
operations of the Spirit; but because he has less belief of the existence of
Devils. Yea, he will not allow so much as the Pharisees did, That any such
things were done; but supposes all to have been Impostures and delusions in
the Author, or cunningly devised Fables in the Relators, which is a contempt
put upon the operations of the Holy Spirit, equal to that of ascribing them to
the Devil, and does as effectually and incurably strike up the Grounds of
Faith, as that. So that in substance, the sin of the Scoffers is the same with
that described in the Text, though differing in circumstance and form. Yea,
it is the sin with aggravation; since they do not barely speak against the Holy
Ghost, and his operations, but deride them: an expression of the greatest
contempt possible.

And when men are come thus far, to despise the great Testimony of the Spirit
and ground of Faith, after it has been sufficiently propounded to them, and
entertained by them, in favor of their Lusts; we have cause to think their
Infidelity is incurable, and consequently, unpardonable. For so the Apostle
has declared plainly, Heb. 6. 4, 5, 6. For it is impossible for those who were
once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly Gift, and were made partakers
of the Holy Ghost, viz. in Baptism, and have tasted the good Word of God, and
the powers of the World to come; (all which are expressions of the visibly
owning Christianity, and partaking in the duties and privileges of it) if they
shall fall away, to renew them again to repentance. And they that are arrived
at the impudent height of deriding all this, are fallen away with a witness; and
therefore, I think, we may conclude safely from the Doctrine of the Apostle,
that they are incurable and unpardonable; and from this, and the discourse
before, that it is sadly probable, they have committed the sin against the Holy
Ghost.

This it is like may seem very severe Doctrine, but I cannot help that: if it be
true, I am not to be blamed for the severity of it.

And I Am sure the Book of Homilies declares more positively in the case, than
I have done: For speaking in the Tenth Homily, of the Scorners of Godliness and
Religion, who are there described; the Author says of them, [I think I may
without danger of Gods judgment pronounce, that never any yet were converted
unto God by Repentance, but continued still in their abominable wickedness,
heaping up to themselves Damnation against the day of Gods inevitable
Judgment.]

I Come now, IV. to the APPLICATION; which shall be (1.) Earnestly to Dehort
all that have the least sense of virtue, or reason, from Scoffing at Religion;
or at men for making profession of it. And then, (2.) I shall conclude with
some very brief Directions and Rules of caution, to secure us from the danger
of this Sin.

Concerning the first, I consider that the Scoffers, with whom I am further to
treat, are of two sorts, 1. The desperate; who have debauched themselves into
downright Infidelity: And 2. the Fashionable ones, (as I crave leave, for
distinction, to call them) who do not Scoff at Religion out of enmity or
malice, but out of modishness and compliance; and it may be, out of design to
be accounted Wits for so doing.

I shall deal First, with the former sort; and in treating with them, shall use
none of the acknowledgments of Religion; but from plain unassisted reason,
shall show the extreme vanity and madness of their practice: And I would
entreat them to think of the following things.

(2.) Be Religion True (as we know) or false (as they vainly imagine) their
Scoffing at it is exceedingly absurd. Every Faculty is to be applied to its
proper object: to employ and of them about others that belong not to them is
foolish and unnatural. Now God has bestowed upon us Reason, and understanding
to judge and discourse about things that are serious; and the Faculty of
laughter and derision to be exercised upon things that are vain: to employ the
former, and discourse gravely about ludicrous, trifling matters is ridiculous:
And it is equally absurd to be sportive about affairs that are serious.

Now; whether Religion be true or not, it is a serious thing: If true, the
greatest Interests of this world and another, are included and concerned in it.
Or if it be otherwise, it must yet be granted, that it has much agreeableness
with the Reasons, and most serious Faculties of Mankind; and our greatest and
most important concerns in this Life, viz. the main affairs of the Government
of the World are bound up with it, and have relation to it: So that whether
true or false, it is no matter of sport, but subject for our most serious
considerations and discourses. And from this last hint about Government, I mind
the Scoffer,

2. That his practice tends to the dissolution of humane Society, and the
turning of mankind into the condition of wild nature: And if it should succeed,
and prevail generally, upon any whole people, it would make them more barbarous
than any Nation in the world ever yet was.

For be Religion what it will, Government has Strength, Security, and
Reverence from it. Take this off, and the fears of it, and no Laws can be put
in execution (and without this, Government is a mere name, and nothing) For
there can be no assurance of the truth of fact, where there is no restraint
from Religion upon Lying, and false witness: and suppose but this, that there
is no reckoning or account hereafter; every man may say, and testify, what is
for the advantage of his Lusts (for no humane Laws can reach him) and then Laws
will be useless, or hurtful; and all Government will quickly be at an end. For
though, as things are under the acknowledgements of Religion, there is much
lying, falsewitness, and injustice in the world; yet let all the Restraints of
Conscience and Religion be removed, and things will be incomparably worse: No
man's Life or property will be safe; mankind would worry and prey upon one
another, and we should ere long fall a-sunder into a condition of dissolution
and wildness. So that the Scoffers at Religion are declared enemies of humane
Nature, and strive to turn us out into the state of Savages and Cannibals.

3. The humor is exceedingly rude and uncivil. It Is ill manners to flout and
deride what is esteemed by our Betters; especially, if that esteem be in the
highest degree of veneration. Now Religion has public acknowledgements of
greatest respects from all Ages, and all Nations; from the Princes and the
people; from the Mighty, and the Learned; from the best, and the most; from the
deepest Inquirers, and acutest Discerners: So that to Scoff at Religion, as if
it were ridiculous and contemptible, is rudely to affront all these, and to
publish them for a pack of fools and madmen. It Is to make Fopps of all our
Forefathers, and Idiots of the Founders of our Laws, and Government. It Is to
defy every man we meet (except the Atheist and the Scoffer) and to proclaim
all mankind besides, to be a set of simpletons and superstitious Sneaks.

Let such men quit all pretenses to civility and breeding, they are ruder than
Toryes, and wild Americans; and were they treated according to their deserts
from mankind, they would meet every where with Chains and Strappadoes.

4. To Scoff Religion, is ridiculously proud and immodest: And the scorner
supposes, that he sees more with one twinkle of his eye, than the wisest, most
learned, and most considering part of mankind have seen in all their most
serious and laborious observations.

Certainly if Religion be a deceit, it is not so thin and transparent a one, as
to be presently looked through by every whiffler, and swilling Buffoon. If it
is an Imposture, it is such a one, as has imposed upon the wisdom of all Ages;
upon all the old World, and upon the greatest part of the present: And be it
what it will, it has made it self very plausible by the helps of reason, and
Arts of Learning; and it would be very Strange, if after all, it should be
detected and made so naked by every one that can laugh, and break a Jest. It
would be wonderful if the Mystery hid from Ages, the Grand cheat of Religion,
should at last be found out by Raileurs, and Songsters: That it should so long
have been concealed from the wise and prudent in all their disquisitions and
reasonings, and be revealed at last to Debauchees and Jesters, amid the wild
inspirations of Wine and Ale.

Suppose the worst; and let Religion be as false and as ridiculous as can be
imagined: the Scoffers that deride it, are impudent to pretend that They have
found it out. They find the folly and falsehood of Religion! Let them find new
Fashions, or new Oaths (things suitable to their genius and capacities) But for
shame let not them talk of discoveries about Religion. Or if they must be
meddling here, let them first learn their Catechisms, and know what Religion is:
And when they understand what they Scoff at, let them Scoff on if they can.

5. To deride Religion, is a dangerous and unsafe practice. For the Scoffer is
not sure that he is wiser than all mankind, that has reverence for it. He has
no demonstration to prove Religion false and ridiculous: Nor is he absolutely
certain, that there is no Immortality or future judgment. So that, suppose it
should prove true, at last, that there will be a general day of account; and
men shall be summoned by Christ Jesus to be judged according to his Gospel, for
a state of eternal happiness, or woe; what is the case of the Scoffer then? yea
what will it be at that day? will his mirth hold when the Judge shall appear?
or will his Wit recreate and support him when he shall be called to the Bar?
will he have any heart to droll when the Sentence is past? or will he applaud
himself in having made Hell his sport, when he feels it? will he show himself
good company among the Devils and his Angels; or make pastime of Heaven and
Religion, amid the flames of Brimstone?

I say, it is possible (at least) that what we have heard of a day of Judgment,
and a future state of Heaven and Hell, Angels and Devils, may be real; And if
it be, the Scoffer is undone, to Eternity undone. So that he is extremely a
fool, to venture so great a stake, as the life and happiness of his Soul for
evermore, upon a confidence that may deceive him; yea he does it upon a
presumption that has not as much as any good probabilities to encourage it.
For if Religion be not certain, yet most of the appearances lie that way; and
no wise man would hazard his soul against such shows of truth: especially, when
the gain for which he runs the risque, must needs be very little; and the loss
will be infinite and irreparable. If Religion proves false, the Scoffer gains
the satisfaction of a little merriment and sport; and it may be, of being taken
for a Wit among his companions; But if it be true, he loses the vision and
enjoyment of God, and the eternal happiness and perfection of his soul, he
falls under the vengeance of the most High, and into the power of Devils; under
the stings of Conscience, and into the pains of Hell.

Now what man in his wits, would run the venture of such fatal losses and
miseries, for such trivial Nothings of advantage? He were mad, that would stake
his Estate and Life to get a pin or a feather, in a case wherein he could have
no assurance; and he were more so, that would do it, when there was odds
against him. If there were ten thousand probabilities on the part of Infidelity
(without certainty) no wise man would lay all his Interests upon it, when no
more could be got by it, than the pleasure of a little laughing: But to do it
when so many appearances (if they are no more) lie on the other side, is Bedlam
madness.

I have thus represented to the desperate Scoffer, whose Lusts have made him
seriously believe, that Religion is contemptible; that the practice of Scoffing
at it, (be it what it will) is very absurd and dangerous.

But there is yet another sort of Scoffers to be treated with, who are not yet
come so far, as to believe that Religion is a Fable, and yet Scoff at the
profession of it out of modishness, and an humor of imitation. They do not in
their hearts deny Religion, but yet they deride Those that practice according
to it; they are not content to laugh at the fopperies, that many times call
themselves by that sacred name; but fleer also, and spend the silly thing, they
think to be Wit, upon those actions that are undoubtedly religious: Such never
enter into the consideration of the matter, and therefore I shall endeavor to
awaken them (that they may know what they do) by the things that follow.

1. They Scoff at the Religious for acting according to Reason, that is,
because they are men and not bruits: Because they act like intelligent
creatures, and not like the Horse and Mule that have no understanding. They
deride them for passing right judgments, and making a right choice: for
preferring God before the creature; the soul before the body; and eternity
before time: For choosing light before darkness; beauty before deformity; and
life and happiness before the extremes of death and misery. God has given to
all his creatures a principle to direct their actions; Reason to Men, and Sense
and Appetite to Beasts; so that to deride men for governing themselves by their
reasons, and not by inferior principles, is as absurd, as if a man should
laugh at the Ox for grazing freely in the field, and not standing still to grow
like a tree; or at the bird, because it flies in the air, and does not creep
like the worm on the ground. He that does so, is an Idiot, and a Natural, and
the Scoffer acts at the same rate of folly.

2. He derides men for living by the most Catholic rule of nature, viz. that
of Self-love, and self-preservation. He flouts them for seeking health and
happiness, riches, honors, and pleasures, the truest and the best: For
endeavoring to obtain the favor of God, the peace of Conscience, and security
of future and eternal well being: For striving to avoid the snares of Satan,
the wrath of God, and pains of Hell. He laughs at them, because they will not
thrust their heads into the Fire, and leap the precipice into the gulf of woe:
Because they will not be their own executioners, and beat out their own brains.

3. He Scoffs at the Religious, because they act for the great ends of their
Being. God made all things for an end, and man for a noble one, the enjoyment
of himself for ever: Now the exercises of Religion are the way to this end; and
to deride men for this, is to laugh at them for acting, and designing
pertinently and nobly. The Scoffer jeers the religious, because he lives for
greater ends, than the Beasts; and endeavors to be happier than his horses and
his swine: Because he will not be content, only to eat and drink, and revel and
die.

4. The Scoffer laughs at the Religious for aiming at the perfection of his
nature. God made man perfect, but we have corrupted our selves, Eccl. 7. 29.
and debased our noble beings: We have destroyed our Makers Image, and deformed
our natures. Now the design of Religion is, to repair our ruins, and to
recover us to the integrity, and perfection of our first selves; to restore
Light to the mind, and virtue to the will, and order to the affections; to
heal, cleanse, and beautify the soul: So that to Scoff at men for living by
this, is as if one should deride the sick for taking physic, and the blind for
using a guide. As if a man should be scorned for washing, after he had fallen
into a mire; or for seeking cure for a foul Leprosy that had overspread him.

5. The scoffer derides the Religious for acting according to his own
principles. He says, there is a God, and jeers those that worship Him; he
believes that God is infinitely amiable, wise, great, and good; and yet laughs
at men for loving his beauty, and believing his wisdom, and trusting in his
power and goodness. He says, that Christ is the Savior; and derides those
that are willing to be saved by Him: that the Holy Ghost is the sanctifier; and
laughs at that holiness, He teaches and produces. He will tell you, he
believes there is an Heaven of eternal happiness; and scorns those that seek
it: that there is an Hell of endless woe and torment; and makes sport of all
endeavors to avoid it.

6. He derides men, because they are true to their engagements and professions.
Because, when they have promised to forsake the Devil, and all his works, they
are not willing in practice to forsake God, and all his: Because, when they
say, Thy will be done, they don't resolve to do all they can to cross it:
Because after they have prayed an hundred times, Incline our hearts to keep thy
Laws, they do not set themselves every day to break them.

At such extravagant rates as these, does he act, that retains the belief of
Religion, and scoffs at the practice of it. And O that they were wise, and
would consider this, who so far forget God, and the Reasonable natures he has
given them!

I shall now, II. conclude with some Directions and Rules of caution for
security against this grievous folly. And,

1. Let us be in earnest in Religion; endeavoring to understand what we
profess; to believe what we understand, and to practice what we believe: And
then, we shall feel such a sense of Religion on our souls, as will beget the
highest reverence to it, and effectually secure us from any such impiety. For
it is ignorance, infidelity, and an evil life, that are the great causes of men's
contempt of Religion.

2. Let us take care, that we place not Religion in uncertain opinions, and
vain trifles: Men's superstitious fondness of such, has exposed Christianity to
much scorn and derision; while its enemies will not, or can not, distinguish
between Religion it self, and those fopperies that pretend unto it. This has
been a main ground of most of the contempt that is upon it at this day. There
is nothing in substantial, naked Religion, that can afford the least just
occasion for laughter, or malicious sport, it being in it self the most
reasonable, venerable thing in the world. Let us take care then that we mingle
not any thing that is ridiculous with it.

3. When we deride the vanities of error and superstition, let us be cautious,
lest we give encouragement, or ground, to others by it, to Scoff at Religion it
self; and consider, that the Lusts of men are ready to catch at any occasion to
abuse and vilify their eternal enemy.

4. Let us beware of too much delight in the humor of Drollery and Jesting,
expressly forbidden by the Apostle, Ephesians. 5. 4. This sort of wit, in most, is a
dangerous and ungovernable Lust, and spares nothing sacred or serious, when
it is indulged; it makes the Spirit vain and trifling; and indisposeth it for
any weighty exercise either of Reason or Religion, and from the indisposition
it produces to such employments, it is an easy step to the contempt of them.

5. Let us not intimately and frequently converse with the people of this sort.
There is infection in such company, and a secret Witchcraft in this humor,
that may work us insensibly to an imitation of it.

And O that the Youth of the present Age, would be persuaded to put a mark upon
those men; and to avoid their dangerous conversation! Certainly they had better
join themselves to Poisoners, and Cutthroats, than to have much to do with
those Factors for Damnation; A Generation so vile, that should Satan send the
most malignant spirits of Hell openly and professedly to trade for him, They
could not act with more direct, and declared opposition to God and goodness,
than these wretched men do. So that one may justly wonder, that they are not
shunned by all sensible men, as desolation, and the plague: and hooted into
their wits, or quite out of them, by an universal contempt, and most deserved
scorn. I am sure it becomes all that are of a Gentile, Virtuous, and ingenuous
Education, to avoid giving them any countenance or encouragement, by any
familiarity of acquaintance; and it is a duty they owe to God, their Nation, and
their own present and eternal interests.

6. Take heed of speaking lightly of any thing that appertains to Religion.
Sacred things are never to be mentioned but with seriousness and reverence: If
we toy and play in our discourses with them, though without direct scorn or
malice, this too familiar use of Divine things, will at last bring us to an
habitual disvalue of them, which in time will grow into contempt.

If we direct our selves by such Rules of caution, we may, by the Grace of God,
escape the Epidemical infection that flies almost every where in our days, from
the Scoffers that walk after their own Lusts.

I have thus shown the sin, folly, and danger of scoffing at Religion, and
given some Rules of caution against it. One would think there should be no need
of such a discourse among a Christian people, who have felt so many Judgments,
and enjoy so many mercies, who have the Gospel preached to them with so much
power and plainness, and have made so long and so zealous a profession of it.
But is there not a cause for all this? If there be none, I crave pardon for my
troubling you so long to no purpose: but if there be, I pray God that we may
all lay it to heart, earnestly beseeching him to awaken those that are guilty
of this heinous impiety, to see their sin, and their danger, before it be too
late; and to divert from them, and others, the Judgments that such bold
heights in wickedness do most justly deserve. That he would in mercy find a way
to remove this vile abomination and scandal from our Land; and diffuse such an
aweful sense of Religion through the Nation, as may keep us under the power and
obedience of it. That he would make us all tender and zealous in the things
that refer to his Glory, and the Honor of his Religion; and assist us by his
Grace, in all holy endeavors to promote those interests: begging all in the
Name and Mediation of Christ our Lord, to whom with the Father, and Holy Ghost,
be all Honor and adoration henceforth, and for ever.

SERMON V. THE CHURCHES Prayer, and Complaint OF CONTEMPT FROM PROFANE and
FANATIC Enemies.

The Second Edition.

SERMON V. THE CHURCHES PRAYER, AND COMPLAINT.
PSALM. CXXIII. 3, 4. HAVE MERCY upon us, O Lord! have mercy upon us: for we are
exceedingly filled with Contempt. Our soul is exceedingly filled with the
Scorning of those that are at ease; and with the Contempt of the Proud.
THE State of the Church in this world is Militant, and uncertain; subject to
those alterations, and vicissitudes which attend all things that are of a
mutable nature. One while, it is in a fair and flourishing condition; orderly
without, and united within: beautiful in its external appearance, and more so
in its inward holiness and peace: And then, its Heaven is overcast, clouds and
thick darkness rest upon it: It is overwhelmed by troubles and disorders; and
rent asunder by Heresies and Divisions: so that the ways of Sion mourn, and her
Gates are desolate. In the afflicted state was the Church at the penning of
this Psalm: whether its afflictions were from the Tyranny of Antiochus, the
Babylonish Captivity, or its own corruptions, I shall not here dispute. It may
suffice for us to take notice, that the Church was now in great distress; and
that it took the right way of remedy, by applying it self to God for relief:
Have mercy upon us, O Lord! have mercy upon us --
In which words we have two parts.


1. A passionate Supplication: Have mercy upon us, O Lord! have mercy --

2. The Ground and occasion of it: for we are exceedingly filled with contempt
--

This is last in order of words, but first in order of nature; and therefore I
shall begin here, and consider in it:

1. The matter of trouble and complaint: it was contempt and scorning.

2. The degree of it: 'twas exceeding contempt; and their souls were filled
with it.

3. The character of the persons, by whom the Church was so contemned: they
were, 1. Those at ease. And 2. the Proud.

1. For the matter of complaint: It Is expressed to be Contempt, which consists in
a mean and vile opinion of the person contemned: and scorning, which may be
taken for the showing of it, in actual derision, and abuse. Now contempt
supposes a mean and low condition, and hatred upon it. For misery moves pity,
and not contempt, where there is any thing of charity or kindness. So that at
this time the Church was low, and hated in its lowness, both which together,
make up the occasion of contempt, and the scorning that was consequent to it.
This is one of the most grievous of all evils, expressed well by him that said,
Nihil in se gravius habet paupertas, quam quod homines efficit ridiculos. Want,
we may think, is misery enough; but it is aggravated and heightened by the
contempt and scorn that usually goes along with it: even the virtues and the
wisdom of the poor are despised.

2. We have the degree of contempt expressed. They were exceedingly contemned:
and exceedingly filled with contempt. And their souls were exceedingly filled
with scorning.

Exceedingly filled, glutted with it, it is a Metaphor taken from an oppressive
repletion of the stomach, even to nauseating and loathing. Their soul was
filled, the greatest and quickest sense of evil was over-charg'd with this,
very grievous one.

They are, we see, greatly moved and concerned, and seem to speak, as if there
were scarce words enough to declare their trouble: which intimates, that the
contempt upon them, was not only from open and Gentile enemies; for from Them
it was to be expected, and from Them not so much to be regarded. The complaint
had been too soft, and unspirited, if there had been no more in it. If an open
enemy did them this dishonor, they might have born it, without so much
expression of tender resentment. It Is likely therefore from the greatness of
their concern, that some of them (at least) were, or had been, pretended
familiar friends, which some time went up to the house of God with them, and
made profession of the same General Faith and Religion.

The sufferings of the Church and good men, are not only from adversaries, and
those without: but very often from weak, peevish, and mistaken friends: from
those that are righteous, and Orthodox overmuch: from the superstitious and
ignorantly zealous: from those that have more heat than light; that mean well,
but understand little. Such, many times, are more troublesome to the Church,
than declared opposers: and Satan uses them as instruments of affliction, and
disturbance to the wise; as well as the profane and unbelieving enemy. This
sort we may well suppose to be some of the proud mentioned in the Text: which
may be considered further under the Third Head, viz.

3. The Persons from whom the Church suffered this contempt and scorning. 1.
Those that were at ease. And 2. the Proud. Our soul is exceedingly filled with
the scorning of those that are at ease; and with the contempt of the Proud.

1. Those that were at ease: the rich and prosperous in the world. Who were
enclosed in their own fat; who had their portion in this life; whose bellies
were filled with hid treasure, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 17. Yea, they had
more than heart could wish, Psalm. 73. and were such, as said unto their Souls,
Soul take thy ease, thou have Goods laid up for many years, eat, drink, and be
merry, Luke 12. They were at rest in their enjoyments, and very loath to be
disturbed by the thoughts of leaving them; and more unwilling to consider, that
they were to give an account of their Stewardship. So that they must needs look
with an evil eye upon Religion, the disturber of their quiet, and have a great
mind to say in their hearts, There is no God, Psalm. 14. 1. and that Religion is
but a cunningly devised Fable, 2 Pet. 1. or, if they cannot bring themselves to
believe that, they will be apt to say, Tush God sees not, he cares not: or,
if He do, they will not; they endeavor to be as careless and as blind as they
can, and to put him far from them, for they like not to retain God in their
knowledge, Romans 1. And being thus disposed, they set themselves to quarrel
Religion, to dispute against it, as far as their wit will give leave; and when
that fails, to Scorn and deride it. These envy the Church, while it enjoyes any
thing of the world with them, and despise it, when they have robbed it.

2. The Contemners were the Proud; And with the Contempt of the Proud. They are
of two sorts, 1. Such as are made so by their riches and worldly prosperity. 2.
Those that are swelled with the conceit of their Knowledge, Spiritualities, and
Graces.

For the first, It is an usual effect of worldly fullness. Riches make men
haughty and insolent, says Aristotle in his Rhetoric: And a greater than he,
having described the prosperity of the wicked, adds, Therefore pride compasses
them about like a chain, Psalm. 73. 6. They speak loftily, verse 8. and loftily
indeed, for they set their mouth against the heavens, ver. 9. They speak with
proud scorn of Religion, and those that are retainers to it. Proud -- despisers
of them that are good, 2 Timothy 3. 3.

It Is the vanity of man, that he would fain have others to think him happy: And
were it not for the considerations of Religion, and another world that it
discovers, the Rich would be, of all men, the most blessed: But Religion denies
this, and affronts the vanity of the great. It acquaints us with nobler and
surer, with more satisfying and more lasting Riches. It pronounces the wicked
Rich to be miserable amid their fullness; that they are set in slippery places;
that they are brought to desolation as in a moment; that they shall be consumed
with terrors, and their image, viz. the remembrance of them shall be despised,
Psalm. 73. On the other side, it teaches, that the righteous is the truly rich
and only happy man; and that the little he enjoyes, is better than great
riches of the ungodly, Psalm. 37. 16. That he is Heir to a mighty inheritance,
an heavenly inheritance an everlasting one: to the inheritance of a Kingdom, to
a Kingdom of Glory, a Kingdom among the blessed, whose crown is unmixt and
unfading. This outdoth all the splendour and magnificence, all the enjoyments,
expectations, and pretenses of the Proud who are swelled by their earthly
Riches; and their pride inclines them to hate Religion for this cause; and
those especially that minister in it. The wicked that are great, take it in
scorn, it should be thought any greatness excels theirs; and that there are
riches so much better than those which make them the adored and potent of the
world. They cannot bear that the Servants of Religion, whom they have despised
for wanting Lands and Titles, Feathers and painted Coats, should think of ever
being more splendid and more happy than They: and therefore they are ready to
scorn Rligion, as fantastic delusion; and to account the hopes of it, as the
imagery of dreams. They will talk as if Heaven, and the happiness of another
world, were only feigned, to support their spirits, that want the comforts of
this. And that the mystery of living again, was but the crafty contrivance of
Priests and Politicians to gain wealth, and keep mankind in awe and observance
by Romantic hopes, and causeless fears. Or, if the Church and its immediate
servants partake of the good things of this world, they think it too much, for
those that expect so much in another: They would have them live by Faith
purely; entirely on the next world, without enjoying any thing in this. So that
by all ways of violence and oppression they endeavor to deprive them of their
properties; and when they have made them poor and naked, they pour all manner
of contempt upon them. When the Church is wholly Spiritual, that is, without
all earthy comforts, and enjoyments; when the Ministers of it are clothed in
Sackcloth, and brought to a morsel of bread, and to an entire dependence upon
what they will let them have: Then they clap their hands, and cry, Ha, ha! so
would we have it; they treat them with imperious Scorn, speaking grievous
things proudly, and contemptuously against the Righteous, Psalm. 31. 18. Thus of
the first sort of proud Contemners of the Church. There is another, viz.

2. The Spiritual proud, that are lifted up above measure, in the thoughts of
their privileges and seize. Pride takes occasion from all things: and
when it has not riches and worldly honors to raise it self upon, it takes
even Religion to serve its vanity. It sets men upon the pinnacle, yea it
carries them into the clouds of imagination: and thence they Scornfully look
down upon all that are not of the same phanciful height. They choose unto
themselves singular ways, and heap up to themselves Teachers of their own;
they put on glorious shows of spirituality and strictness; and make a more
refined form of Godliness: And then they fancy, that they worship in a more
acceptable and Spiritual manner, that they have more knowledge of Gods mind,
and experience of his ways, than all others: And so, that they are his special
favorites, and more dear unto him than all the rest of mankind. That they only
have pure Ordinances, and precious truths; while the rest of the Church are in
darkness and the shadow of death, covered with the night of Ignorance and
Superstition: and were it not for them, fire and brimstone, destruction and
utter desolation would seize on the rest of men.

And being thus opinion'd of themselves, they will not mingle with the wicked,
but gather into their Select companies, and worship after their own fashion:
They despise the public orders of the Church, and contemn those that are not
in the mode of singularity and separation.

But especially, they look on the Ministers of the Church with the greatest and
bitterest scorn: they undervalue their abilities, and defame their lives: they
talk of them, as if there were nothing but ignorance and debauchery among them.
As if a man were forsaken of God and all goodness, as soon as the Church had
taken him into her service; and bereft of all understanding, and all sense of
virtue and Godliness, as soon as he undertook to Minister in the public legal
places of worship. They greedily hunt after Stories, to make them odious and
contemptible; and catch the vomit of Atheists and Drunkards to throw in their
faces: I mean, they publish, and authenticate the slanderous lies that those
sots make in their more than bestial debauches; what They intend for sport;
these propagate in malice: they vent the scandalous tales among their friends,
for sad certainties; and confirm them with sighs, and solemn nods (as the
others did with Oaths and Dammee's) as if they were troubled at the evil they
report, when as indeed they are then most tickled and pleased! It Is marrow and
fatness to them to hear and tell stories of the Sons of the Church: no one can
oblige them more, than he that so entertains them: And when informations fail,
they have good inventions to supply that want; so that no innocence can escape
them: No virtue is protection against them. They Will interpret every harmless
action into a miscarriage; and aggravate every the smallest miscarriage with
all the most heinous circumstances of guilt and villainy. Yea, where no blot is
to be found, none to be pretended; there they vilify the virtue of those
unblamable persons, as dull morality, and them as strangers to the Spirit, and
Mystery of Religion.

But besides these, there is another sort of Proud, that are occasions of the
Church's contempt: men that would have themselves thought to be the only
friends to it: That will not be satisfied with their brethrens subscriptions
and declarations for the Articles and Constitutions of the Church, except they
will take Their Interpretations: And unless you will be of their mind in every
disputed Doctrine; you must be published enemies to the Church, and suspicions
will be raised upon you as secret adversaries, and dangerous persons that
undermine the foundations. These would set the Church upon an indivisible
point, and have it stand like a steeple invers'd. They would shut out those
that have served the Church to as good purpose, as any of themselves; that can
do it, and will in spite of their peevishness, and conceited folly. Such men
as these act as if they thought the Church had not enemies enough: they would
make more divide from it, if they could: and would have themselves accounted
the only members and pillars of it. Whether this be the way to assert its
honor and reputation; or to lay the ground for more contempt; let indifferent
men judge: and to their thoughts I leave it.

I come now to the other General, viz.

2. The earnest Supplication: -- Have mercy upon us, O Lord!

This may be understood as a Petition both for, 1. Pardon: And 2. Deliverance.

1. Common contempt is a Judgment, of which sin is the ground and occasion:
and when men complain of Judgments, they should remember their offenses: which
if they do, with hearty penitence, and due humiliation, they are then prepared
for pardon, and may, and ought to apply themselves to God for it. This is the
first thing to be done in order to deliverance from any evil, and particularly
from this: It Is vain to seek for the removal of the effect, while the cause is
suffered to continue. Allowed sin is contempt thrown upon the Majesty of God;
and those that dishonor Him, shall be lightly esteemed. He must first be
restored to his honor by our humbling our selves, and renouncing our sins: and
then He will be ready to deliver us in his time, from the scorning of those
that are at ease, and the contempt of the proud. For those that honor him, he
will honor, 1. Sam. 2. 3. And when a man's ways please the Lord, his enemies
shall be at peace with him, Prove. 16. 7.

This seems to be the first thing implied in the Petition: Have mercy upon us,
O Lord; in the pardon of our sins.

The second is for deliverance from the contempt, of which they complain: and
so the Supplication speaks thus: Have mercy upon us, O Lord! and help us.

They do not trouble themselves with Appeals and Apologies unto men; no, it is a
small thing with them to be judged of man's judgment, 1 Cor. 4. 3. but they
make their application to Him that judges righteously: if He approves, it is no
matter who condemns; if He honor, let men vilify and contemn at their peril.
The Church seeks His favor and his help for deliverance: for vain is the help
of man. And it seems to be exceeding earnest, and solicitous to procure it;
which is implied in the reiteration of the request, Have mercy upon us, O Lord!
have mercy. Which earnestness we may not suppose to proceed only from
tenderness of their own names and reputation, as if their being disvalued were
so very grievous a thing to them: No, there was more in it, the honor of God
was concerned, and they were vilified and despised because of their Relation to
Him: For his sake they suffered reproach, Psalm. 69. 7. and the reproaches of
them that reproached thee, says the Psalmist, ver. 9. are fallen upon me. Those
that despise the Church, and its Servants, first despised God, and Religion:
And it is the interest that his Glory has in its contempt, that makes them in
the Text so sensible, and so earnest. When men hate and contemn their Prince,
and his Government, they will scarce dare to vent their spite immediately
against him: but do it against his Ministers, and Favorites: in like manner,
the contemptuous enemies of God carry themselves to him and to his Messengers,
and Servants: they give him a little formality of complement and respect; but
pour all possible scorn and reproach upon them: But it is for his sake they are
thus slain all the day long; and He knows where the contempt, and enmity
begins; so that when we are scorned on the account of Religion, we may resent
it, and ought so far as to be earnest with God for deliverance, because his
honor is concerned with ours.

But this will be matter of particular Application and Address, and therefore I
say no more of it in this place; but descend to apply the discourse for our
Instruction and Practice.

I Infer First, That no Church upon Earth can secure it self from contempt.
This of the Jews was Gods own constitution; a Church of his framing, not only
in the essentials, but in the circumstances of it: A Church enlightened by
Prophets, founded on Miracles, and encouraged by the more than ordinary
presence of God with them: and yet even They were a reproach to their
neighbors, a scorn and derision to them that were round about them, Psalm. 79.
4. Their souls were filled with the scorning of those that were at ease, and
with the contempt of the proud.

And the Christian Church that succeeds into all their privileges, and has
the addition of more and greater; That also has undergone heavy burdens of
contempt ever since it appeared in the world. The Author of it was the Son of
God, God blessed for ever; the brightness of his Fathers Glory, and express
image of his person; and yet He was despised and rejected of men, Isa. 53. 3.
they hid their faces from him, and esteemed him not; as Isaiah Prophesyed, and
the event made good. He came unto his own, and they received him not; yea, they
rejected him with contempt: They reproached him in his Life, as a Wine-bibber,
a Glutton, a friend of Publicans and sinners; In his Doctrines, as a Deceiver,
and Blasphemer; In his Miracles, as a Conjurer and Magician, and one that cast
out Devils by Beelzebub; in his Declarations, and rightful claims, as an
ignominious Impostor: And at his Death, they loaded him with all the marks of
contempt and reproach imaginable: Seized him with Swords and Staves, like a
Murderer or a Thief; condemned him by a public cry, as one not fit to live
upon the earth, Away with him; Crucify him, crucify him; Buffeted him, Spit
upon him, hung him up on an infamous tree, as a vile person between two
notorious Malefactors. And if the Master had such usage, what were the servants
to expect? If He be called Beelzebub, what must they look for? Matthew. 10. 25.
They could expect no other than contempt and reproach, and they had it in full
measure.

The Apostles, and immediate Messengers of the holy Jesus, were accounted as
madmen, bablers, deceivers of the people; and setters forth of strange Gods;
their way and Doctrines, foolishness, cunningly devised fables, every where
spoken against. Their persons treated infamously with Whips, and public
scorns: And the disciples that were made by their Ministry and endeavors, had
trial of cruel mockings, and scourgings, bonds and imprisonment; and were
forced to wander about in Sheep-kins and Goat Skins, destitute, afflicted,
tormented, as the Apostle speaks to the Hebrews, Heb. 11.

They suffered reproach from the carnal proud, their enemies without, Jews and
Heathens: and from the spiritual proud that pretended to be within, the
Gnostics, those vile Fanatics of the first times, who boasted that they were
more knowing, and more spiritual than all others; that they better understood,
yea, only understood the mystery of Religion; they spoke swelling words of
vanity, had men's persons in admiration, heaped up teachers, crept into houses,
led captive silly women, despised dominions, spoke evil of dignities, caused
divisions, separated themselves, as they are described by the Apostles: These
despised the true Church, and all the sober members of it, as people of a low
Form, and utterly unacquainted with the heights and spiritualities of the
Gospel; and therefore they scorned their company, and communion, and went out
from among them.

I need not further prosecute the relation of the Churches usage in those old
times: These last accounts lead my thoughts to our own; and perhaps there have
been none from the beginning which more sadly prove, that no Church can be
secure from contempt, than these.

By the blessing of God we enjoy a Constitution, Apostolical in its Doctrine,
Primitive in its Government; decent in its Ceremonies; grave and pious in its
Liturgy; We have the Scriptures, the Creeds, the Sacraments, the main
Ordinances, and Duties of the first and purest times; we are freed from
Idolatries, Superstitions, and other corruptions of the Roman Church, on this
hand; and clear from the vanities, and Enthusiasms that have overspread some
pretended Protestants on that; our Church has rejected the painted bravery of
the one; and provided against the sordid slovenliness of the other. Her
clothing is decent and not gaudy; Has all that which may assist reverence,
without any thing that can directly minister to vanity or superstition.

It is a Church reformed by grave Councils, and not by popular Tumults; framed
to primitive patterns, and not to modern phancies; conducted by Reverend
Prelates, and not left to the pride and ignorance of Novices, or factious
multitudes. And now, one would think, that such a Church as this, might escape
the contempt of the Proud, and that it would be revered (at least) among the
professors of the same Faith and Religion. But alas! how much otherwise is our
case! we are exceedingly contemned; our soul is exceedingly filled with the
scorning of those that are at ease, and with the conptempt of the proud. Never
any Church had more just reason to take up this sad complaint of the Text than
this.

For, its Government, the most Apostolical, and most Catholic, is decryed by
the spiritual proud, as Antichristian and Tyrannical: Its worship, the purest
and most primitive, reproached as Idolatrous, and avoided by them as the
Plague: Its Liturgy (the best in the world) loaded with contempt, and made a
common Theme of derision: Its discipline made void by every one that pleases;
observed by very few out of Conscience, and by none out of Fear: Its penalties
the greatest (its Excommunications that were so justly terrible heretofore)
slighted and despised, as if they were but mere Buggs and Scare-crows: Its
Ceremonies, those few comely Rites it enjoyes, declam'd against with loud
outcries, as superstitious and abominable; and its public places of worship
(those sacred houses of God) deserted, as if their walls were infected; and
exchanged for private corners.

Such contempt is poured upon this excellent Church, and all this reproach it
suffers from the spiritual proud, who think themselves wiser than the Aged, not
because they keep, but because they break the Laws, and fancy they are
enlightened enough to be a Law unto themselves, without needing the Rules of
other Governors, than those of their own Imaginations. In the last days shall
come Scoffers, walking after their own lusts, 2 Pet. 3. 3. Pharisaical as well
Dehauch'd Scoffers, who walk after their fantastical, as the others do after
their carnal lusts; and therefore despise and contemn all Laws that should
bound and restrain them.

But the Church suffers contempt also from the other sort, the carnal proud
have her exceedingly in derision, and make mouths at her. And we are fallen into
an Age, in which to be a Church, and to profess Religion, not this, or that,
but any, is occasion enough, with some (and God knows not a few) for contempt
and scorning. The fool, in old time, said in his heart, There no God, Psalm. 14.
1. but that folly has put off its modesty in ours: and vile men now set more
than their hearts against the Heavens, Psalm. 73. 9. It Is wit to deride
Religion, and modish accomplishment to make merriment of things Sacred. As if
we were past the dispensation of disputing against God; and were so certain
that he is not, or not to be worshipped, that there were no more to be done
now, but to laugh at the silly belief of his Existence, and the vain folly of
adoring Him.

To this height we are come, and by it have outdone the impudence of all
former times; and what we are to expect if this bold impiety be not stopped, is
very sad, but very easy to foresee. What are the effects of it at present, we
know; and the Church woefully feels in the extreme contempt and scorn that is
upon it. And by reason of the one sort of proud contemners, and the other, it
may too justly complain in the words of the Jewish Church in the Lamentations,
I am a derision to all my people; and their Song all the day; and in the
language of the Prophet, How do I sit solitary, that was full of people! my
ways mourn because few come to my solemn Feasts; my Gates are desolate. My
Priests sigh, and the precious Sons of Sion, comparable to fine Gold, are
esteemed as earthen pitchers, the work of the hands of the Potter. My
adversaries are the chief, my enemies prosper; all my persecutors overtake me
between the straights. They hiss, and gnash their teeth, and say, We have
swallowed her up: Certainly this is the day we looked for, we have found, we
have seen it. This is our case, and O Lord, have mercy upon us: have mercy upon
us; for none other fights for us, but only thou, O God.

II. SInce we cannot be secure from contempt, let us endeavor not to deserve
it; nor give occasion to that hatred and scorn which is upon the Church and its
members. This I shall take liberty to address, (1.) To my Brethren of the
Clergy; and (2.) To the people that are yet in communion with us.

1. As for Us, we are sure to be the first, and deepest sharers of the contempt
that is upon the Church: And how it is with us at this day by reason of it, is
easy to see, but deplorable to consider. I desire not to speak fond, or
overweaning things, but this I think I may say with justice, That no Church in
the world enjoyes a more truly learned, and sober Clergy than this; and with as
much truth I may affirm, That no Clergy upon earth undergoes so great a burden
of contempt. The Heathens of all times, and places of the world have had
reverence for their Priests: the Jews and Turks sacred respect for theirs; the
people of the Greek Churches pay great venerations to the meanest of the
Priesthood; the Romanists are very respectful to them. Yea, even the several
Classes of Sects among us, reverence their Teachers: So that the dueness of
respect to the Ministers of Religion, seems to be the common acknowledgement of
mankind; grounded upon the Relation they have to God, as his Ambassadors, and
Stewards of his Mysteries; and the nobleness and importance of the business
they are employed in, the conducting the souls of men to everlasting happiness.

But we, the Clergy of this Church, and only we, seem to be cut off from the
common acknowledged rights of Priesthood: as if there were an exception against
us in the general Rule, and all the Ministers of Religion were to be honored,
except those of the Church of England.

In all cases else, greatness of Relation, and dignity of employment give title
to respect: But in this, where the Relation is to the highest, and the business
is about things most worthy, and most necessary, the practice is quite
otherwise: and we are exposed by our character and employment to disesteem and
neglect. It Is true, we are guilty of many sins and imperfections, that may
occasion disrespect; but I hope, not in proportion to the contempt that is upon
us. In judging of all others, men make abatements in consideration of the
weakness of humane nature: But we are under the Law (I mean as to men's
censures) and are judged by the strictest severities: there is no mitigation,
no pardon for us, and it will not be considered that we are but dust.

Yea every Mote in our eye, is made a beam, every infirmity is blown up to an
height of villainy; and every vice of which any person among us is guilty, is
reflected upon the whole Order.

So that were it not for the right we expect at a juster Bar, than that of man's
judgment, we were of all men the most miserable: for we are treated here, as
if we had no claim to the civility and good nature of mankind, but were either
another race of creatures, or out laws of this. The Apostle supposed it
reasonable, we should be counted worthy of double honor; but the world thinks
single respect too much for us, and treble contempt scarce enough. We are gone
over as the stones in the street, by the carnal proud, and reckoned as the dirt
of it by the spiritual Scorners: Yea, there are scarce any whose condition is
so bad, or so low, but think themselves good enough, and great enough to
despise us.

We look not for the great honors and venerations of the world, and it is not
fit we should; but yet, there is no man, that is not stupid, but would be
sensible of such treatment, and I think we ought to resent it, since the ground
of our reproach is contempt upon Religion, if not upon the Author of it.
Abstract us from our relation to that, and our Order may without boasting,
pretend to as much wisdom, and knowledge, ingenuity and virtue, as other men.
Our Education is as handsome and ingenuous, and I know not why the parts of the
Clergy should not be equal to those of other ways of breeding: So that we might
pass well enough in the world, and, for ought I know, might meet tolerable
reception in it, were it not that God has honored us with the dignity of
being his immediate Servants, and has employed us in the affairs of Souls. But
for this, I can see no cause, why we should not be as capable of the qualities
that procure respect, as others that have a competent measure of it: And
therefore upon the whole matter, I must say, that we are so far from having
honor for our office and our work sake, that we are lessened by them, and if a
Minister meet respective entertainment in the world, the kindness is extorted
by some personal advantages he owns; and not given him for his character and
Function; no, he is taken down, and is so much less, in consideration of it. So
that God himself is affronted, and Religion vilified by the excessive,
unreasonable contempt that is put upon the dispensers of his Truths and Laws:
And it is pity that our concernment in this matter will not permit us without
incurring more reproach, roundly to reprove this indignity to our Lord and
theirs, who has sent us in the most important errand to them. But alas, all we
can do without the loud imputation of Preaching up our selves, is to bear our
Reproach in silence, and to mourn in secret, for that horrid Atheism, and Scorn
of all Religion, or of the best, which is the occasion of it: and certainly
where there is contempt of the Priesthood above board, there is disvalue of
Religion under it: disrespect to one does suppose, and will soon produce
irreverence to the other.

Upon the whole, we see, how great reason we have to be cautious, that we
contribute not to the contempt that is on Religion and our selves, and justify
this impious barbarous Age in it. And there is no better advice can be given to
secure us from it, than that of St. Paul to Timothy, 1 Timothy 4. 16. Take heed
unto thy self, and to the doctrine.

It concerns us first, to take heed of our selves, to our Lives and
Conversations. We have many observers whose malice makes them critical and
curious; They lay in wait for our haltings, and are glad at heart, when they
have caught an opportunity to revile us; we are encompast on all hands by those
envious pryers; by the debauched on the one side, and the Schismatical on the
other. The roaring Lion is before us, and the wily Serpent in the next ambush;
one would fain have an occasion from our miscarriages to tear and violate the
honor of all Religion; and the other to spit its venom against that which we
profess. It behooves us therefore to beware, and to walk circumspectly, not as
fools but as wise, because the days are so evil.

In order hereunto I humbly recommend these Cautions in paticular, that we take
care not to be found guilty of, 1. Pharisaism. 2. Immorality, or, 3. Negligence
in our calling.

1. Pharisaick righteousness, and Fantastic heights of zeal beget great
respects and venerations among the vulgar; but contempt among those of
better-understanding; and there is nothing whereby Religion has been more
exposed in the present Age, than this. Plain unaffected righteousness and
sincerity is accountable in all times, and has still reputation among the most
knowing: but the flanting shows of the Pharisee are despised as soon as they are
understood. Our Righteousness then must exceed his, not in pomp, and
appearance, but in reality and sincere practice. There is no one that
understands the nature of Religion, the constitution of our Church, and the
temper of the Age, but knows it to be the present interest both of Church and
Religion, that Pharisaism, which is the general humor that runs through all
the Proud Sects, should be discountenanced and detected; and therefore we
should take heed, that we do not encourage the spreading vanity, by any
conformity unto it.

Indeed there is no other way lesenow, to make us popular, and to Crown us with
the applauses of the people: and those who affect that sort of glory and
reputation, are under great temptation to square their discourse and lives
according to those vain models: but those Ministers deserve to be despised that
are possessed by that low spirited ambition: and do not prefer the pleasing God,
and Conscience, and the few wise men, before the pacifying the humors, and
receiving the caresses and applauses of ignorant and giddy Phantasticks: and
there are no sort of men worse enemies to this Church than these; who while
they pretend to be of it, promote this spirit and humor that destroys it.

2. We ought on this, as on all accounts else, to shun all Immoralities of
practice. Vice makes any one contemptible among good men, and us despicable
among all. The worst have an abhorrence of Debauchery, or any degree of
Profaneness in the Clergy: The best things degenerated, are worst. It Is true,
live we how we will, the malicious world will find accusations against us, but
we must take care we do not justify their reproaches. Though (as things are in
the present Age) we are disabled from doing much to promote Religion by our
Doctrine; yet we may disserve it much by our lives. The best that we can say
does but little good; but the least evil that we do, is cause of great hurt and
mischief. Men are hardened by it in their Contempt of Religion, and we are made
incapable of doing it, or them any considerable service.

Or if we do nothing that is morally evil, yet such is the world now, that
advantage will be taken of the least appearance; every thing shall be urged
against us that the wit of malice can make criminal; And therefore it
exceedingly concerns us to heed the Rule of the Apostle, Avoid all appearances
of evil, 1 These. 5. 22. we should take care not to come within the shadow of
it. We live in an Age, in which it is not enough for a Clergyman to be innocent,
there is much wisdom and prudence necessary to keep that from having a stain
upon it. And though we be as harmless as Doves, yet we shall not be thought to
be so, except we are as wise as Serpents. Men were never more careless of their
own conversations, and never more exact observers and censurers of ours; so
that nothing will secure us in this Age, from the tongues set on fire of Hell:
our only course is to be as much as we can out of their way; And as far as our
profession will give leave to draw our selves up into privacy and retirement.
For the Sea is too rough for us to be abroad upon it.

The sum is, It Is not possible for us to avoid contempt, but we may avoid
being accessory unto it, if we take care that our Religion be not Pharisaical,
nor our practice immoral, in reality or appearance. Not that it is sufficient
for a Minister of the Gospel to be thus negatively righteous; no, besides other
considerations, we have a great charge upon us, which will require a very
active piety; And therefore,

3. We must take heed also that we are not negligent in the great business of
our noble Calling. That business is so worthy and so necessary, that it
requires the chief of our thoughts, the flower of our time, and the vigor of
our endeavors, to bestow less upon it is to neglect it: and every neglect of
that, deserves a degree of contempt upon our selves. Give thy self wholly to
these things, was the instruction of the Apostle, 1 Timothy 4. 15. and our whole
is little enough: for who is sufficient for these things, 2 Cor. 2. 16. and
when we have done all, we are unprofitable Servants, Luke 17. 10. It Is little
we can do, God knows, to make the world wiser or better; it is too wise, in
conceit, to be taught; and too bad in practice, to be amended by us. However we
must labor, and ply the Oar, though the tide be never so strong against us.
It Is part of the patience of the Gospel, to work even there, where our labor
for the present, is in vain. It will not be so always, 1 Cor. 15. no, it shall
be rewarded by plentiful Glory hereafter, though it were not encouraged by any
visible success here. Those rewards we publish and expect, and for us to do the
work of the Lord negligently, is to put a slight upon them, and upon Religion,
our selves, and to invite contempt from others. And there is none certainly
that more justly deserves the extremest degrees of it, than he that loiters in
the Lords Vineyard, and is negligent in the Ministry of Souls.

I have expressed these cautions in a negative way, but hope it will be
understood, that the positive duties are included. When I say, we are not to be
Pharisaical in our Religion; I intend also, that we are to be very plain,
sober, and sincere in it: When I caution against immoral lives, I imply, that
ours ought to be very virtuous and religious: When I give the rule against
negligence, I have taken care to be understood to mean likewise, that the
greatest sedulity and diligence is our duty. To have run out into full Comments
upon these, would have taken up more than my whole time. I descend to the
Second Head in the Apostle's Rule.

2. We ought to take heed to our Doctrine, if we would not deserve contempt. We
live in a ticklish Age for this also; an Age of itching ears, and curious
palats: men were never so eritical upon their teaching, though it is likewise
sadly true that they were never so little careful to practice according to it.

In the variety and oppositions of opinions, phancies, humors, and capacities,
an Angel from Heaven could not please all; and as things are, those that are
not pleased with the Doctrine, will contemn the Preacher. So that avoid
contempt we cannot; but we shall not deserve it, if our Doctrine be guided by
our end; and that is the Glory of God in the Salvation of those that hear us.
The business of Preaching, is to instruct men in what they are to believe and
do, in order to their serving God, and being happy. This is the great Rule,
this the measure. And the Discourses that are not directed by it, may be witty
Orations, and learned entertainments, but they are not good Sermons. For every
thing is to be judged by its fitness for its end. If our Doctrines, and
public instructions* are squared by that, we shall approve our selves unto
God and Conscience; though vain and fantastic men despise us: and so we are
to speak not as pleasing men, but God, 1 These. 2. 4.

There is nothing by which some Preachers have more exposed Religion and
themselves, than by propounding other ends, and such mean ones as the gaining
the reputation of being Witty, Eloquent, or Learned: for when they miss their
aim (as they do always with the wise) they fall under extreme contempt with
them. The affectations of words, and Metaphors, and Cadencies, and^ ends of
Greek, and Latin, are now the scorn o^ the judicious, and as much despised and
(almost) as generally as they deserve. They are banifh'd from conversation, and
are not endured in common matters; for shame then let us not retain them in our
Pulpits, and defile sacred Subjects with them. Let us leave those sorts of
fooling, when none but the ignorant can be deceived by them into a good opinion
of us; and by their use we shall deceive our selves into the derision and
Contempt of all that have either wit or judgment; and which is infinitely
worse, into the displeasure and wrath of God.

1. Our business in Preaching is the greatest and most important, and therefore
we should be very grave and serious in it; to be slight, flashy, or affected in
so solemn an affair, is to show our selves vain and contemptible triflers.

2. We are to instruct all sorts, the most ignorant, as well as the more
knowing, in the matters of Faith and practice; and therefore should design and
endeavor to be as plain as we can, both in our Doctrines and Expressions,
avoiding hard words, and senseless phrases, and speaking in the proper,
natural, easy way, which is most profitable for the ignorant, and most
acceptable with the wise.

3. And for the accommodation of the memories, as well as the understandings of
the generality of hearers, our Discourses should be in clear, facile, and
distinct methods; not involved in confusions, nor spun out into nice divisions,
or numerous particulars.

4. And because the main work is to persuade, and direct an holy life, our
Sermons should mostly be practical, and affectionate: Not but that we may
labor to explain, establish, and defend the great principles of Faith and
practice, especially in an Age in which such Shipwreck is made of both: but
then we must take care that those we teach are such indeed, and that we vent
not speculative notions and opinions, as fundamentals of Religion. We are not
to be concerned for any Doctrines in our Pulpits, but for the great and certain
Articles of Faith and Life; As for our opinions, this is not the place for
them: For it is not our business to make people in all points, Orthodox and
Knowing; but to endeavor that they may be sincere and good, which is wisdom to
salvation. These I take to be proper measures for Preaching, and if he that
directs himself by them, be despised for his Doctrine, he will have this
comfort, that the contempt he suffers is none of his fault.

I have done with what I intended for my Brethren of the Clergy, namely for the
younger sort, for I presume not to instruct the elder and graver men.

I Am (II.) to apply the advice of this general Use, to the people, who yet
profess themselves of our Church. You see the contempt that is upon it, and I
beseech you to consider whether its pretended friends have not been, and are
not still, great occasions of it. The greatest part of Christians are incapable
of judging concerning the truth or goodness of any Church or Constitution of
Religion: but are inclined in their opinion, and affection by the general
temper and practice of its professors and adherents: Now it is an almost
universal principle among men, that Religion and the Worship of God require the
greatest seriousness and zeal; where these are observed in peoples carriage to
their particular Church, the most are usually inclined to have respect for
that: on the other side, when the members of any Church are cold and
unconcerned, or wanton and irreverent in their Religion; such a temper when it
comes to be general, draws popular contempt upon that Church and way.

This at present is the sad case of ours; and I doubt it may be too truly said,
that there are no retainers to any Church in the world, who are so little
concerned for it, and the worship of God in it, as the pretenders to the Church
of England. If we survey our several Congregations, and consider our people, we
shall find but very few that carry themselves, as if they had any conscientious
affection to the Religion they profess. If the Estimate be taken from those
that are constant or frequent at the public Prayers in Cathedrals, or other
Churches; certainly the number must be acknowledged to be very small; and if we
reckon only such that carry but the appearance of serious Devotion, it will be
yet less: so that the Church may almost be tempted to say with him, There is
not one godly man left, the righteous are minished from among the children of
men.

There are indeed multitudes, who will tell us they are of this Church, when
they give us no ground, but their bare word, to believe they are of any: While
they talk of owning and adhering to the Church, they will not afford the solemn
worship of it as much as their bodily presence, as long as the Devil and their
Lusts have employment for them elsewhere: They carry themselves to it, as to a
matter of the greatest indifference; will go to Church now and then, when time
lies upon their hands, and they are in the humor for it; and then again never
think of Religion, or Worship, till another accident excites them. And when
they come to such Sacred places as this, with what rude boldness do they enter
Gods house? and how much carelessness and irreverence do they express in their
very looks and garb? Confident negligence seems at present to be a fashion; and
the whole carriage after is suitable to this ill beginning. What toying,
talking, gazing, laughing, and other rude follies may we observe in the midst
of the most solemn parts of worship? and how much slightness and playsomness in
speaking of serving God, being devout, saying prayers, and such like serious
things after it?

Now when these carriages are observed (not to mention worse) in those that say
they are of the Church of England, how readily does it dispose the generality
of men, who judge by bare appearance, to think amiss of the Church that is
ordinarily thus treated by its members; and to suppose most others that profess
it, to be of the same sort, or not very different; and so to despise the
Church, and all that adhere unto it. This certainly is a very great occasion of
her present contempt; and if you would not be accessory to its increase and
growth (if it be capable of any more) beware of this carelessness and
irreverence to the Religion you profess.

If Religion be a real thing, and not a mere imagination (as nothing is more
certain) it then requires our greatest zeal and venerations; and the most
serious exercise of our faculties, and endeavors: no prostrations can be too
low in the adoration of the God of Heaven; no engagement of soul too intense,
in praying for his blessing, and praising him for his bounty; no attention too
serious in hearing of His Word; no deportment too awful in His eye, and special
presence. Let us all consider this, and demean our selves in our worship, as
those that are in earnest: Let the light of our zeal and devotion so shine
before men, that they, seeing our works, may glorify God, reverence the
Church, and vindicate it and us from the scorning of those that are at ease,
and the contempt of the proud. Let us endeavor so to worship, that the fervor
of our piety may equal the truth of our profession; and our actions in
Religion, may have some sutableness to our expectations from it. And then
though the Church and we are filled with contempt, yet we shall be clear from
any imputation of the guilt; and our souls may be at ease, though we are
scorned by the Proud.

Preached at a Visitation.

SERMON VI. MORAL EVIDENCE OF A Life to Come.

The Second Edition.

SERMON VI.
MATTHEW. XXII. 32. -- God is not the God of the dead, but of the living --
NOtwithstanding the manifold and immediate Transactions of God with the people
of the Jews; yet were they a dull and stupid generation, addicted very much to
the matters of sense, and indisposed to things of spiritual and invisible
nature. Yea, there was a great and famous Sect among them that denied a Life to
come, and the Existence of immaterial beings, For the Sadducees say, there is
no Resurrection, neither Angels, nor Spirit, Acts 23. 8.

These put the Question here to our Savior in a case of a woman, who
successively had seven Husbands, whose Wife she should be at the Resurrection,
from ver. 22. to the 28. which captious Query they intended for an Argument
against the Doctrine of another Life.

Christ answers directly to the objection, by telling them their mistake of the
state and condition of that Life: since they neither marry, nor are given in
marriage, that have attained unto it, but are like the Angels of God, ver. 30.
and then, takes occasion to prove the Resurrection, or Living again of the
dead, out of the writings of Moses, the only Scripture the Sadducees allowed,
ver. 31, 32.

"But as touching the Resurrection of the dead, have ye not read that which was
spoken unto you by God, saying, I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac,
and the God of Jacob? -- God is not the God of the dead but of the living."

The former clause of the verse cites the Scripture which is the ground of the
Argument, the latter is a principle of Reason; and both together infer, That
there is a Resurrection.

Now the (...), the Resurrection of the dead undertaken to be shown, was not
the Resurrection of the body (though that be a great truth also) since the
argument does not reach this; For one who believes that the soul lives after
death, may say, That God is the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, though the
body does not rise; for they are living in their souls, which are their true
selves.

And therefore the Conclusion our Savior went about to prove was, that There
is another Life, which the Sadducees denied and endeavored by this Question,
though very weakly, to overthrow. And the word (...) signifies standing up, and
implies, Living again, simply, not the Resurrection of the Body; except where
the Body is expressed, or the necessary sense does otherwise enforce it. So that,
though it be a truth that the body shall rise, and demonstrable from many other
places, yet it is not meant here; but the thing intended to be proved, is, a
Life to come; without determining whether in our bodies or without them.

This was undertaken, and this was performed, for the Sadducees were put to
silence, ver. 34. That they were convinced, we do not hear; Arguments from
Faith or Reason prevail little against corrupt interests, and affections. But
yet it is something to stop the mouths of Gainsayers; for others may be
fortified in their Faith by the confutation of the enemies of it.

Would to God we could say, There was no need of endeavors of this sort, in
our days, and that this subject were quite out of date. But alas! we see
Sadducism revived, after Light and Immortality has been brought to light
through the Gospel; and the Holy Jesus has given sensible assurance of it by
his own Resurrection from the dead. Yea, the Heresy is improved in our time to
a great and more dangerous height, and almost to Atheism it self. We are fallen
into an Age wherein, among some, and those not a few, it is a piece of Gallantry
to be an Infidel: and Heroically great to have outgrown the panick terrors of
another world. We have lived to see the Doctrine of Spirits, professedly and
openly derided, and that of Living again esteemed equally vain, and ridiculous.
The wantonness of some has disputed all the Articles of the Christian Creed;
and the lusts of others have taken advantage thence boldly to deny them.

So that it is not unseasonable in such a world as this, to labor in the proof
of a future Being. For besides those that openly oppose this Principle of our
Faith; the vileness and debauchery of our days are too sad an argument that
many others do not believe it. Men could not be so impious, did they believe
themselves immortal; nor live so much like Beasts, did they not think also that
they should die as such.

Now as our Savior, dealing with the Jewish Sadducees, did not make use of the
proofs that were most obvious and direct, but of that which was most suitable;
not of the plain and clear places in the other Scriptures, of which the
Sadducees made no account; but of this from the Books of Moses, whose Authority
they granted: In like manner, while we treat with the modern Sadducees, we must
not offer Arguments from the Testimony of these or other Scriptures, which they
value not; but reckon with them from the principles of Reason, which they
cannot but acknowledge. And the Arguments I shall now use, to prove a Future
Life, shall be of this latter sort: and those not taken from Philosophic
heights, and remote Speculations, but from moral Considerations, improving
things obvious; and taking ground from matters of common observation. And
though I hope there are none of those Infidels in this place; yet, I suppose,
it may not be wholly unprofitable to you to be minded of the reasons of your
Faith, in days wherein so many make Shipwreck of it.

This then I shall endeavor, viz.

1. To show some moral Arguments to enforce the belief of a Future Life.

2. The causes and occasions of unbelief, in this Article.

3. What this Infidelity infers in the just reasoning and consequence of it.

For the First, I prove a Life to Come,

1. From some OBSERVABLES in the great world. And,

2. From the FRAME and CONSTITUTION of our own Natures.

The Phenomenon, or observables I argue from, are (1.) The Miseries of this
state. And 2. The unequal distribution of good and evil here.

I begin with the Miseries of this Life. In the description of which, I shall
take liberty to enlarge a little, that we may have such a sense of it, as may
dispose us to feel the force of the Argument. Let us consider then, That

In whatever condition we look on this poor thing we call man, there is nothing
but misery before us: Prosperity is temptation to wantonness and excess:
Adversity to murmuring and impatience: Riches are anxiety and care; and
poverty, a complicated misery: Labor is pain, and idleness as uneasy as
employment: Wisdom affords cutting senses of the evils we encounter; and folly
exposes us to the edge of cross events. He that increases knowledge
increases trouble, Eccl. 1. 18. and the soul without it is not good, Prove. 19.
2. Our enjoyments satiate, and weary us; and disappointments are smart
afflictions; so that we want both when we have, and when we have not, and are
miserable both in successful issues, and in defeatures: we complain of our
misfortunes, and seek rest and ease in the shifting of our condition; but in a
short time we find as many other evils as those we shunned; and are convinced,
that the change of our state yields no happiness, but a different kind of
misery. Like men in a Fever, we toss from side to side, and find rest no where
but in the Grave. If we have a pleasant moment we pay severely for it in the
next, and a short happiness is a torment. We are devoured by our eager
appetites, and torn piecemeal by the contrariety of desires and inclinations:
We carry all the beasts of prey within us; There Is a fire in our breasts that
consumes us, and we die by the same flame by which we live. Nor is the
condition of our bodies less sad and tragical: We are scorched by Fevers,
melted in Catarrhs, burn and freeze in Agues, are racked by Gouts, maimed by
Gangrenes, and rent asunder by violent pains within our bowels: At last we are
made the food of worms, except a Consumption deceive them, and send away our
flesh before us. The best of our condition is, that we can die, and mingle with
insensible rottenness and corruption. The Grave is the best bed we find till we
turn to ashes; and the silent darkness of the house of worms and bones, is
better than the light of the Sun, and comfort of the Elements.

Such is the condition of this mortal Life; This is our portion, and our lot is
this. And these miseries of the present state afford us the comfort of the
Conclusion, That there is another: and that this is not all the Life of man.
For God has made us, and not we our selves; And he is infinitely good, and
infinitely powerful: Absolutely perfect, and perfection it self, and of his
fullness he communicates to his creatures, and takes infinite pleasure in so
doing. This our Reasons, and the common notions of mankind teach us concerning
God: And hence it follows, that he has made nothing to be miserable; he has
no pleasure in the vexations, and destruction of the Living; but made all
things that they might enjoy their Being: There can be no envy, imperfection,
or shadow of evil, or defect in the fountain of Benignity and fullness. Now He
that is so absolutely perfect, and so infinitely good, has placed us under
these circumstances of present infelicity; and therefore from that goodness,
and that perfection, we may argue, that he has made other provision for us;
and that there is a Life besides this mortal miserable condition.

Otherwise, with how much reason might we expostulate as Job did, Job 3. 20.
Why was light given unto man? why was the Sun suffered to see a thing so
miserable? why did we not go from the darkness of the Womb to that of the
Grave; and cease to be, as soon as we had a Being? Is our Maker pleased with our
sighs; or is there any Music or sweetness to Him in our groans and tears?
Every thing else that he has made, is perfect in its kind, and enjoyes an
happiness suitable to its nature: And must ours be the single excepted case, and
man be the only instance of wretchedness and misery?

These suppositions are not consistent with the perfections of the Divine
nature, and yet would be sad realities if this Life were all; and there were
nothing else to succeed it.

2. I prove there is another Life, from the unequal distribution of good and
evil in this. The passages of the present world are a very Chaos; there must be
a world of light and order. All things here come alike unto all, Eccles. 9. 2.
Yea, there is very often a worse event of things to the righteous, than to the
wicked. Treasons and Villainies are crowned with successful issues: Triumphs and
Victories attend the Ensigns of Tyrants and Usurpers; the Just is made a prey
to the Sons of Violence; and persecuted in his friends and name, even beyond
the Grave; while the injurious are Courted by smiling successes, and born to
the Stars by flatteries and applauses. They lay down their heads upon peaceful
pillows, and take farewell of the world in solemn and pompous obsequies: When
the persecuted Virtue swims in a Sea of blood to the Tomb, without other
ceremony, than the tears and groans of a ruined Family: there is no answer here
to the cries of the Fatherless and the Widow; the Oppressed go down complaining
into darkness; and providence seems as silent as the Grave. Wickedness has
Virtue's Livery and reward, and the Patrimony of Innocence is beggary and
unhappiness. Providence seems now by glorious successes to countenance the
Alchoran, and the Tyrant Ottoman spreads his victorious Arms, and is fleshed in
Triumphs. The race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong, nor bread
to men of understanding, Eccl. 9. 11. But the things of Earth seem to be
distributed by a kind of blind Lottery, and to justify the conclusion of the
Atheist, that the moral world (as he supposes of the natural) is ruled by a
fortuitous range of undesign'd events.

Thus things are in the present world; and yet Almighty Wisdom and Justice
governs and presides over it. And thence we may conclude, that all things shall
at last be cleared, and ordered according to the Rules of exactest Justice and
Decorum: And since it is not done in this life, we with much reason expect and
believe another.

We see all things in the world of Nature, are carried on in a beautiful well
disposed order: There is harmony and elegance in the motion of the Sun and
Stars; and inferior creatures are managed by apparent wisdom and contrivance:
the Universe is a great beauty, made up of regular variety; there is no
monstrousness or unbecoming disharmony in nature.

Now can we think, that the divine wisdom would be so curious in ordering the
world of things below us; and give up his nobler workmanship to eternal
confusions and disorders?

No, certainly, He that gives the hungry Beasts their meat in due season, and
sends his showers at the appointed time, to refresh the dry and parched ground;
He that waters the Spring with his seasonable dews, and ripens the Fruit with
his benign beams; He that teaches the Rivers when they shall overflow; and
has made the swelling Ocean know its bounds and limits: will doubtless take
care that Virtue shall at last be happy; and that the wicked shall receive the
due reward of their impieties. The present disorders are but preparations for
that state of order, and like the rude dashes and rudiments of a Picture.

Thus of the arguments I proposed from the First General, the Phenomenon or
Observables of the World.

I descend to the SECOND, the Frame and Constitution of our own natures. And
under this, shall consider our Reasons, Passions, Appetites, and Instincts:
from each of which I shall infer something for the proof of a future Being.

I begin I. with our Faculty of Reason. This is a noble power, and exercised
not only about the matters of the body, but upon the highest and noblest
objects; in a way that is raised, and spiritual, and shows a capacity of far
greater heights and improvements: Which exercises, and perfections prove, that
it is designed for more than this poor mortal condition. For if this be all the
Life of man, his end and happiness would then be only to provide for the body,
and the gratification of its Senses: And if we were made for no more than this,
our Reasons are a superfluous provision in nature: For what need of the Notions
of a God, Universals, and Abstracted Theories; in order to the filling of our
bellies, and the pleasing of our Senses? What need of a power of drawing one
thing from another in a chain of long dependances; if we had nothing to do but
to eat, and drink, and laugh, and die? The eye cannot be entertained upon
abstracted notions; nor the palate feasted upon Geometrick subtilties; there is
no Music to the ear in any demonstration of Euclid, nor any recreation to the
Senses in spiritual contemplations.

Yea high and intense exercise of our reasons is so far from being serviceable
in such low offices and pleasures, that it is prejudicial to them; for it spends
the Spirits, mortifies the body, and flats the pleasure of the Senses: So that
if this were our only state, and the advantages of the body our end and
happiness, our reasons then are not only needless but hurtful; especially when
they are employed upon the highest and noblest objects.

Besides, It Is not agreeing with the divine wisdom, as it is discovered in the
whole Analogy of things, to make such noble faculties for so low and mean
services: All things have their proportion in the economy of God, and are in
number, weight and measure: every thing is suited to its design and end: And
hence we may conclude that our Reasons were intended for more than the little
business of this inferior life, and that there is another in which it shall be
becomingly employed, and gloriously improved.

II. Our Passions in the present temper of them, afford us evidence of another
Life and Being. As to which, we may consider them, (1) in their natural
disorders; and (2.) in the regulation of them by reason and virtue.

1. Let us reflect a little upon their present disorders. In our first and
growing years we are unavoidably led by Sense and bodily affections: and before
Reason comes to any considerable degree of exercise, our passions are commonly
too strong to be governed by it. Yea, they maintain war against the Laws of the
mind, and lead us into captivity to the Law of sin and death, Romans 7. They
fight against reason and one another, and make a tempestuous troubled Sea
within us, Isa. 27. 20. so that we are driven by them upon Rocks and
quicksands, and our peace and happiness is made a prey to the waves, Isa. 48.
22. All the evils of the world bear testimony to this Reign of passion: and the
History of all ages is full of the sad issues of violent affections.

Which things do plainly prove, that this is not the only, or the proper Life
of man. For certainly Reason was intended to be the ruling principle in
reasonable creatures, and this Reign of passion is an usurpation in our
natures, that must not last always. Passion is well defined by Zeno to be an
unnatural, over-boiling motion: and it is not credible, that reasonable
creatures should during their whole being, continue under violent hurries, and
brutish force. It Is not to be supposed that our light shall always be darkened
in an Eclipse, and muffled up in clouds; the Moon and Stars may rule the night,
but if there be a Sun there must be a day, in which it shall govern. Reason
will have its time of Rule; as Sense and Passion have had theirs; and that must
be in another world, for there is but little of it in this. I say little of it,
but some there is* and the Empire of Conscience is begun in the virtuous. This
is the other thing in the temper of our Passions to be considered, viz.

2. The Regulation of them by virtue and Reason. This is the beginning of a new
Life; a Life proper for men; which in the best is weak and defective here; and
arrives not to any very considerable height of perfection; hence also we may
conclude that there is another Life, in which those divine inchoations shall be
completed. For as from the obscure discoveries of Sense, in an Infant in the
Womb, we may argue there is another state, wherein the sensitive faculties that
have begun to show themselves, shall act with more advantage and perfection; In
like manner those Essays of the soul toward a better Life in the virtuous, is
an Argument that indeed there is one; and that this present state is but the
Womb of the future.

These are the first draughts of the divine nature, and Image; and God will not
suffer it to die in imperfect rudiments. The blushes of the morning are an
earnest of an ensuing day. The Chaldee Oracles call these the Tokens and
Symbols that God has inserted in the Soul; they are the first fruits, and no
doubt the harvest will follow. The tendencies of lower nature do not use to be
altogether in vain; much less shall the beginnings of the divine Life, and the
resemblances of the immortal Deity. All life is immortal, says Plato, and
certainly the seed of this noble and spiritual one shall not perish. God will
not leave his Image in the grave, nor suffer this spark of him to see
corruption.

The sum is, The Regulation and Government of Passion, is a new Life begun;
the (...), the true, proper rational Life (as Plotinus calls it) but in this
world it is very incomplete and defective; and therefore there is another, in
which it shall grow up to the fullness of its stature and perfection.

I come in order to argue the same, III. From our Desires and Appetites in two
instances, viz. (1.) Their dissatisfactions with the things of the present
World; and (2) some Tendencies of them toward another.

1. I begin with the unsatisfiedness of them. Our desires are too wide for our
enjoyments; and there is a thirst in the soul that is unsatiable. When we have
one thing we want another, and our appetites are always craving. There is not
bread for the hungry soul, nor any fitting entertainment on this side the Sun:
We flatter our selves with fancied satisfactions at distance, but when we come
near we find not the happiness and content we expected. And as Children think
that at such a Hill they should touch the Skies: so we fancy that in
compassing such, or such designs we should be happy; but when that is done, we
see as much beyond us, and learn that in appetities there is no Term or Horizon.

Now these dissatisfactions with the things of the present world (which are no
sullen or Cynick humors, but the complaint of all mankind (afford an Argument
of much probability, that we were not made for this state only; nor chiefly for
it. For all Faculties are satisfied with the due measures of their proper
objects; and every thing rests in its own Element: And therefore the
restlesness and inquietudes of men in the present Life are an Argument that we
are not yet where we should be, but that we were designed to live again in
another: Which reason we may improve by this further observation: namely, that
the better any man is, the less he is pleased with these perishing enjoyments.
The noise of Fame, the pleasures of Sense, and the pageantry of worldly
greatness, are to Him like the Rattles and Cherrystones of his Childhood; He
has lost his taste and relish of such entertainments. And now, if all the
delights and comforts we are to expect, were of this sort, the best men are in
the worst condition, in losing all their share of their proper pleasure and
felicity; and living without taste among so many relishing enjoyments.

2. The Bent of the desires of Good men toward another world, is a probable
inducement to believe, There is another. Indeed the greatest part of mankind is
so miserably sunk into earth and sense, that they feel no such tendencies or
propensions, but rather averseness to all things that do not gratify the body,
and serve its interests: But yet there are those who have strong inclinations
toward another Life; and the more virtuous any man is, the earnester will his
desires be after the state of Immortality: which importunities and cravings of
their souls, give us some ground to think, that there is another world, and
objects in it suited to their desires: Otherwise those appetites would be in
vain, and the best would be most miserable, while they quitted other
satisfactions, and grasped after air and delusion,

I come now to the last head of proof.

IV. Our Instincts; or some natural propensions of universal mankind. The
instances I shall name are two, (1.) The general belief and acknowledgement of
another Life. (2.) The common desire of Memory after death.

1. For the first, the Doctrine of a Life to Come, has not been the opinion
only of concerned Priests, or designing Politicians; of melancholy
Superstitionists, or distracted Enthusiasts. It has not been the conceit of a
single Age, nor confined within the limits of one Country or Region, but is as
general as the Light, and spread as far as the utmost bounds of the reasonable
nature. For those that are strangers to one another Laws and Customs, and as
different in their natures as they are distant in their Climes; yet all alike
concur in the expectation, and belief of a future Being. The cold Russian, and
scorched Moor; the barbarous American, and spruce Grecian; the soft Chinese,
and the rough Tartar, though vastly different in all other things, yet they
agree in this, That there is another world, and that we are immortal. And it is
the observation of Pliny, that those barbarous people that have neither
Clothes to cover their nakedness, nor Laws for a common security; that live by
the Rules of ferity and lust, and differ from the Beasts, seemingly, in little
else but external shape; that have neither Towns nor Houses, and but just
reason enough to provide for the necessities of nature; yet these live in
expectation and belief of a Life after this; And the latter improvements of
Navigation, and remote discoveries, confirm the same in the farthest darkest
parts of the habitable Earth.

Now this general effect must have some general cause, which cannot be any
general deception; For it is not morally possible, that those who are at so
vast a distance in place, and nature, and all other circumstances, should agree
in a common deceit, and jump in the same imposture. It must arise then either
from some universal explicit Revelation, or an universal Instinct, or voice of
nature. If the former be granted, it is full proof of the assertion: or if that
be not, it is the other, which seems most probable, viz. that God has inserted
it into our reasonable natures; or by his providence has conveyed it into the
minds of all men, which is Tantamont unto it. And so we are carried to this
belief, as the Lamb is to the Dugg: or other creatures to the food or work of
their particular natures.

On this account Aristotle sets it down for a Rule, (...), and Cicero says the
same, Quod omnibus videtur, est. That which seems to all, is. For what ever is
so universal, is from God, who cannot deceive, or be mistaken.

2. The desire of Memory after death is an Instinct in mankind: and whether the
former be so properly, or not, this is certainly such: All way have been taken
to perpetuate men's Names and Memories; Children and great Houses, and noble
Deeds, and Books, and Monuments; yea, and as if Earth wanted things
sufficiently lasting to satisfy this appetite of Immortality; men have placed
themselves in the regions of incorruption, and have called the Stars by their
own names.

Now this universal thirst after such an imaginary Immortality is an inducement
to believe, there is a real one: Since did we cease to be, as soon as we die and
disappear to this world, such an appetite would be unreasonable and ridiculous:
For why should we desire a precarious being in a name and memory, if our true
selves were so shortly to be nothing? Of what concernment is it to us to be
remembered, if in a few days all things should be forgotten for ever: and we
were to go into an eternal silence and oblivion? What would a Stone be the
better for being accounted one of the Ancient Pillars of Seth? or a piece of
wood in being esteemed a Sacred Relic of the Cross? The sum is, Mankind
has an appetite of posthumous Memory, which would be senseless, and to no
purpose if there be no Life but this: Now God implants no Instincts in his
creatures that are futilous and in vain; and therefore hence also we may
conclude, that there is a Future Being.

I have now done with the Arguments on which I intended to insist: After all, I
cannot say that each of them is an absolute demonstration; or that the evidence
of every one is such as is impossible to be avoided: there are few proofs of
that nature: But this I do, that all of them together will, I think, make a
cord hardly to be broken: And these considerations in conjunction may amount to
a moral demonstration, and have force enough to obtain assent from those that
are not stupid or unreasonable.

But yet the strongest proofs are those from the Scripture, and all the
Arguments that demonstrate the Truth of Christianity, prove also the certainly
of a Life after this. For one of the great designs of the Holy Jesus, was to
bring Immortality to light, and (as I noted before) he gave visible evidence of
a future existence by his own Resurrection. So that those that could not reason
and dispute, and see truth at distance in principles, might however be
convinced by a Demonstration to the Sense; and those that could not be fully
assured by the reasonings of Philosophers, which many of them were very deep,
and many uncertain, and many unsound and false, might yet be persuaded by the
miracles which were wrought by Christ and his Apostles to confirm those
Doctrines, which they taught, of rewards and punishments in another Life; And
that there are such, every thing in the whole Gospel either supposes or proves.

These I say, are the clearest and best evidence, but they are such as are
obvious to every understanding, and cannot receive more light than what they
have at first fight in themselves: I therefore omit that sort of proof, as not
needed by those that embrace the Scripture; and for others that believe it not,
the Reasons taken thence will be of no force with such men.

I have also designedly omitted the Arguments that arise from the nature of the
Soul, Philosophically considered, for the reason mentioned in the beginning,
viz. because they are speculative and nice; and so not proper for such
discourses as this; nor are they usually of much force upon the mind.

I Come II. to show the Causes and Occasions of men's not believing a future
state. The chief are such as these,

1. The Wickedness and Debauchery of the Unbelievers: the horrid sins of their
present lives make them afraid of another. They are resolved on the course of
vanity and folly while they live, and would have all to end here. They will
crown themselves with Rosebuds, and leave tokens of their mirth in every place;
they will let no Flower of the Spring pass by them, nor lose any part of
voluptuousness: and this they would have to be their whole portion, and their
only lot to be this. Away then ye melancholic dreams, and troublesome fancies
of another world! ye are an offense unto us, and savor not the things that are
of jollity and good humor: ye damp our joys, and put bitterness into the
sweetest draught of pleasure: Therefore away to Cloisters and Cells; and dwell
there among the superstitious and the ignorant; but leave us the liberty of our
thoughts, and the satisfaction of our enjoyments. This is the reasoning, if not
the language of the Sadducee. He is not willing that there should be another
Life, and therefore persuades himself that there is not any: He would not meet
himself again, nor have such a restraint upon his appetites, as the dread of an
after-reckoning. The fool has said in his heart, there is no God, Psalm. 14. 1.
it follows, They are become abominable.

Vice is at the root of Atheism and unbelief: Sensuality drowns all the noble
conceptions of the Soul, and fills it with foul and bestial imaginations. It
ties men's thoughts down to present and sensible things, and hinders their
prospect into the Regions of Immortality. It makes them like to the objects of
their pleasures, and renders them unable to resent future and spiritual
satisfactions; they can form no Idea of any thing agreeable to them in the
other world: all things there are uneasy and unrelishing at the best; and the
worst is not to be endured. So that they bend their force to erase all
impressions of so ungrateful a Doctrine; in which, at last, through the power
of their endeavors, and the cooperation of Satan, they effectually prevail;
and cast off all belief and expectation of any future Being. Another cause of
which is,

2. Vainglory, and a proud affectation to be something extraordinary. Vain men
would be Wits, and soar above the height of other mortals: Their Eagle-sight is
sharp and piercing, and they espy the deceits and impostures, that the rest of
mankind are too dull to descry! They despise the common Doctrines, and proudly
pity, or laugh at the easiness of others, who suffer themselves to be swayed by
them; and by how much the more sacred the truths are which they reject, by so
much greater, they reckon, is the honor of their own sagacity, in finding out
the deceit, by which so many have been abused and misled.

These are Wits in an instant; at the top, before they have taken the first
step; and perfect in knowledge as soon, and some of them before they have
begun. If their accomplishments be measured by their confidence and their
scorn, they are the greatest Wits among men; but if by their judgment and real
knowledge, they (of any) have not the least pretense to that title. For though
they may gain the glory among their easy companions, by opposing the great
acknowledgements of Religion, and particularly this; yet they will never by
such ways obtain it from those who are really that, which they affect to be
thought. It is the known observation of one who held a high place among the
Wits of his Age, That a little Philosophy and knowledge inclines men to be
Infidels and Atheists, but the greater measures set the mind right in Religion,
and secure it from the danger of those impieties: So that who takes this way to
be accounted a Wit, makes himself a Fool to the wise; without gaining the
reputation of being wise among other Fools besides those of his own sort. Or if
he could attain the height of that ambition, 'twould prove a very dear credit,
that is purchased upon such terms, as are the ruin of his soul, the
destruction of his best hopes, and the degrading of his noble nature.

3. Another main occasion of Infidelity in this Article, is Enthusiasm, or the
entertainment of Principles of Faith upon the credit of phancies: Dangerous is
the case of Religion, when Reason is thrown by, and detested; and the whole
stress laid upon warm imaginations. These indeed will hold up the mind for a
while, in great confidence of another world, and fill it with a thousand
extravagant images and chimaera's about it, which will be all taken for clear
light and solemn certainties, while the wind sits right: But then alas! anon
the scene alters, and a change in the habit of the body disposes the man to
other thoughts; and so all is flung away as delusion; and the Enthusiast is
strongly carried down by the over-bearing of his melancholy, into the doleful
conceit of his mortality, and the belief that he shall die like the Beasts that
perish. And that that humor disposes men naturally to such apprehensions, we
may see in Job, who spoke in the trouble of his spirit, and in the bitterness
of his mind, he said, There is hope of a Tree if it be cut down, that it will
sprout, and the branches thereof will not cease -- But man is sick, and dies,
and man perishes, and where is he? Job 14. He seems to speak in this and other
passages like an Epicurean, or a Sadducee: and the question looks comfortless
and discouraging, ver. 14. If a man die, shall be live again? The good man was
under the disorder of a great and just sadness, and that represented all things
as dark and dismal to his wounded fancy, and seemed sometimes to deprive him
of the only remaining comfort, the hope of a better condition in another world.
The same effects has melancholy still upon many Euthusiastick tempers, on some
of which it prevails so far, as to fix those impressions on their minds, which
never are worn off. And though Job recovered quickly by the exercise of his
Faculties, and the reason that God had given him, and expresses his
expectation of a Future Life, immediately after the passage of greatest doubt (
All the days of my appointed time will I wait till my change come) Yet those
whose principles are fastened only by their phancies, and the impulse of present
belief, are in great danger to be lost in such temptations.

Thus are some men disposed to Infidelity by their own Enthusiasms, and the
same too frequently give occasion to others to laugh at the belief of a future
Being, by representing that state in various shapes, and under very odd
disguises.

I Am next to show,

III. What the denial of a future Life infers, in the reasoning and consequence
of it.

1. It follows hence, that man is but a better beast; and those Wits speak
agreeably to this principle, that (whether in earnest or in jest) Satyrize
humane nature, and represent us only as somewhat a more cunning Herd of Cattle.
For if this Life be all, we have the same end and happiness with the bruits;
and they are happier of the two, in that they have lesser cares, and fewer
disappointments than we. Our Reason and Religion, upon which we so much value
our selves, according to this doctrine, are but chains of imaginations; and
those but refined sense: and so the soul and principle of action, is no other
in us, than it is in them; and we differ but little more than one sort of
Beasts does from another; namely, than the more stupid does from those that are
more sprightly and sagacious. And then farewell the Prerogatives and dignity of
humane nature. Man is but a Beast of prey, and his use of and dominion over the
other creatures, is but a proud usurpation over his equals. So that this
opinion degrades our natures, and affronts the whole race of mankind together.
And,

2. In the direct tendency of it, it destroys humane Societies; For those
cannot subsist without Laws; nor Laws without some conscience of good and evil,
nor would this signify to any great purpose, without the belief of another
world. Take away this, and every thing will be good that is profitable, and
honest that conduces to a man's designs. That would be mine that I could get by
force; and I had no right to any thing longer than I had strength to defend it:
and thus the world would be ipso facto in a state of war, and fall into endless
confusions and disorders. So that the whole Earth would quickly be an Hell
intolerable; every man would be a Devil to another, yea and every man to
himself.

3. It suppresseth men's private happiness and felicity; and even the Rioters of
the world have stings and torments from it. If a man live in Sensuality and
fullness of pleasure, what a cutting thought is it to consider, that in a little
time he must bid adieu to this, and to all felicity for ever? And if his life
be in trouble and discomfort; how terrible is it to reflect, that he must go
from being miserable to be nothing? How can those think of parting with their
possessions and enjoyments, that have nothing else to expect? or, how can they
bear up under the burdens and vexations of this state, that cannot relieve
themselves by the hopes of a better? With what sad pangs of sorrow should we
lay our Friends into the Grave; if we had cause to be assured that they were
lost eternally? and how could we reflect upon our own mortality, if we were to
look for no farther Being? The pleasures of the present Life are gone in a
moment, and leave nothing but dregs and bitterness behind them; and if there be
no further delights besides these mean and fading satisfactions, it is not worth
the while to live; but we had better to have been nothing for ever.

The sum is, The Sadducee vilifies Mankind, destroys the peace of Societies,
and the happiness of every private person: and so professes himself the common
enemy of men, and a Renegado to humane nature.

IT will not be needful for me to say much in Applying this Discourse; Almost
every Sermon we hear, is an Application of it: for here is the matter and
ground of our hopes, and hence are taken the great enforcements of our duty.

I presume there are few, or none, in this place, but who are ready to profess
their belief of a Future Life, and (as I premised) I have not insisted on the
proof, to persuade You of this Article; but to show, that the confidence is
groundless, which affirms, There is no reason for the great Doctrines of
Religion; and to contribute somewhat toward the settlement of the weak,
against such temptations.

Now if we believe this great Truth, as we say; Let us do it to purpose; and
not content our selves with a cold and customary assent, but endeavor to raise
our Faith to such an height, that it may have an effectual influence upon our
lives. The general belief that education has infused, is but a dead image in
the soul that produces nothing: Let us endeavor by fervent Prayer, and
frequent Meditation to invigorate and excite ours to that degree; that it may
be a living representation of eternal things; that our Faith may be the
certainty and presence of the invisible world. The substance of things hoped
for, the evidence of things not seen, Heb. 11. That we may have such an
apprehension of it, as if the prospect were open, and our eyes beheld it; that
we may fix our thoughts there, and fill up our souls with the consideration of
that world.

Such a Faith as this, ought to be our aim; and if we did so believe the other
world; what excellent, what heroical, what happy persons should we be in this?
Such a Faith would secure us from the flatteries and temptations of this
sensual life; and excite us to more earnest longings, and more vigorous
endeavors after the happiness of a better: It would enable us to despise this
vain world in comparison; and to bear all the crosses of it, with magnanimity
and steadiness of mind: It would quiet our solicitudes, and answer the
objections against providence, and the present unequal distribution of good and
evil. It would make the most difficult services of Religion easy and pleasant
to us; and fill our lives with sweet hope, and delights infinitely more
agreeable than the most relishing sensual joys: It would afford us
satisfaction, amid our disappointments; and rest amid our anxieties and cares:
It would raise our designs and thoughts to things generous and noble, and make
us live like the Inhabitants of an Heavenly Country.

Such blessed effects as these follow this Faith here; and unmeasurably,
unspeakably greater in the other world; the vision of God, and full enjoyment
of His love; the perfection of our natures, and the compleatment of our
happiness; in the arms of our Redeemer, and amidst the triumphant Songs of
Angels and Saints; in the exercise of holy love, admiration and praise: Things
too great to be expressed, or to be imagined, For eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man to conceive, what God has
reserved for those that love him: To Him be all Glory, and humble Adoration
henceforth and for ever.

SERMON VII. THE Serious Consideration OF THE Future Judgment.

The Second Edition.

SERMON VII.
ACTS XVII. 31. -- Because he has appointed a day, in which he will judge the
World in Righteousness, by the man whom he has ordained --
ALthough it might be well expected that the Laws of God should abundantly
prevail by virtue of His Authority, and their own native reason and goodness;
Yet such is the stupidity and perverseness of men, that these alone have not
(usually) any considerable effect upon us: And therefore God who earnestly
desires our Reformation, and our happiness, has superadded the greatest
Sanctions to enforce His Laws, glorious rewards on the one hand, and most
terrible Penalties on the other, and these to be distributed in a most solemn
manner, represented in such circumstances as are most apt to work upon our
Hopes and Fears: For -- He has appointed a day. --

Which words are part of St. Paul's Speech to the Athenians upon the occasion
of their superstitions and Idolatries: These in the time of Gentile ignorance
God winked at, verse. 30. (...) He took no notice of those sins (in comparison)
He was not so much offended and displeased, but considered the general
ignorance, and temptations, and made abatements for them. As our Savior said
with reference to the Jews, Joh. 15. 22. If I had not come and spoken to them,
they had not had sin; Their sin had not been so great, or so inexcusable; nor
would it have been charged upon them with such severity of condemnation. But
now that the Light has shined in darkness, the true Light that enlightens
every one that comes into the world; Now since the Son of God is made
manifest, to destroy the works of the Devil, and to turn men from those
superstitious and idolatrous vanities to the right worship of God in Spirit and
in Truth: The plea of ignorance will no longer excuse or extenuate, but God
commands all men every where to Repent, which is enforced with the most
powerful consideration of the Text, -- He has appointed a day --

In which words we have these things, (1.) The Declaration of a future
Judgment, Because he has appointed a day, in which he will judge --

(2.) The universality of the subject to be Judged, the World.

(3.) The Person that is to be the judge; -- The man whom He has ordained.

(4.) The rule and manner of Judgment, He will Judge the World in
Righteousness.

I Begin in order with the Decree of a future Judgment. Of this the Heathens
had some obscure notions, as appears among other things, by the stories of
their famed Judges, that were to call men to account in the other world. But
these were but glimmering apprehensions: It Is the Gospel has brought to light
the great Doctrine of a coming Judgment, in the solemnity and circumstances of
it.

This has declared, That there is to be a Judgment Day, Matthew. 10. 15. Jude
6. That Christ Jesus is to be the Judge of the quick and the dead, Acts 10. 42.
That he shall be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire,
2 These. 1. 8. That he shall come with ten thousand of his Saints, Jude 14. That
he shall judge the secrets of men according to the Gospel, Romans 2. 16. That the
Dead shall be all raised by a General summons, 1 Cor. 15. 52. and all shall be
judged according to their works, Rev. 20. 13. The just to eternal life, and the
wicked to everlasting punishment, Matthew. 25. 46.

So that the belief of a Judgment Day, is no panick fear or melancholy dream:
It Is no trick of Politicians, or Mormo of Priests to fright fools and keep the
world in awe, but a Truth as certain and undoubted as the Oracles of Truth can
make it: It Is plainly declared in the most infallible Records; yea, it is
engraven on the minds of universal mankind, who all expect a call to a future
Judgment.

There is therefore no need of further proof of so clear and so acknowledged an
Article; But it may be worth our while to consider what may be the Reasons of
this appointment of a Judgment Day. And the same will serve as Arguments to
confirm and enforce our Faith in it.

(1.) Then, It Is reasonable and fit there should be a General Judgment, that
Religion may be vindicated and cleared. The Gospel was of old to the Jews a
stumbling block, and to the Greeks, foolishness, 1 Cor. 1. 23. and we know, by
sad experience, how in latter days, Religion is exposed and scorned. It is made
ridiculous by some, and laughed at by others; and which do it the greater
mischief, Those that put it into contemptible clothing; or those that pour
direct contempt upon it, is not our present business to conjecture. This is
certain, that there is nothing has been pretended in so many vile actions and
designs; Nothing in which mankind have been, in any comparison, so out of their
wits, as in what they have abusively called by this Sacred Name. Religion! we
have seen it died with humane blood, and swollen with spoil and rapine: written
on the foreheads of tyrannies and usurpations, and pleaded as the CAUSE, the
CAUSE of prosperous Villainies. Divided into Atoms of Sects, and disputed into
Air of opinions: Entitled to all the vanities of sick imagination, and claimed
by all the follies of zealous ignorance.

And is it not reasonable there should be a time, wherein this over-cast, this
clouded light should brighten like the Sun at noon; and dispel those spots and
that scumm, which superstition, ignorance and hypocrisy have fastened upon its
glorious Face? Is it not fit that the Gospel should at length appear to have
been the power of God, and no creature of melancholy or design? Ought it not to
be at last confessed and known, that Religion was a great Reality, and no
cunningly devised Fable? No dream of imagination, or interest of any lust; but
as simple as Innocence, and as clear as the virgin light? And it will be so in
the coming day, when the light of the other World has shone in upon the
darkness of this.

In sum, It Is just to expect that Religion will be gloriously celebrated and
cleared, and reasonable to believe it will be done by the solemnity of a
Judgment day.

(2.) A Future Judgment is ordained, That Providence may be unridled and
absolved. The Judgments of God are a great Deep, Psalm. 36. 6. and His ways
past finding out, Romans 11. 33. The affairs of Providence are full of Mystery
and Meanders, as dark as the midnights of December, and as crooked as the paths
of the Desert. All the Lines of our spinning, all our observations and
reasonings are too short to lead us to and fro the Labyrinth. The world is
governed by secret methods that are beyond our most improved knowledge. How are
we puzzled when we undertake to gloss on Providence, and presume to give the
reasons of its most ordinary managements! The wicked lift up their heads
against Heaven and prosper; and the just bow the knee; lifting up their hands
unto it, and are undone: Folly succeeds, and is applauded, and Wisdom is
disappointed and contemned; Clouds and thick darkness encompass the devout, and
a warm Sun shines upon him that sacrifices not ( Eccl. 7. 15.) And when vice
thrives, and folly triumphs, Providence is pleaded to credit ignorance and
impiety, and the success of the actions vouches for the goodness of the Cause.
God is thought to have owned what, for unknown reasons, he has permitted, and
to have acted that, which in judgment he has suffered. On the other hand, the
best Designs are thought wicked when they prove unprosperous, and the whitest
Innocence marked with black characters, when the cloud is upon it. Thus Shimei
accused David for a man of blood, because of the evils of his House, 2 Samuel 16.
7. And Job was concluded as great an instance of sin, as he was of misery, Job
4. The Barbarians inferred from the Viper, that St. Paul was a Murderer, Acts
28. 3, 4. And the unbelieving world from the Cross, that the Holy Jesus was a
Malefactor.

Thus do men shoot one another out of this crooked bow, and judge the goodness
and badness of things by successes, not by Rules; and thereby traduce and abuse
Providence by making it speak the language of their affections, and their
Interests, and serve the ends of malice, and Self-love.

Which things being so in the present world, it is fit that, at last,
Providence should be disintangled and absolved, that all the world may see the
living creatures in the Wheels, Ezekiel. 1. 20. and the eye that is in the
Scepter, as the Egyptian Hieroglyphics represented Providence. That we may at
length understand, that its ways are equal, Ezekiel. 18. 25. and that all the
seeming inequalities prove the shortness of our Reasonings, not the unevenness
of its managements; that its strangest, and least accountable issues were the
Results of Counsel, and governed by an infinitely wise mind that shoots it self
through all things. That we may understand the difference between good and
prosperous; and the reason of the distance between virtue and success. Why the
fire out of the Bramble is permitted to devour the Cedar; and the desert of the
wicked is so often the lot of the just.

These expectations are reasonable, and in a manner necessary; that mankind may
be convinced the events below were not Lotteries, but (...) full of Providence;
and that Providence acted by an infinite Wisdom, Justice, and Goodness. That
wickedness shall, at last, reap the misery it has sown, and dwell in the
flames it has kindled: And afflicted Virtue lift up its head to receive the
Crown and the Glories that are the rewards of its patience: and appear to have
shot it self up in another world, when it was deprest in this. And so all shall
know that there was a God that judged in the Earth, Psalm. 58. 11.

And this is another reasonable account of the appointment of a Future
Judgment.

(3.) We may suppose it to be ordained for this also, That secret wickedness
may be disclosed, and shamed. The Heart of man is as deep waters, has a smooth
surface, but is full of rocks and quicksands at the bottom. The world is a
Theater, and the greatest part of men are but Actors: For as They cloathe
themselves with Gold and Purple, and put on great names, and are fine things
upon the Stage, when behind the Curtain and in their retiremen^s, they are but
common men, and like their ordinary Spectators: Thus we dress our selves for
public converses, set our looks, and gild our language, and put on the Livery
of Wisdom and Saintship, and appear what we would be thought, not what we are:
But in our privacies, and more familiar conversations, in the loose and
unconstrained order of our words, and our actions, we are quite another thing;
we are foolish and frivolous, froward and impatient, sordid and absurd: And in
the secret Chambers of our souls we are worse. The fairest face would affright
us, if the skin were taken off it, and show us nothing but ghastliness and
deformity: And it would amaze us to see the In sides of those, whose outward
appearance is fair and plausible. We now seek coverings for our shame, and hide
our follies and imperfections under handsome names, devout shows, and fair
pretensions; or excuse them by Necessity, Temptation, the Devil, or Providence.
And though we see much sin and vileness as soon as we open our eyes, and look
out of doors: Yet there is another and a worse world of wickedness, shut up
from our sight, and hid in its own darkness; in close designs and private
actions; in the corners of the heart, and recesses of thoughts: These make up a
dark Region covered with fear and shame, and the shadows of death; open only to
Him to whom all things are so, and midnight is as bright as noon, ( Psalm. 139.
12.) And he will provide that so it shall be to all the world; that all sin may
be as odious, as it is ugly; and unobserved impiety may not still lie hid in
the secrecy and silence it has sought: But that its whispers may be
proclaimed by a voice more loud than Thunder; and its concealed deformities be
brought into the open day: That those hidden iniquities which hitherto have
escaped, may be whipped with the scorpions of guilt and shame; and the divine
purity and patience may appear in their Glory and proper luster.

And for this Reason also God has appointed a Day wherein He will Judge the
secrets of men: That sin may not be the more secure, for being close; But that
it may be feared and shunned in Grots, as well as in most public places.

And I may add, That those actions of virtue that no eye sees, but that which
sees all things, and those unknown tendencies and anhelations of divine souls
after the adorable object of their Love, may be solemnly celebrated and
rewarded. Again,

(4.) Such a Day is fit and is appointed, that all rights and claims may be
determined. The great Controversies are, which, and where is the True Church
and Religion. And if we attend to the Zeal, and the confidence, the loud talk,
and bold claims of each of the pretenders, All are in the truth, and All
mistaken: Every Sect is in the right, if it may be judged by the fondness of
its own assurance; and every one is out, by the sentence of all the rest:
Here Is Religion, says one; Nay, but it is here, says the next; and a third
gives the Lie to them both; And then they scuffle and contend till they have
talked themselves out of sense, out of charity, and out of breath: And when
they would say on, but know not what; when their passions are raised, but their
Reasons lost; They fall to pelt each other with hard names; They squabble, and
strive, and damn one another by turns; They gather parties to help up the Cry,
and fill all places with the noise of their quarrels, and triumph and crow
after a conquest in Imagination: And after all this bustle, and all this ado,
They sit down where they begun; Nothing is gained on either side, but an
addition of malice and bitter zeal, more rancour, and more damning sentences,
while they are, for the most part, as far from Truth as from agreement.

This is the state of the contending world, nor can we expect it should be
otherwise, while Ignorance and Malice, Interest and Passion inspire the
quarrels. Or, if Controversies should be ended, the Vote would, doubtless, be
cast on the side of Folly and Falsehood, for their adherents are most numerous,
and most loud; while the friends of Truth and Reason are meek and modest,
thinly scattered among the Herd, and still liable to be overborn, and
out-nois'd by the Tumult.

But the coming Day will set all right, and effectually resolve Pilate's
Question, What is Truth? And then no doubt, The meek and the peaceable, the
charitable and the just, who did not dispute, but live; who were not swollen with
rage and notions, but big of Charity, and universal kindness for mankind: Then
shall These be declared the rightful Heirs of the Kingdom, when the presumed
Sons of it, who hugged themselves, as the only favorites of Heaven, and warmed
their hands by their own fantastic Fires, who flew aloft on the wings of
Imagination, and proudly looked down upon the modest and humble Believer; who
were full of mystery and rapture, scorn and talk, but void of justice, modesty
and love: These, we have reason to think, shall then be cast out, and receive
their portion with the Pharisee, to the shame and disappointment of their
confidence, and their hopes.

In this Day shall the Errors, and the follies that were recommended to the
deceived embraces of the Sons of men, by frauds, and Art, paint, and
meretricious bravery, be exposed in their naked Deformities to the sight and
contempt of all the world: And that Truth, and those Virtues that were
persecuted into Corners, and covered with dust and shame; torn piecemeal by
wrath and ignorance, and scattered up and down in the Tents of Error, shall
then be brought into the Light, and cleansed from all debasing mixtures, and
represented in their native loveliness and beauty, that they may receive the
praises and acclamations of their ancient friends, and acquaintance; Yea, and
the acknowledgements of their now blushing and confounded enemies.

Upon the whole we see, That the Faith of a Future Judgment is not misbecoming
the severest Sons of Reason and Philosophy, but is infinitely agreeable to the
faculties of men, and the Analogy of things.

I Come now to the SECOND main thing in the Text,

II. The Universality of the Subject to be judged, the World, so it is here;
And the Scripture elsewhere expresses it in very general terms: The secrets of
men, Romans 2. 16. Every man, Rev. 20. 13. The Dead, small and great, Rev. 20.
12. The quick and the dead, 1 Pet. 4. 5.

Now I shall consider the Universality of the Subject of Judgment in two great
solemnities of it: viz. The General Summons, and the General Resurrection that
follows: both mentioned together, 1 Cor. 15. 52. The trumpet shall sound, and
the Dead shall be raised --

1. The Trumpet; either some divine universal virtue; or the voice of some
mighty Angel, crying, Arise ye Dead, and come to Judgment. Methinks I hear
that voice; it is full of Majesty and terror; it is more loud than Fame, and
more general than the Light of Heaven. It Is heard at both the Poles; in the
Earth, and Sea, and Air, and all Deep places.

Attend, Attend, Ye Sons of Adam! Ye that are afar off, and ye that are near;
Ye that begun with the Infant World, and ye that lived in its latest Periods;
Ye that freeze under the uncomfortable North, and ye that are hid under the
remotest South; Ye that dwell in the temperate Regions; and ye that are
scorched with the heats of the Line; Ye that only cried, and ceased to breathe;
and ye that went slowly and late to the Grave; Ye that are yet alive, and ye
that have been Ages under ground.

Hearken, Hearken to the Proclamation of the great King, the Prince of Glory,
the Judge of Angels and Men: The Day, the Day of vengeance and recompense is
come, the Day of Terrors and of Triumphs. The night is past: Arise ye dead,
cease sleeping in the Grave; Put on our bodies, gather up your scattered parts,
summon your thoughts together, and make up your Accounts. The Tribunal is set,
the Judge is coming. And ye living Inhabitants, lay by your designs, let fall
your Traffic; quit your pleasures and pursuits; the time for these is done,
for ever done; Eternity is in view; Trim your Lamps, the Bridegroom is at the
door.

2. And now the General Resurrection follows. Behold the closest Vaults throw
away their coverings, and disclose the proud Families that lay hid in that
stately darkness: See how the loose Earth moves about the Cloisters of the
Dead, and the Grave opens all its doors to enlarge its Prisoners: And lo, a
numerous people rises from under ground to attend the great Assize of Angels
and men! They arise, but are not yet alive; Death sits upon their faces clad in
dread and paleness. They lose that motion with astonishment which they gained
with their restored parts; and are ready to be shaken into their former dust,
by the fear that has seized their unsettled joints: They wonder at the Light,
and at themselves; and are ready to drop back into the Graves, from which they
just peeped out.

See here the mighty sits trembling by his Monument, unconcerned at the vain
Epithets it gave to his flattered Memory; and the delicate sighs with his first
breath, willing to return to darkness, rottenness, and worms; rather than to
the light that will discover the guilt, and the follies of a Life of vanity and
sin. The Hypocrite droops to consider that his painting and his shame are to be
brought out of the night and silence of the Grave, into a naked, and open day;
and the vicious dies again to think, That he has taken up his body from one
Death to carry it to another, and a worse. Thus the world of the wicked shall
all appear, and all be concerned in the Judgment that follows.

The Righteous shall rise also, They awake with vigor in their souls, and life
in their eyes; with gayety in their looks, and transports in all their powers.
Their new warmed blood moves pleasantly in its ancient channels; and the
restored spirits dance in the renewed veins. They are glad to meet the old
companion of their pleasures, and their miseries, rejoicing at its rescue from
the infamous dishonours of corruption, and that it is ready to pass with them
into the promised and long expected Glories.

These are the First Fruits, and the full Crop is near, and their joy is beyond
the joy of Harvest; and we must leave the degree to be imagined, that cannot be
expressed.

And thus the universal World both of the wicked and the righteous shall appear
on the Solemn Summons.

The Earth, and Air, and Sea, and Death, and Hell shall give up their Dead,
Rev. 20. 13. And so Adam and the Patriarchs, and all the Ancient Sages, with
their Sons, and Nephews to the latest Posterity, shall stand up together before
the Judgment Seat: for all are subjects of the same general Empire, and all
are accountable for their Actions to the same Sovereign Judge: And He is the
Man whom God has ordained to judge the world in Righteousness. And this is the
next thing in the Text to be considered, viz.

III. The person appointed, The Man whom he has ordained: And this is the Man
Christ Jesus, even the Man, who being in the form of God, thought it no
robberry to be equal with God, Phil. 2. 6. The same is He who is ordained of
God to be the Judge of the quick and the dead, Act. 10. 42.

And now under this Head I shall show how fit he is, as man, for this great and
solemn office, in these two particulars.

1. He is fit to be the General Judge, as Man, because he descended to the
meanness of our condition. It Is but just that He, who laid by his ancient
Glory, and clothed himself in the Livery of guilt and shame, should reassume
that native Majesty and splendor in the face of universal mankind: That He,
who made an humble stoop from the Throne to the Manger, from the Government of
the World, to the life of a mean subject; should (at last) be illustriously
advanced as much above the heights of humane grandeurs, as then he was below
them.

It Is fit that That Holy and Divine Person, who was buffeted and affronted,
condemned and crucified by an abusive and injurious world, should righteously
judge his Judges. That Herod may see that he persecuted not the Infant King of
a little Province, but the Sovereign of Angels and men: And that Pontius Pilate
and the Jews may be convinced that He whom they called King in scorn, is really
a greater Emperor than Caesar: And that those who were scandal'd at the Cross,
and a verse to the belief of an humble Savior, may see the shame and
confutation of their Infidelity, and their Folly; in the exaltation of the Holy
Jesus above all the possibilities of worldly glory. Upon this account it is
reasonable and becoming that the Man Christ Jesus should be the Judge. And it
is so upon another, viz.

2. Because He contracted an alliance with our Natures, and experimentally
knows and felt the Infirmities of our state. If the Supreme naked Deity should
judge us immediately, we should be confunded and astonished at the Mjaesty of
his presence, and his greatness would make us afraid. For who can bear that
dazzling Glory? who can stand before a Throne surrounded with incomprehensible
Light and Flame? This Glory is therefore allayed by the interposal of humane
nature; and this Light wears a veil upon it to encourage our approaches. Yea,
it is our Brother, and our Friend that loved us, and dyed for us, who is the man
ordained to be our Judge. He has the same compassion, as when he wept over an
obstinate City, and the same love, as when he bled and dyed for a rebellious
World. He knows the strength of our temptations, and the weakness of our
natures, and will make abatements for them. So that the faithful may hearfully
appear before his Throne, confessing their sins, and relying upon his Love. He
that loved us, and was like us, is to take our Accounts. It Is our Redeemer is
to be our Judge.

Thus may believing Penitents encourage themselves before him, and hold up
their heads in that Day of terrors, as much revived by the apprehension of his
humanity and meekness; as the wicked will be dejected by the knowledge of his
greatness and power.

And for this cause also, it is congruous and fit that the Man Christ Jesus
should be Judge, when mankind is at the Bar.

I Come now to the IV. General to be considered -- He will judge the World in
Righteousness -- viz. (1.) By a Rule: Not by unaccountable humor, or arbitrary
Will; Not by hidden Decrees, or secret scrowls of Predestination. But by those
plain and open Records that are in our Houses, and our Hands; that are Preached
in Public places, and declared in a language we understand. The Books shall
be opened, Rev. 20. 12. and the Books the Rules of Righteousness, are the Law
and the Gospel. The one strictly requires perfect obedience, the other accepts
of sincere.

Now while our actions are tried by the Law, and measured by its Righteousness,
our straightest Lines are crooked and uneven, and our greatest services are
very scant and defective. The best are like the dust in the Balance, and the
rest are lighter than Vanity. For as Magnifying Glasses betray roughness, and a
ragged surface in the best polished Marble; So this Glass of the Law discovers
wrinkles and deformity in the fairest and most even virtue. And while men's
lives and actions are compared with this Rule, all mankind is distressed, and a
cloud hangs upon the brow of the most religious and most innocent. The Law
concludes all men under sin, and sin under wrath: So that by this all the world
is cast; and were happiness to be had upon no other terms, strait would be the
Gate indeed, and so narrow the way, that none would find it. And while no other
Book than this is opened, all the Generations of men fall prostrate before the
Throne, condemned by the Law, and by themselves. Nothing is to be heard but an
universal groan, and the suppliant cry of Mercy, Mercy Lord!

When lo! the other Book is opened, and out of it is read Grace and Peace, and
multiplied Pardons to all the followers of the Lamb, who have believed in the
Crucified Jesus, and testified that Faith by their Repentance, and sincere
obedience: But shame and darkness, and new confusions; Death, Horror, and
everlasting Destruction from the presence of God and of his Christ, to all the
stubborn rejecters of His Grace, who would not have him to Rule over them, nor
accept of His offered Salvation. These are the Declarations of this Book, and
these the measures of that Righteousness whereby we are to be judged: As the
Judge himself has told us, John 12. 48. The words that he spoke, the same
shall Judge us in the last day. And God will judge the secrets of men, says
St. Paul, according to my Gospel, Romans 2. So that believing Penitents that are
not perfect according to the Law of Works, may plead their sincerity, their
Faith, Repentance, and new obedience, which is their perfection according to
the Law of Pardon: And this will be accepted by the Judge with a gracious Air,
and the sweet reviving voice of, Well done ye good and faithful Servants. He
invites them to Him with the voice of pity and endearment, and ravisheth their
souls with the pleasant sound of Come ye blessed of my Father, Matthew. 25. 34. O
the Ecstasies that are in that Sentence! O the killing harmony of that voice!
Can a Finite spirit bear such excess? The pleasures of Eternity crowded into a
moment: Did unfaln Angels ever know such another? or can there be more
transport in ten thousand Hallelujahs? Certainly, the boundless imagination it
self cannot form an Idea of that rapture, nor the Tongue of a Cherub express it.

The sum is, The World shall be judged in Righteousness, viz. according to a
Rule, and not by mere power and will: A Rule! not the strict and severe one of
the Law, but the sweet and gracious one of the Gospel; whose Righteousness is
Faith, and sincere obedience, which in the Great Day shall be accepted, and
gloriously rewarded.

2. God will judge the World in Righteousness, viz. with impartial equity. To
evidence this, let us consider the Judge in the three great qualifications of
his WISDOM, JUSTICE, and POWER.

1. He is Wise, and cannot be abused by Witnesses, nor mistaken in Law; cannot
be imposed on by false allegations, nor cozened by fair pretensions: He
intimately understands the Fact, and the Cause, and cannot be deceived by
malice of enemies, nor subtilty of excuses.

2. He is Just, (...) A pure Mind, without interest, or affection. He cannot be
awed by greatness, nor swayed by partiality, and fondness. All mankind are
equally distant from Him, and all stand upon a Level before Him. He that beggs
in Rags, and weeps in the Corners of the Streets, shall be heard as soon as the
proud Gallant that lives in Luxury, and Pomp. He that tugged at the Oar, as soon
as the Commander of Legions: And the poor fellow that followed the Plough,
shall have as much right done him, as the mighty that sat upon the Throne.

3. He is powerful. All power is in his hands, both in Heaven and on Earth,
Mat. 28. 18. So that he can execute his Sentence without resistance or
possibility of rescue. There is no getting out of His reach, who holds the
World in the hollow of his Hand. There is no opposing of his power, except we
had an Arm like God, and could Thunder like Him. There is no quitting His
Dominions, for his Rule, and His Presence are universal. The frozen North, and
the farthest South; the Desert and the Ocean, are all within the bounds of His
Empire, and His Influence. Yea, could we climb up into Heaven, that is His;
descend we to the Center, He is there; or if even as far as Hell, His power
reaches thither also, Psalm. 139. 8.

In sum, The Judge cannot be deceived, corrupted, or overpowered, and
therefore on this account likewise He will judge the World in Righteousness.

HAving thus spoken to the main parts of the Text, I descend to enforce all, by
some Practical improvement.

If then there be an appointed Day for so universal and righteous a Judgment,
by so great and just a Judge, Let us consider,

(1.) How passionately, and differently mankind will be concerned at that time.
Of this something has been said before, but I shall now discourse the matter a
little further, and endeavor to give you some description of the Terrors of
the wicked, and the Raptures of the Just at that solemnity: Though all that can
be said will be very short of the Passions of that Day.

And (1.) How will the careless and ungodly world be appalled and astonished at
that unlooked for Summons! How will the dark Gentiles, that never heard of such
a Day; and the hardened Infidels that heard, but did not believe; and the
dissolute spirit that heard, and believed but did not consider, how will they
tremble and be confounded at the dread preparations of that Day!

Methinks I see the pale looks, and the shivering motions, the gazing eye and
listening ear, the distracted face and trembling hand of the most proud and
daring sinner. The Drunkard lets fall his Cup, and the busy worldling stands
at gaze, the loud companions are hushed into silence, and the merry Droll into
a careful look. The Atheist hides his head, and the sleepy Sot starts up into
anxious wonder.

And after this first amazement, See how the trembling-multitude run distracted
up and down, Some into corners to cover, others into companies to consult:
Every man asks his Neighbor, what is to be done? and he again repeats the
question to every one that is next unto him: The Son runs to his amazed Father,
who needs the advice his dear child seeks; and the Wife clasps about her
astonished Husband, that is as helpless as his frighted Consort. The Publican
beggs counsel of the Pharisee, and he, poor soul, is as much at a loss as the
Reprobate.

They all Court the Mountains to cover them, Rev. 6. 16. and shuffle into
Caverns to hide from the presence of the Judge. But alas! they quickly see the
vanity of those naked retreats, and find themselves as much exposed in the
closest Vaults, as they would be in the body of the Sun. Mountains are but
Cobwebb coverings, and Rocks and Earth but a Cypress veil. Hills, Caves, and
all are His, whom the frighted Fugitives would avoid, and will not, cannot
conceal His enemies from His eye, that strikes through the Earth as through a
Globe of Crystal. What shall they do then; whither shall they go? they cannot
bear His presence, and they cannot avoid it: the Light kills, and the darkness
will not hide. For the darkness is no darkness to this Judge; The darkness and
the day to Him are both alike, Psalm. 139. 12.

Thus will the wicked be confounded by the coming of the great and terrible
Day, and most of all those that lived under the plain and frequent warnings of
it. Had they never heard of this solemn time, they would have been astonished
but not so much affrighted; It would have been their wonder, but not so much
their misery. Had they not been told of this great appearance, and this Judge,
they might have looked on that Majesty without those sad degrees of dread, and
such mortal shiverings, and hoped for great abatements in consideration of
their fatal ignorance: But alas, they were told of this Day earnestly, and
often. The God of all the World, and this Judge of all, acquainted them with
this solemnity while 'twas future; And these Preachers that were most
infallible, and most urgent, pressed the Truth of these things upon their Faith
and affections with all evidence and importunity, sutableness of address and
accommodation to their Reason and their Interest; with all the motives of hope
and fear, and all the alliciencies and incentives that use to move reasonable
nature. They heard, but did not heed, they heeded a little but forgot the next
moment; they assented, but slept, they were awakened, but sunk again into a
careless slumber; they said they believed, but were not concerned; convinced a
little, but not persuaded; Persuaded, but not resolved; Resolved, and presently
let out of mind what they had concluded.

And now when the sight of the Judgment Day shall thoroughly awaken them to
consider those invitations and warnings they had to prepare for it, what inward
anguish will they feel at the thoughts of their sottishness and neglects? And
methinks I hear the sinner thus inveighing against himself:

Brutish Soul! Where was thy reason? where was thy Self-love? where were thy
reflections? where was thy Providence? could thou not look beyond the grates
of flesh, or did thou see, and would betray me into this danger and this
misery? were thou diverted by greater matters? or had thou any thing of more
necessity, or concernment to engage thy thoughts? was the sordid flesh a better
friend than that triumphant Jesus? or the world an enjoyment like those rewards
he will now dispense? were thy pleasures comparable to the joys of the happy
expectants of this Time? or thy little policies of equal moment with the
affairs of this day? O how wild and absurd are these questions now! and why
were they not always such in thy esteem? Yea, why did thou determine on the
unreasonable side? what can the fondling flesh, and eht world do for thee? what
relish now in those pleasures that are gone out in stenchand shame? What profit
in those designs whose objects are vanished with thy hopes? O how shall I
answer this Judge? what shall I say to the black indictment that lies against
me? why did I abuse his love, and reject his addresses? disregard his promises,
and slight his threatenings? throw off his easy yoke, as an intolerable
burden, and choose darkness, death and misery before light, and life, and
glory? what can I say to my Judge? what to my self?

Cover me shame and blushing; yea let death hide me, and everlasting darkness
cast its covering upon me; But death will not befriend one that has so sad a
reason to seek it; and darkness flies away from yond glorious presence. O the
day that I put far from me! and the danger that I would not consider! The wrath
I have been treasuring up! and the evils that I feared, but would not endeavor
to avoid! These are come upon me; Mercy is at an end; and pardon is no more;
excuses are in vain, and Prayers insignificant; The Judge is just and
inexorable, not moved by fond pity, nor weak affections; He will show no more
favor to those who so long have slighted it; Nor will He have mercy upon them
that would have none upon themselves.

Such reflections of anguish and despair as these, we may suppose the sight of
the Great Day will occasion in the wicked, and be the beginnings to them of a
sad and intolerable Eternity.

On the other side, (2.) The Transports of the faithful will be unspeakable on
that day; when they shall exchange the doleful tone of How long! how long, O
Lord! for the pleasant voice, He is come, He is come. See now how the nimble
spirits play in the smiling eyes, that languish'd and drooped before; And all
the lovers of the Holy Jesus awaken into cheerfulness and vigor. Joy warms the
cold and liveless blood, and sends it about with a pleasant thrill through all
the channels of its motion; and the enkindled spirit is ready to melt the gross
mass that detains it from the adorable object of its love.

O my soul! says the transported admirer, How reasonable was thy Faith; and
how unjust were thy Fears? How small were the troubles of thy night, to the
pleasures of this day? and how injurious were thy complaints to so glorious an
expectation? O blessed tears that end in such triumphs! O pleasant sorrow that
ends in rapture! Was it such comfort that our Lord promised to those that
mourn? was this the time I did so coldly expect, and so indifferently regard?
Is this the Savior I loved so little? and was this that Lord I was so careless
to obey? Is this He whom the flesh and world tempted me so often to deny; and
whose interest could do so little with me? Stupid soul! How unworthy art thou
of this sight of Glory? and how more unworthy of the favor of this glorious
and triumphant Jesus? O the grace that pardons such great defects; and thus
rewards such mean services! O the pleasure of Faith when it comes to be in
sight, and the transports of hope that is within the reach of enjoyment!

Such, and incomprehensibly greater, will be the Ecstasies of the faithful in
the day when the Judge shall appear.

Let us all then (II.) make it our main care and business to prepare for this
time. We are probationers here for another state, and the Day of Judgment is
the great Time of Trial for it. As we are found then, our condition will be for
ever; And according as our actions have been, the Sentence will pass, either to
everlasting Joys, or endless Woe: What remains then, but that we look on this
as our great and most necessary work; That we have the future Judgment always
in our eye and thoughts; That we study the Laws whereby we are to be judged;
That we frequently judge our selves before; and that we square our actions by
the directions and example of the Judge. And if we thus prepare, That Day which
will be so dreadful to the wicked, will be the most joyful one to us that we
ever saw, and the beginning of an everlasting Day of Joy, that has no night of
sorrow to succeed it. For at the conclusion of the Judgment we shall pass with
the Judge to those Regions of Bliss and Triumph, where we are to dwell with him
to eternal Ages, singing Hallelujahs to God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; To
whom are due from us, and all creatures, all Glory, Honor, Praise and
Adoration, henceforth and for ever. Amen.

SERMON IX. OF THE NECESSITY OF AN Unfeigned Repentance.

SERMON IX.
JONAH III. 5. So the people of Nineveh believed God, and proclaimed a Fast,
and put on Sackcloth, from the greatest of them even to the least of them.
NIneveh, the ancient and famous City of Assyria, was founded by Nimrod, the
mighty Hunter, and supposed first Monarch of the Earth; it had its name from
Ninus, who completed it, and was the third of that Empire. Where its
particular place was, is not, at this day, certainly known; but this is
certain, it was a great City, of three days journey, says the Sacred History,
Jonah 1. And, as was the extent, such were the sins of it; all great Cities
abound in vice, but (it seems) the wickedness of this was notorious, it made a
cry, and that cry came up before God to call for deserved vengeance on their
heads! but he that is slow to wrath, and does not willingly afflict the
children of men, resolves to warn before he strikes, and therefore sends Jonah,
a Prophet of Israel, to foretell their approaching Ruin; He (considering the
ungratefulness of the Message, and doubting what Entertainment he was like to
have from a proud, and (as he might think) an obdurate City) diverts another
way, and flees toward Tarshish; but the judgment of God overtook him, and
plunged him into the Deep, where a Fish prepared, swallowed the Prophet, who
having been three days in that Belly of Hell was by Miracle discharged upon the
Shore: and then the former Commission being renewed, he was not disobedient to
the Heavenly voice, but went to Nineveh, cried against it, and the Event was
beyond all expectation, and extremely contrary to his own; for,

[The people of Nineveh believed God, and proclaimed a Fast, and put on
Sackcloth from the greatest of them to the least of them.]

Very different was this Success from what other Messengers of God, Patriarchs
and Prophets, and holy men of ancient, and later times, have had: Noah was a
Preacher of Righteousness, and preached many years, while the Ark was in
preparing, but they were disobedient in the days of Noah, and went on in their
sins, till the Flood came, and swept away that world of the ungodly. The
Prophets were earnest, and importunate, they cried aloud, spared not, and God
by them stretched out his hand all day long, and yet they were a disobedient
and a gainsaying people, and gave them reason to complain, Who has believed
our report, or to whom has the Arm of the Lord been revealed? The Holy Jesus
himself, who was greater than Jonah, than any of the Prophets, than all; the
Brightness of his Fathers Glory, and the express Image of his person, who did,
as never man did, spoke, as never man spoke, even he came unto his own, and
they received him not! they many of them believed not his words, nor would they
abide his Counsel, but gave him occasion to lament their hardness with tears of
compassion, when he drew near the City, he beheld, and wept over it, saying, If
thou had known, even thou in this thy day, the things that belong to thy
peace! and then grief and tenderness breaks off the sentence, they would not
know the things belonging to their peace, though the Prince of Peace was the
Preacher of them: and therefore elsewhere he passionately expostulated with
them upon the score of the same perverseness,

O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that
were sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thee, as an Hen gathers
her Chickens under her Wings, and ye would not? The Son of God himself could
not prevail upon a City, to which he made his frequent and earnest addresses;
all he could do by the Methods of his Graces was to bewail their obstinacy,
resolved impenitency, and unbelief: But Jonah succeeds on one, as wicked, and
much greater, in the very first attempt he makes on it, v. 4. And Jonah began
to enter into the City a days journey, and he cried, and said, yet forty days
and Nineveh shall be destroyed: and the very next words are those of my Text,

[So the people of Nineveh believed God, and proclaimed a Fast, and put on
Sackcloth, from the greatest of them, to the least of them, etc.]

In discoursing of this wonderful change, and conversion of the Ninevites, I
shall,

(1.) Consider their sins: and,

(2.) Their Reformation, in the two main parts of it; Their Faith, [They
believed God.] Their Repentance, expressed by [Fasting, prayer, and turning from
evil ways.] And,

(3.) The universality of both, [From the greatest of them to the least of
them.] And,

As I go, shall humbly compare their Circumstances with our own, and consider
what duties are suggested to us by that comparison. I begin,

(1.) With their Sins; those were great, and the cry of them was loud, Their
wickedness is come up before me, Chap. 1. 2. What their sins were in particular
we are not told, but from the circumstances, and the severity of the judgment
threatened, we may conclude they were very grievous; St. Paul tell us, that at
the times of Ignorance God winked [(...),] He over-lookt, in comparison, he
made abatements, and had respect to their frailties; He considers our Frame,
our Impotency, and Temptations, and is not so severe in judging, and punishing
men under those circumstances of disadvantage: According to the same Scheme of
Speech, our Savior speaks, If I had not done the works that no man ever did,
they had had no sin: (viz.) theirs had not been so great, not such in
comparison. But now, notwithstanding the allowances the divine goodness makes
for a state of Ignorance, and consequent Infirmity, the sins of these Ninevites
were such as called for the severest judgments, even desolation [Destruction]
-- Nineveh shall be destroyed.

What this destruction was in particular, whether Fire from Heaven, such as
destroyed Sodom and Gomorrha; or an Inundation of waters, such as had
overwhelmed diverse Cities and Countries; whether an Earthquake, such as
swallowed Corah and his company; a sudden surprise of Foreign Enemies, such as
that of the Barbarous Nations among the Romans; or of the Europeans on the
Americans; or else any unexpected violent commotion among themselves, by
Massacre, or Rebellion; whether to be extraordinary and miraculous, or in a
plain and visible course; which of these it was, whether any of them in
particular, we are not told, only destruction is threatened: Things were come to
a sad issue with them, their sins were full, and ripe for vengeance.

Let us now, in the Name and Fear of God, humbly compare this with our own case.

Our sins also are very great, great as theirs in their Nature, and Quality, in
their circumstances and aggravations much greater and more heinous: Blasphemy,
Profane Swearing, Perjury, Luxury, Uncleanness, Drunkenness, Disobedience,
Murder, Treason, Violence, Oppression, all the deadly sins, whatever is
contrary to found Religion, and true Doctrine, Reign, Triumph, brave the Sun,
are fashionable, almost creditable! Fear and Shame, all the Restraints are
gone; men make a mock of sin, glory in it, are ashamed of nothing: But Virtue,
Sobriety, Religion; Religion, matter of the best, highest, truest honor,
despised, buffoon'd, exposed as ridiculous!

Atheism, the greater, the less, formerly hid its head, the Fool of old said
only in his heart, there is no God: but now it appears openly, and boldly
claims the reputation of wit, the only wit, and good sense; men like not to
retain God in their knowledge, but dispute his Being, Attributes, Providence,
and you are beholding to them, if they do not bluntly tell you, There is no
such thing, or do not say (at least) with those in the Psalmist, Tush, God
sees not, he cares not, is there knowledge in the most high? Such we are, and
thus do, after Miracles of Mercies, and of Judgments; after mighty Calamities,
and equal Deliverances; frequent warnings, and Importunate Calls to Repentance!

And now, we have not indeed any immediate extraordinary Prophet, particularly
sent to thunder against us, but we have the warning of Moses and all the
Prophets, of Christ, his Apostles, and Ministers of all sorts; besides all
which, the Providence of God, and the Circumstances of our affairs, and all
things about us call loudly, that we should prepare our selves to meet the Lord
coming to reckon with us; but, alas! how shall we do this? Strength is
weakness, Policy is Folly, and Infatuation; when he is angry, his power is not
to be resisted. Have thou an Arm like God, or can thou Thunder like him? Job.
His presence is not to be avoided. Whither shall I flee from thy Spirit? Ps.
What shall we do then? must we sit down in despondency, in despair of Mercy? is
there no Remedy, no way? Blessed be God, there is one; the same that was taken
by the poor Ninevites, who did not summon their armed Forces, nor put their
wits upon the Rack for Stratagem, and Counsel, for public Safety, (means that
may be used, and ought, in their place.) No, they looked on the Evil threatened,
as from the Lord, with whom there was no contending, against whom there was no
contriving, and applied themselves to appease the offended Majesty; and they
took the right course to do it; for [They Believed God, etc.] This was,

(2.) Their Reformation; the second thing I was to speak of: in which I
consider,

First, their Faith, [They believed God,] his Being, Attributes, Providence,
Love of Virtue, Hatred of Vice; and that the way to appease him when he was
angry was by the use of Prayer, Fasting, and turning from evil ways. These they
understood without a Prophet, and believed before the preaching of Jonah. God
has conveyed some main knowledge of himself to all his world, and has not any
where left himself without a Witness, his Laws are written upon the hearts of
men, and all of those we call most Heathen. Romans 2. What is to be known of God,
is manifest. Chapter the first of the same Epistle, all the World is his, the
Souls of men especially so, of his Family, his Offspring (as it were) Bone of
his Bone, Flesh of his Flesh, and he provides for his own, they are worse than
Infidels that do not. He takes care for Oxen, for Sparrows, for Lillies; much
more then for the Souls of his Reasonable Creatures; the very hairs of our
Heads are numbered, certainly then the Souls of men are every one considered,
every one, some way or other, provided for. The Sum is, God has dispersed
some Light, some glimmerings (at least) of Light and Truth among universal
Mankind; and these men of Nineveh had their portion, and by that were prepared
for more; that alone was not sufficient, and therefore God sends them a
Prophet, not an Angel to destroy (like those sent to Sodom,) not a common
ordinary Messenger from among themselves, their case required more; but an
extraordinary person, one from far: when men are prepared for Repentance, they
shall have the proper means, God will not be wanting to his Creatures, when the
ordinary means will not do, they shall have such as are extraordinary and
uncommon; when the Native Light, and convictions are not sufficient, they shall
have an external Preacher, such was Philip to the Ethiopian Eunuch, Acts 8.
And an Angel sent to Cornelius to direct him to an Apostle, Acts 10. Thus was
Jonah sent to the Ninevites, and doubtless many other good Heathens were so
assisted. He went, though after a Repulse of the divine commission, and they
were more ready to hear, than he to preach; in that they both believed the
Messenger, and the Terrible Message that he brought. We alas! believe what we
like, what is grateful, and agreeable to us* and our Faith is much in our
affections; but they believe what was dreadful, and amazing, the truth was most
opposite to their corrupt Inclinations, and carnal Interest, and this their
Belief is interpreted as faith in God. To believe his Messengers coming in his
name, and with his Truth, is Believing him, as our Savior says, He that
receives you, receives me; and he that receives me, receives him that sent
me: and again, He that despises you, despises me; he that despises me,
despises him that sent me. The Ninevites did not so by Jonah or his Message;
consciousness of their own guilt, and their Natural Apprehensions of divine
justice, made them apt to receive Impressions of dread; and doubtless they had
ill Abodings in their minds before, by which they were prepared for such a
Message, and a Prophet, one coming from another Country to appear with so much
Resolution, and to speak with so much Authority, and assurance, affected them
more than if they had been used to such preachers of Errors; nor are we to
suppose, that he only repeated to them these dreadful words, Yet forty days and
Nineveh shall be destroyed. No, these (more likely) were but the Sum, the
Text, the Burden of his Sermon, which probably he amplified with all those
Considerations, that were apt to move, and awaken: and possibly the Mariners
that were with him in the Ship, and threw him overboard, upon the Lot; that
saw the Fish swallow him, and the Tempest quieted upon it, might have come into
Nineveh before him, diverted from their intended voyage by the Storm, meeting
him again, after they had seen him plunged into the Ocean, might certify the
people of the Miracle, and they thereby assured, that he was an extraordinary
person, and was come to them in an Extraordinary, and Divine Errand; but
whether this were so, or not, whether they credited the Prophet on these
Motives, or any other, is not certain; but this is, They believed upon the
preaching of Jonah. And now,

As God daily preaches unto us by his various Messengers, so he does by his
Providence, by which we are sometimes brought into great straits, even to the
Brink of Ruin; and when it is thus with us, when we are in a state of
perplexities under present Evil, and Fears of greater, let us not abuse our
selves with false confidences, put far from us the evil day, and cry Peace,
Peace, when there is no Peace: let us not impute our Troubles, and disorders to
accident, and common causes; but consider, that the Hand of God is in them, who
is then about to reckon with us for our sins, and a voice sounding from thence,
Repent, Repent, for your Iniquities will be your Ruin. Let us not be deaf, and
stupid, as the careless old world were, till the Flood came, and swept them
away; or as those Mockers, the Apostle speaks of, who scoffingly said, where is
the promise (to them it was threatening) of his coming? when he was at the door;
but let us humbly be affected, as these poor creatures were, who believed upon
the preaching of Jonah.

And what was this Belief of theirs? was it cold, indifferent, unconcerned
assent only? no, it was a Faith, powerful and active, that wrought a mighty
change, and produced the blessed Fruits of Repentance, and Reformation; their
Faith had been dead, and unsignifying, if it had not wrought, and wrought this
way; if they had past a Complement on the Prophet, that they believed him, and
gone on in the same course as before; if they had believed God, and continued
in their provocations of him, their Faith had been an aggravation, and might
justly have heightened, and hastened their ruin; it had then been a great
argument of their Impudence, and Obduration: but theirs was not a Fanatical,
Pharisaical Faith, without works; but a Faith Operative, and Fruitful, and the
Effect of it was Repentance; and the expressions of that Repentance, Fasting
and Prayer, and turning from evil ways.

1. Fasting. This is a Rite of Humiliation and Repentance, in which we
acknowledge our unworthiness, and our vileness, that we merit not common
mercies, but deserve the greatest punishments; and this anciently, and in all
times was also expressed by Sackcloth, and vile clothing, whereby these
Ninevites likewise set out their wretchedness, and ill deservings. God Almighty
has so made us, that we are apt, and cannot help it, to represent our inward
Affections by outward Expressions: and here is the ground in Nature, and in
Reason of Sacrifices, and all the Rites of External Worship, and particularly
of this, by which the men of Nineveh declared their abasement before God; and
we have need of some eminent signal way to humble our selves before him, in
acknowledgement of our greater, and more aggravated crimes; we have sometimes
public Fasts, and days of public Humiliation; But are they such as God has
chosen? do we in them afflict our souls with penitence, and Godly sorrow? do we
as much as impose any penance upon our external persons? alas! we generally do
not so much as the Pharisees, and Hypocritical Jews did, who hung down their
heads, covered them with Ashes, put on Sackcloth, and sad looks, and abstained
from all things that were grateful, and agreeable to the Body, but we will not
give our selves the trouble as much as to appear, or look like it; our Fasts
are not only not the thing, but not the resemblance, or mere name, in effect a
Mockery; other kind of Fasting and Humiliation is expected, and required from
us; and the greatest, the deepest is not low enough, nor great enough to
signify the sense, and sorrow, that is due to so much guilt! The Ninevites
declared theirs solemnly, The King descended from his Throne, and put on
Sackcloth, sat in ashes, and proclaimed general Abstinence to Man, and Beast;
and we see, that the whole people conformed to the penitent Example, and put on
Sackcloth from the greatest of them to the least of them: This was one
expression of their Repentance, and it was accompanied with another, which also
was very proper, and significant, ( viz.)

(2.) Prayer. Earnest, affectionate Prayer, expressed by crying mightily unto
God, v. 8. This also is a Duty generally acknowledged through the world, in all
the ages, and places of it, part of the Law written on the Heart, a Branch of
the Religion of Mankind: These Heathens knew the necessity, and virtue of it;
we have no Reason to think they learnt it from this Prophet, whose Message was
destruction; and by the consequent story, we see, he thought of nothing less;
they knew, that their sins were against God, as all are; against thee, and thee
only have I sinned. He was offended, and he threatened; he was to be appeased,
or they were undone; and prayer is the way, that all the world is taught to
seek pardon, and favor by; this they took, they cried unto God, not unto
Saints and Angels, unto God, One, the true God; That there is but one supreme
Deity has ever been the Belief of Mankind, even of the Heathen world; the
various gods, we read of, are but the diverse representations of the one
all-perfect Being, or of his different Attributes, and Manifestations in the
world; or they are of lower signification, and mean only Angels, or nobler
Souls departed, in which sense the Scripture says, There are Gods many. So
that the Romanists cannot this way justify themselves from the Imputation of
Idolatry, by alleging, that they worship one, and the true God, as the
ultimate object of their Adorations; for even the Heathens, The Ninevites
believed God, and they cried mightily unto God: indeed the Mariners in the
Storm cried every one to his God, viz. his Tutelar Angel, and Genius, such many
of the Heathens had; and (it seems) these were Heathen Mariners: But these here
direct their Devotions to the one Supreme immediately; so they were required,
and so by the consequence, we find, they did; for God saw their works, and this
among the rest: and he rerepented him of the Evil he had threatened, and sent it
not: this was the blessed answer of their prayers! And now,

If they, or any other people had ever Reason to cry mightily unto God, we
have; Let us humbly do this, he is ready to bestow pardon, and deliverance, but
he will be sought unto. Let us do it in Faith and fervor, we have great
Advantages, and Encouragement, which the Ninevites had not; we are taught how
to pray, and in whose Name.

We have a Mediator at Gods right Hand, that ever lives to make Intercession
for us; we have through him free admission to the Throne of Grace, with
boldness, and many promises, that we shall be heard, and receive the Blessing,
if we ask in Faith, and in the Sons Name: Let us then pray fervently, humbly,
and incessantly, for our Prince, and Nation, for our selves, and posterity;
that God would pity, and pardon, divert his Judgments, and deliver us from all
our Enemies, and all our Fears, Establish our Religion and Government, and all
our Interests in those. And,

O thou that stillest the raging of the Sea, and the Madness of the people, be
merciful to us, do thou save us, or we perish; The Seas swell, and rage
horribly, and the Deep is ready to swallow us up quick, do thou, O Lord, put
forth thy Hand, and stay us, or we sink, and perish in the great waters, we
sink into the depth of the Abyss, and there is no help, Be thou our helper and
deliverer, for vain is the help of Man!

Thus prayer, earnest, affectionate prayer is necessary; not that God can be
moved thereby, but thereby we are prepared for his Mercies, and he is always
ready to give, when we are fit to receive. But

Besides this, the men of Nineveh did somewhat else, and it was that which made
the rest significant.

(3.) They turned from their evil ways. This was the main thing, and without
it, Fasting and prayer had been to little purpose, yea they had been
Abominations as the Sacrifices, Oblations, Fasts and Services of the Jews were,
because they did not loose the Bands of wickedness, or let the oppressed go
free; They did not do Justice, and love Mercy, and walk humbly with their God,
which he principally required from them, but these Ninevites did; They humbled
themselves, and turned from their evil ways, and from the violence that was in
their hands. It seems, some of their principal sins were Cruelty and Injustice,
and therefore their Reformation is particularly noted: they knew where the Root
of the Distemper grew, which was the cause of approaching Judgments, and
therefore here they apply the Remedy, in renouncing those sins they were so
notoriously guilty of.

The Light and Law of Nature told them, how displeasing sin was to the
Almighty, and that there was no atonement, but by Repentance; no Repentance,
but in Turning, and they did this: They thought it not enough to cry out upon
their sins, to roar like Bears, and mourn like Doves: as the Expression is in
the Prophet: This ('it is like) they did, but stopped not here, they went on to
what was more to purpose, They turned from their evil ways. Repentance is
turning, Turn ye, turn ye, why will ye dye?

Let this practice of theirs be a pattern to us, let us seriously consider the
common crying National sins, and how far we are guilty of those provocations,
and resolve in the Strength of God to cease from them, to destroy them our
selves, and to endeavor every one in his place, to suppress them in others:
thus far each man is his Brothers keeper; and Charity, and the Common Interest
require this Endeavor from us, by reproof, by advice, by the exercise of our
power: Let us consider, what are our particular sins, the sins of our
Education, of our Complexion, of our Condition, and apply the Grace of God, and
our chief warchfulness, and diligence against them, that we may strike at the
root, and destroy the strong holds; let us do the work thoroughly, and
effectually.

This our present safety, ours, our Kings, our Government, our Religion, our
posterity require from us; for if we continue to do wickedly, we may expect to
be destroyed, both we and our King. This, all the considerations of the next
state demand, loudly call for, all manner of Reasons from both the worlds urge
and enforce this: Let us not be still stupid, and deaf to such calls, but hear,
and fear, and do no more so wickedly. Let us put a stop to the course of our
sins, and then we may expect that a stop will be put to our Troubles, and the
Judgments threatened and feared, will be turned from us.

The Sum of all is, to urge us to be as wise in our Generation, as those poor
Heathens were in theirs, who Believed, Fasted, Prayed, Reformed; and we may
consider further,

(3.) The Universality of these [From the greatest of them, to the least of
them.]

They were all affected, they all did something, and so much as was accepted.
This is a wonderful Instance of Conversion, somewhat like it is that of St.
Peter's 3000 in one Sermon; The King humbled himself, and the people Fasted, and
put on Sackcloth. The Greatest is not too great to humble himself before the
God of Heaven, nor the least too little to be considered by him, all Flesh had
corrupted it self, all were become abominable in their doings, and therefore
all were concerned to be greatly affected, and deeply humbled, from the
greatest to the least [From the Greatest.] There the Humiliation begun, The
King descended from his Throne, and put on Sackcloth, laid by his Majesty, and
Glory, debased himself in the dust, and put on vile array, significations of
Sorrow and Repentance; from the great, it is like, their enormous sins begun,
thence they had their examples, thence their encouragement. The great draw
their Trains after them, Natural Pride and Ambition, make all desirous to
imitate them, their Example is largely diffusive and infectious, and makes sins
fashionable: their sins quickly overspread, and debauch a Nation, and
therefore, 'twas fit, that Repentance should begin here, where, probably, many
of their sins did; that the great should cure by their good example those they
had hurt by their bad, and theirs being against more Mercy, and more
Expectation are the greatest, and most aggravating: and therefore there was
Reason, and need, that they should be most penitent, and first so: and
accordingly here it Commenced.

Reformation is like to be general and effectual, when the Great begin it in
themselves: it does not stop there, but passes through the middle degrees, to
the least of men, the meanest, and least considerable, those also add to the
common heap of provocations, and those have therefore reason to be humbled
also; and when Gods hand is lifted up, and his Judgments are near, he
requires, and expects that all, and every one, from him that sits on the
Throne, to him that grinds in the Mill, should repent, and turn to him; the
sins of the meanest contribute to the public guilt, and their Repentance helps
forward to public deliverance.

Let us duly consider this circumstance of the Repentance of the men of
Nineveh: and,

O that God in his Mercy to us and them would open the eyes of the Great among
us to see this their duty, and the things that belong to their Peace before
they are hidden from their Eyes: as their Guilt is often greatest, so the
public consequent Judgments (many times) fall heaviest upon them. Two late
dreadful Judgments we have been under, Fire and Pestilence: These fell chiefly
upon the middle and meaner sort. The Judgments we have now reason to fear
threaten all, but chiefly the Great.

In the Name of God let us all pray that a deep Spirit of Humiliation may be
upon them, that they may reflect on the greatest of their sins in their Nature,
and the Mischief they have done by their Influence; that they may strive to go
before all the rest in Repentance, and show the Inferior souls the way to
Safety and Happiness; that they may lay aside all Vanity, Luxury, and
Intemperance, Rioting and Drunkenness, Chambering and Wantonness, the Dalilahs,
the dearest sins, those of Pride and Pleasure, the sins by which the Nation
has been made drunk, poisoned, debauched and depraved, that they may mourn for
these great crying Iniquities, and in the strength of Divine grace resolve to
turn from them: This would be the happiest sight that ever England saw, and the
most hopeful. Oh that our eyes were blessed with it. And

Let not us of the middle and inferior sort content our selves to desire their
Reformation and amendment, but resolve also on our own: It Is generally very
grateful to us to hear the faults of the Great ripped up, of our Governors
especially: It will concern us more to affect our hearts duly with those we are
guilty of our selves. And in this we the Ministers of Religion, the Guides of
the people (at least, who ought to be so) should lead the way; our unworthiness
also has been great, and our provocations have been many, we have not returned
unto the Lord according to his Benefits, or made a right use of his Mercies, we
have not been so strict in our Lives, or so diligent in our great and most
weighty Employment, so much concerned for the good of the Church or Interests
of men's Souls as we ought to have been; many have been Loyterers, some Rioters,
scarce any have employed proportionable Zeal and circumspect diligence: Our
faults are published and aggravated to the height (I hope beyond it) by our
Enemies of all sorts, and we may expect still a greater load of Criminations
and Reproaches. Let us consider that this evil is from the Lord for our sins:
He said to the Lying Spirits Go; and David reflected that he might have bid
Shimei curse him. Let us look at his hand and humble our selves before him, and
not spend our Breath in Invectives against the Instruments of our Troubles and
Fears, but apply the proper Remedy to the Root of our Distemper, which we know
is to bring forth Fruit meet for Repentance. And let not the people spend
their, all their Heat, and Zeal against the sins of their Governors and their
Misdeeds; in these they are apt to exceed, and run beyond bounds, and multiply
their own sins in so doing: But let them lay their hands on their hearts, and
say, We have all sinned and done wickedly, we have been all as sheep going
astray, but we will return to the great Shepherd and Bishop of our souls: Let
them make themselves deeply sensible, not only of the gross carnal Evils, but
of the Spiritual Iniquities, malice, bitter zeal, contempt of Rulers, and
betters, Schism, Separation, waywardness, and the like; and not excuse and
extenuate their sins; charge others, and lessen their own by Pharisaical
comparisons; but let all sorts and degrees of men charge themselves with their
own guilt, and deeply abase themselves before the Almighty in the sense of it;
and when it is thus, when penitential acknowledgements and humiliations are
universal, then a people is prepared for the Mercy of deliverance, and the
evils threatened shall not come. And

In order to this we should not look and stay till the rest begin, but every
one should endeavor to be the first; and if we do take this course and proceed
in it, whatever others do, whatever they suffer, we shall be safe, if not for
this world, yet for the next certainly (which is better) and probably for both.
And

Now I shall endeavor to enforce this great, this most seasonable, this most
necessary duty, by several considerations taken from the circumstances of the
Repentance of the men of Nineveh,

1. They were Heathens, such as the Prophet speaks, had not the knowledge of
Gods Law, ( viz.) in the fullness and expressness of it; and yet they Repented.
But we are Christians, whose are the Law and the Prophets, to whom Christ is
come, Eternal Life is made manifest, and the Everlasting Gospel is revealed:
And shall we continue our Impenitency and Obduration? Are there Flowers in the
Wilderness and none in the Garden? Do the wild Beasts of the Forest hear his
voice, and shall not the Sheep of his own Fold obey him? This will be an
aggravation of our sins, if we impenitently continue in them; those rude
Heathens did not so.

2. They Repented upon Preaching: we do not read of any fiery Trials they had
been under, of any dreadful Judgments that had been upon them; we hear not of
any prodigies in the Heavens, or any portents in the Earth, Blazing Stars, or
Fiery Swords, or Earthquakes, or dreadful Apparitions, or other terrible
sights to predict their approaching Ruin; such as have been forerunners of
Destruction to many Nations. No, we hear only of preaching, Jonah Preaches, and
they Repent. But now God has pleased to vouchsafe unto us great plenty, as to
the Declarations of his word and will by preaching; it is as common as Gold in
Solomon's Time, as the Stones in the street, and we trample on it, and make it
as vile. Preaching is customary, grown a thing of Form, has lost its force
upon us, we believe not the Report of it, we refuse to hear, or hear with
carlesness and unconcernment, with no design, or with a wrong one to entertain
our Curiosity, or to gratify our Fancies with the same Affection that they see
and hear Plays; otherwise generally we neither heed nor mind what we hear: The
most powerful preaching has little or no Authority or Effect with us or upon
us. Besides which,

We have been exercised with great and grievous Judgments; when his word would
not prevail, God was pleased to take the Rod into his hand, we were harrass'd
with Twenty years Civil war, that drew our Blood, and wasted our strength, and
consumed our Treasure, and filled us with horror and desolation, that brought
in Oppression, Tyranny, and sad Confusions; from the aforesaid War was the
overthrow of the best of Governments, the Murder of the best of Kings,
Suppression of Laws, and Destruction of the best Patriot and Subjects, and an
universal Slavery, Misery and Disorder. And after our deliverance from those
evils by a wheel of Providence, we continuing still in our sins, and growing
the worse for our mercies, he sent a raging Pestilence among us; The destroying
Angel poured forth his Viols of wrath, and poisoned the public Air of our
chief City, and destroyed Thousands and Ten Thousands in our Streets, and such
a Mortal Contagion as had not been in all the days of our Forefathers. And
that Judgment was followed on the heels by another as dreadful, and by a
devouring Fire we were made as Sodom, and like unto Gomorrha: The Strength, the
Glory, the Beauty of our Land laid in Ashes, and made an heap of Stones.
Notwithstanding which and many other Providence, Mercies and Judgments, we
have sinned yet more and more, as if we dared the most High, and resolved to
provoke him to destroy us utterly.

Thus we have done, and if this is the ground of our present Troubles and
Fears, and if we persist in our hardness, and do not at last return by
Repentance, What can we expect but the utmost extremities of his vengeance? The
poor Ninevites repented upon preaching, and 'twill be a mighty aggravation of
our sins if we continue impenitent, not only under the most awakening
Preachers, but the most dreadful Judgments.

3. The people of Nineveh repented upon the preaching of a single Prophet, they
had but one Jonah, not so much Testimony as uses to be expected in common
business, in the mouth or two or three witnesses shall every thing be
confirmed; and yet they did not call for more evidence: There was a Jonah
within (their own Conscience) that preached the same Doctrine for the main with
the other without, and they repented upon the Preaching, external Preaching of
a single Jonah. But now among us, great has been the number of the Preachers,
Patriarchs and Prophets, the Son of God himself, and a whole Army of Apostles,
Ministers, Confessors, Martyrs in former, in latter, in present times, a whole
Cloud of Witnesses, with a Firmament thick of Stars and Glories, Lights of all
sorts and sizes. And now did those poor Heathens hear the voice of a little
Brook, and shall not we the noise of many Waters? Were they enlightened by a
single Planet, and we not so by numerous Constellations? This also will be
another and great aggravation, if we still persist and go on hardened in our
sins.

4. The Ninevites repented when they might have doubted, who is this Jonah? he
is a stranger to our Country, to our Laws, to our Religion, and shall he lead
us? this Jonah is a sinner, and God does not use to send his mind and messages
by such. He says he is a Prophet, but how shall we know it, where are his
Miracles? where are his Credentials from Heaven to justify our Belief of him?
Thus they might have questioned and disputed the matter, but they took the
better course, and repented on the Preaching of Jonah. They knew that though
Jonah was a stranger, yet one that was not so, the Preacher within, taught the
same Doctrine, that they might expect Gods Judgments on them for their sins;
that though Jonah were a sinner, yet they might learn their duty from such;
that though he should not be a Prophet, yet there needed no Prophecy or
Extraordinary Messenger or Message to make them acknowledge the Divine Justice,
and their own Guilt: So that instead of cavilling and disputing, they repented
and turned from their evil ways. But now God has given us a sure word of
Prophecy, and mighty and undoubted Miracles have confirmed the Ministry of
Moses and the Prophets, and the Gospel is established by the greatest that ever
were, and we have highest Reason to Believe for the works sake, and the Divine
Testimony that was given to the Holy Jesus and Apostles, by the uncontrollable
Miracles which they wrought especially: we are assured by that greatest, of our
Saviors Resurrection from the Dead, by which he is declared the Son of God
with power, all his Doctrines and all his Actions, and the whole Scope of his
designs do infinitely confirm it unto us: And yet we doubt and dispute, and
cavil when we should Repent. This also greatly heightens our sins, and will our
condemnation, if we do not seasonably, speedily take another course.

5. The Ninevites repented upon the Preaching of a Temporal Judgment, forty
days and Nineveh shall be destroyed. It was the destruction of their City, no
express mention of the Ruin of their persons and posterities, much less of the
damnation of their Souls; and yet upon this lesser Threatening they Repented.
But now besides the many Temporal evils our sins threaten us with, we have
denounced against us the loss of our Souls to eternal ages. The wicked shall be
turned into Hell, and all the Nations that forget God, Ps. 9. 17. And terrible
is that Sentence passed on the impenitent, Mat. 25. 41. Depart from me ye
cursed into everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels: Every word
speaks terror, depart and Depart cursed into Fire, into everlasting Fire, and
Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, in their company and under their
condemnation and Torment. Such threatenings one would think should effectually
restrain men from their sins, and bring them to Repentance; and woe to us if
those or Gods other Methods do not effect it.

6. The people of Nineveh Repented upon uncertainty of Success; They were not
sure that their Repentance would be accepted; yea they had great reason to fear
it would not; for the threatening in the Form seemed to be absolute. But they
knew that there was certain Ruin in the way in which they were going, and some
probability, possibility at least, that the Divine goodness might interpose for
them upon their Repentance, and they acted wisely, and took the safer course,
they Repented and Repented upon the faint Encouragement of a peradventure, who
knows but the Lord may repent and turn, v. 9. But now God has pleased to give
us the fullest, the greatest assurance of Pardon and Favor upon Repentance:
for this we have his repeated word and his Oath, and the Blood of his Son and
the Testimony of his Spirit: This is the Covenant he has made with us, and his
Son came into the world to give us the assurance, and his Spirit has always
confirmed it, that by these immutable things by which it is impossible for God
to lie, we might have strong confidence that our Repentance will be accepted
and rewarded. And 'twill be a very great Instance and aggravation of our
hardness, if notwithstanding we go on impenitently in our accustomed sins.

7. The men of Nineveh Repented, and they did it speedily, When the Prophet
began to enter into the City a days journey, it follows immediately, So the
people of Nineveh believed God: They did not stand to consult and deliberate
about the business, they did not say to Jonah as Foelix did to St. Paul, We
will hear thee some other time of this matter; no, They heard and Repented
presently. But we are apt to procrastinate and delay, and put the work off from
one day to another, from youth to manhood, from thence to old age; from the
time of Health to Sickness, from thence to a Deathbed, and still cry to morrow
and hereafter. But if we think to do it at all, let us take the next time,
Delays here are most dangerous, and the work will still grow the more
difficult: We are called by present Providence to instant Repentance, if we
delay yet longer it may be too late, immediate Reformation is expected and
required from us, or immediate Judgments are to befall us. And

The same Encouragement have we for the work of speedy Repentance as these
Ninevites had; for this is most certain, that if we Repent of the Evil we have
done, God will also Repent of the Evil he has said. Both which gracious Acts
of Penance on our part, and Pardon on Gods, that they may be done, God of his
infinite Mercy grant through the Merits and Mediation of his Son Jesus Christ
our Lord,

To whom with the Holy Ghost be ascribed by Angels and men, by all things in
Heaven and Earth, as is most due, all possible Praise and Power, Might and
Majesty, Dominion and Adoration to Eternal Ages. Amen.

SERMON X. The Various METHODS OF Satan's Policy DETECTED.

SERMON X.
2 COR. II. 11. For we are not ignorant of his Devices.
THe great and known Enemy of Mankind at tempts our ruin by a double method,
that of confessed opposition, and flattering insinuation; and what he cannot
compass by main strength, he endeavors by Stratagem, and by Artifice. In which
latter, he has always been most unhappily successful, prevailing more by
Policies, than by Power. Satan is most dangerous in the livery of Religion, and
the appearing Angel of light has done more execution, than the known Prince of
Darkness.

Indeed in the early times of Christianity, it is enemy and ours thought to have
overborn and crushed it by open ways of violence; and therefore vigorously
assaulted this new and naked Religion, with all the force that Wit and
Interest, Power and Malice combined, could draw together; and with all that
rage, that Hellish zeal could inspire, flew upon the naked Infant, that had no
captivating arts to recommend, no visible aids to assist it: But Innocence was
too powerful for Arms, and Truth and Virtue for assault; and the Designer
perceiving that this persecuted Christianity did but brighten and grow more
conspicuous by the Flames he kindled against it: That the injured Innocents
prevailed more on the World by their Patience, than their enemies did on them
by their Cruelties: That this hated, this maligned Religion stood like a Rock
in the Sea, while the spightful Waves and foaming Billows did but dash and
break themselves against it. I say, perceiving how little success he had in his
assaults, he betakes him to his arts and his devices. He pretends to that which
he designs against: and gets into Religion that he might overthrow it: And this
design he has been ever since carrying on in the world, viz. to destroy
Religion by it self. And if ever Christianity be exploded, it is like to be by a
Spirit that highly pretends unto it: So that the roaring of the Lion is not so
formidable as the wily subtilties of the Serpent: And the Deceiver in the close
Pharisee is more dangerous than Satan in the Publican and open Sinner.

Now the way to defeat frauds and wiles, is to understand them, and the
Designer is disappointed as soon as his practices are discovered; we therefore
owe this care to the interest of our souls, to endeavor to be acquainted with
the arts of our enemy; and we shall be secure from the danger of their
influence, when We are not ignorant of his Devices.

Now the chief Devices of the Grand Designer are levelled against the Glory of
God, the Peace of the Church, our Faith and a good life. All which in some of
their main branches, I shall endeavor faithfully to discover; and though I
foresee my discourse will light on things which are very sacred with some who
will be angry with every one that is not fond of their darling devices, yet I
shall not keep the Devils Counsel, because I know they are not so much theirs,
as his. And the more men are taken with the pretense, in the greater danger are
they of the mischief.

To begin then with the first Head proposed, Satan devises against the Glory
of God, and that in these instances, viz. against his Goodness, his Grace, his
Spirit, and his Worship.

(1.) Satan designs against the Glory of Gods goodness. The goodness of God is
his nature, and the fountain of his actions, (...), says the Philosopher, and
God is love, says the Apostle. And the most suitable apprehension we can form
of God, is to look on him as an Infinite, Eternal, and Almighty Love, as that
benign fountain that is continually overflowing, and that glorious Sun that is
always shedding abroad its beams and brightness. Indeed the dry essence of God
we cannot know, it is hid from our sight, and our approaches in dazzling glory,
and light inaccessible: But his nature, that is, the Principle of his actions,
is his goodness; and his attributes are but the several modes and variegations
of Almighty Love, from which they differ but as the colors of the Rainbow do
from the light of the Sun. This then is the dearest and most God-like
Attribute, and the Divine glory is most concerned in the honor of his
goodness; and against this Satan has in these latter days especially been most
subtly and unhappily designing.

For perceiving that the notion of a God was so deeply pressed upon the Souls of
men, that there was no erasing, no plucking it thence: He endeavors to corrupt
and undermine what he could not otherwise destroy. And if he cannot obtain of
the world to say with the Fool, There is no God, he will attempt to persuade them
to believe, that God is like him, or themselves, and so is worse than none:
which he does by instilling notions into the minds of men, vastly prejudicial
to the honor of his goodness, and representing him as cruel, merciless, and
tyrannical, as one that has made Myriads of excellent creatures, to make them
miserable for ever, and who delights in triumphing over the wretched and
calamitous whom mere unaccountable Will has made so. As one that has involved
the greatest part of his best Creation in black and dismal fates, before they
sinned or had a being, that do what they can, will dragg them into the Regions
of endless woe and pain. Thus representing the God of Love, under the character
of the most detestable Cruelty and Injustice, and making him who is a Lover of
men, an Almighty Cannibal, and an Idol more black than the God of the barbarous
Americans.

Which sour and injurious apprehensions of God had never entered upon the
minds of men, by professed and open ways of opposing that goodness which shines
with so clear a beam into our Souls, and is writ upon every leaf of the sacred
volume, and external nature; and therefore the cunning agent has insinuated
them by a Device; pretending himself a mighty Zelot for the glory of God's
absolute will, power, and prerogative over his Creatures, which he has
strained and forced beyond all the bounds of Right, Just, and Good. And by such
representations he knows he does no real honor to these Attributes, but
reflects a certain disparagement upon the divine goodness. For a Will that is
arbitrary, and not governed by goodness and wisdom, is mere unaccountable
humor and womanish impotence, and not becoming him who acts by the Council of
his own will according to the Apostle; yea and the Heathen Poet, (...). And
that power and prerogative, that is a perfection of the divine nature, is
always in conjunction with the milder and sweeter attributes, he cannot lie, he
cannot destroy him, says the Apostle: He cannot act contrarily to the rules of
his infinitely perfect essence. And indeed to act inconsistently with the
eternal laws of Right and Good, is not only cruelty and injustice, but
impotency, and weakness. So that this mighty noise of the glory of Gods
absolute power and prerogative, in contriving and resolving the ruin of his
creatures, is no exaltation of any perfection in God, but a sad and particular
execution upon his goodness, and consequently upon Religion, the foundation of
which is laid in Love to God, which is fatally overthrown by such sour and
surly notions of him, as represent him as the hater of his creatures. And when
such apprehensions (as one has well observed) meet with stout and resolute
tempers, they do but canker them against such a Being, so that first they wish
he were not, and then easily persuade themselves he is not. Or, if such
opinions of God light on the more timorous and passive spirits, they do but
fright them into some poor sneaking, forced and feminine devotions, which are
devoid of all heart and life. And thus the success of the first device against
the glory of the divine goodness, is either Atheism, or a Superstition that is
near it.

But (2.) Satan devises against the glory of God, by disparaging his Grace;
which he does by detracting from the fullness, under pretense of exalting the
freeness of it. The Enemy of Mankind is envious at that Grace the Divine
goodness affords us, and denies him, and because he cannot confine the bounty
of Heaven, or hinder the beams from descending from above, he will endeavor to
raise clouds below that shall intercept them, and deprive us of their
influence, which he does by suggesting narrow and diminishing apprehensions of
the grace of God, and representing it as an arbitrary, contracted desultory
thing, bestowed only here and there by humoursome measures, and directed by no
rule but that of mere unaccountable will, by which abusive representation, the
glory of the divine Grace, which consists in its universal diffusion, is
clouded and eclipst, and the minds of men hindered from apprehending what they
enjoy, and from enjoying what without such an abuse they could not but
apprehend.

This is the design and the mischievous issue which to cover and to propagate,
the cunning Machinator pretends the exaltation of the freeness of that grace
which he designs to dishonor and defeat. He raises a mighty cry of Free
Grace, and intitles the Libellings of divine goodness by the specious name of
Vindiciae gratiae. He fills men's heads and mouths with Grace, Grace: O the
freeness of Gods grace! Nothing will be admitted but what comes in the Livery
of grace; men are pleased with the very word, and tickled with that dear and
agreeable sound: all discourses are insipid that are not full of free grace;
and he will not be allowed to know any thing of it, that is not rapt up into
the ecstasie of admiring it.

Who would think now that such a Spirit as this, that so highly pretends to
exalt Grace, should really disparage it, and undermine it? Who would think that
the enemy of Gods Grace, blew in this humor upon the world, and kinled this
mighty zeal that seems so gloriously to illustrate and recommend it? And yet we
may see reason to believe so, when we shall consider that this Free Grace, that
is so magnificently talked of, is infinitely unworthy God, and prejudicial to
his Glory, both in the notion of Free, and in the notion of Grace. For a thus
admired, thus celebrated freeness, is but an humoursome doting on a party,
which self-admirers are pleased to call the Elect, that is, those of their own
fashion and likeness. They first fancy themselves the favorites and special
darlings of Heaven, not from any reason they have to think so from the goodness
of their lives, but the strength of their imaginations, which furnish them with
strong and proud presumptions; and then they admire (and well they may) the
freeness of that grace which chooses them to be the darlings, and peculiar
people, with as little reason, as they can conceit themselves to be so. And
thus the freeness they commend in God, is that we call childish and
unreasonable fondness in our selves; which is infinitely unbecoming him, who is
a lover of Righteousness, and no respecter of persons: who acts by the eternal
Laws of Right and Good, and not by the feminine measures of impotent humor and
indulgence, and the freeness of whose Grace consists not in loving or favoring
us, without reason, but for reasons drawn from the benignity and perfection of
his own nature, which communicates without external motive or constraint,
without bounds or possibility of impediment. And thus we see how a corrupt and
abusive notion of the freedom of Gods grace, has been insinuated by this
device to the prejudice of his Glory. And as free grace has been misrepresented
in the notion of Free, so also has it been corruptly taught in the notion of
Grace, which some have represented as a violence the divine power offers unto
our wills; at least, superinducing a foreign quality upon us, to which we
contribute nothing, which makes us (...), as the Heathen expresses it, Good and
happy by a certain fate. So that good men are but a better sort of Engines. By
which notion of grace God is supposed to contradict the laws himself has
established in the Universe, which have provided that every thing act
consonantly to the rules of their own natures. Besides which, such an
irresistible impulse as this, defeats the doctrine of Rewards and Punishments.
For who is rewarded for actions that are prefectly another, or who is punished
for what he could not help? And if grace be such a force as makes men good
irresistibly, and this Grace bestowed only on one here, and another there,
merely as arbitrary Will shall dispose it; the greatest part of men (for ought
I see) will have fair apology for their sins, at least for their neglects,
since they wanted that which was necessary to make them better, and God alone
could have given them.

-- (...)
(...) --
was the Apology of the Heathen, and might be all men's else upon this supposal.
And to this I add, that such a notion of Gods grace, lays a foundation for
sloth and remission of all endeavor. For whoever believes that the grace of
God where it comes is like a mighty current that bears down all before it,
irresistibly forces our wills to a compliance, and makes such sudden and
miraculous changes upon our natures: I say whoever believes this, and thinks
also that this grace is necessary to make him good and happy, and that nothing
he can do can obtain it, or draw it near him; what can we expect, but that such
a man should neglect all care and diligence in order to the making himself
better, in expectation of this necessary irresistible Grace, without which his
endeavors are at the best impertinent? and who is so ridiculous to digg for
the wind to fill his Sails, or to endeavor to set to Sea without it?

We see then how the fullness and glory of the divine grace have been undermined
by plausible and dangerous conceits that have crept into the world under the
notion of free grace, dishonorable to God, and injurious to the interest of
men's Souls. And this is the second device I proposed to detect.

Thirdly then, another design Satan manageth against Gods glory, is to
disparage and vilify his Spirit, which he does by ascribing to it the foolish,
and sometimes wicked impulses, the fond and extravagant conceits of the sons of
imagination. For as of old when he perceived he could not overcome the belief
and acknowledgement of a Deity: He multiplied Gods, and Deified things of the
meanest and vilest rank and nature; even stocks and stones, vices and diseases:
in like manner perceiving now that he cannot hinder the influence of the Spirit
of God from being acknowledged in the world: He cries up every folly and hot
imagination, for the work of the Spirit: He entitles it to boiling passion,
under the name of zeal, and to the diseases of men's fancies, melancholy, and
frenzy under the name of the Spirits motions. Thus when kindled melancholy
has inflamed the imagination with hot and scalding conceits, and the fired
Fancy gets into the Revelations, opens the Seals, pours out the Viols, and
fantastically interprets the Fates of Kingdoms; when it is mounted on the Wings
of the Wind, flys into the Clouds, and flutters there in Mystical nonsense,
when it flows into the tongue in an extravagant ramble, and abuses the name
and word of God, mingling it with canting, unintelligible babble; I say, when
the diseased and the disturbed Fancy thus variously displays it self, Satan
makes men believe they are acted by the Spirit, and that those wild agitations
of sick imagination are divine motions.

And when this fire is descended from the fancy to the affections, and these,
being extremely moved by those vain and proud conceits, cause tremblings and
foamings, convulsions and ecstasies in the body (all which are but natural
diseases, if not worse, and just such as were those odd ecstatical motions of
the Devils Priests, when they came foaming from his Altars.) These I say the
same wicked Designer has taught these wild Phantasticks blasphemously to
ascribe to the blessed, and adorable Spirit. And when, their fancies being full
of turgid notions and their bodies in an ecstasie, they dream of strange
sights, voices, and wonderful discoveries, which are nothing but the unquiet
agitations of their disordered brains. These also Satan persuades them to be
divine Revelations, and effects of the Spirit of God showing it self
miraculously in them.

Briefly then and in sum: Every humor and Fantastic unaccountable motion
has by this device been represented as the work of that Spirit, to which they
are most opposite. Thus when warm and brisk Sanguine presents a cheerful Scene,
and fills the imagination with pleasant dreams, these are taken for divine
illapses, for the joys and incomes of the Holy Ghost. When heated Melancholy
has kindled the busy and active fancy; the Enthusiast then talks of
Illuminations, New Lights, Revelations, and many wonderful fine things, which
are ascribed to the same Spirit. But when Phlegm predominates, and quenches the
Fantastic Fire, rendering the mad man more dull, lumpish and unactive; then
the Spirit is withdrawn, and the man under spiritual darkness and desertion.
And when again choler is boiled up into rage and fury, against every thing that
is not of the Fantastic cut and measure, this also is presumed to be an holy
fervor kindled by that Spirit, whose real fruits are Gentleness and Love.

Thus then does the Devil devise to disgrace the Spirit of God and its
influence, by those numerous, vile, and vain pretensions, which he thinks a
likely means to extirpate the belief of the agency of the Spirit, and to render
it ridiculous.

But again (4.) Satan devises against Gods own glory by designing against his
worship. Which he does by endeavoring to destroy its reverence under pretense
of Spirituality. God requires to be glorified in body, and in soul, which are
his, and Satan sets the worship of one against the other, that he may destroy
both. Thus when under the Law Religion required the Pomp and Solemnity of
external Rites and Usages, the subtle designer drives it on in that method so
far, that at last the Spirit of Religion was lost in the ceremony, and the life
and substance in the circumstance. But when Christianity came into the world to
abolish that ceremonial economy in order to the establishing a more spiritual
frame of Worship, then does Satan turn with the Tide, and puts on the semblance
of a Zealot for Spirituality, which he prosecutes so far, till at last in the
Gnostics and other aerie Heretics, he had run Religion out into mere empty
Fantastic Notionality. In like manner where in these latter ages the world
has been disabused, and has detected the vanity of the formal outside
Religion of Rome. There does the designer fall in with the Current, sets up for
a Reformer, and mightily contends for the Spirituality of Worship. He gets into
the Pulpit, and there with hot and sweating zeal he cries up the purity, the
purity of Religion, and never leaves canting on the subject till he has fired
men's tongues against every matter of decency and order, as formal and
Antichristian. And when he is shut out of those high places, he creeps into
corners, and inflames the Spirits of the zealous and the ignorant, against all
harmless circumstances of Reverence and Decorum. And so far has he prevailed
in this device, as to drive those of warm affections, and weak heads, from all
due external Reverence to God and things Sacred. For these well-meaning people
being frighted by the terrible noise of Popery, Antichristianism, Superstition,
(things they have learnt to hate, but not to understand) boggle, and fly off
from every thing their furious Guides have marked with this abhorred Character.
And thus a rude and slovenly kind of Religion has made its way into the world,
and such a sordid carlesness in matters of divine worship, that should a
stranger come into the assemblies that are acted by this Spirit. He could not
by their carriage imagine what they were a doing; and that they were about holy
Offices, would perhaps be one of the last things he could conjecture. Thus bold
and saucy talk has crept into men's prayers, under the pretense of holy
familiarity with God, nauseous impertinent bawling, under the cover of praying
by the Spirit, and all kind of irreverences in external demeanor, under the
shelter of a pretended Spiritual worship.

And thus the design of Satan is successfully carried on in the world, which
is, to subtilize Religion till he has destroyed it. To make it invisible that
he may make it nothing. And this is another way whereby be betrays those who
are Ignorant of his Devices. And thus I have dispatched the first General, viz.
Satan's Devices against Gods glory.

From which I descend to the second, viz. Satan's devices against the Peace of
the Church, which, while it stands in its main and united body, is like a
mighty mountain unconcerned in the tumults in the air, while the blustering
winds and tempests assault, but cannot prejudice or disorder it. And therefore
the Designer endeavors to divide, what he cannot deal with in its knit and
combined strength: He strives to crumble it into Sects and Atoms, that this
mountain may become an heap of Sands, which he may blow up and down, and
scatter with his winds, and so at last become a plain before him. For which
Design he has two main instruments and Devices, viz. (1.) Pharisaical Pride
under the cover of Religious strictness: And (2.) Intemperate Heat, under the
notion of Holy and Divine Zeal. These are the chief Engines for the dividing
purposes.

(1.) Then he hatches, and fosters a Spirit of Pride and Sectarian Insolence,
(a sure and fatal Divider) under the specious pretense of Religious strictness.
For where he perceives he cannot succeed in his designs of debauching the
world, and propagating open profaneness and Impiety: He shifts his shape, puts
on the clothing of light, and wraps himself in a Cloak spun of strict and
severe pretensions; and in this habit puts himself among the proud and
conceited Professors. These he and their own vanity gild and adorn, with all
the glorious names and privileges of the Gospel; and when they have incircled
their heads with their own Fantastic Rays, and are swollen in their
imaginations, with a tympany of ridiculous greatness: They then proudly contemn
all, but their darling selves, under the notion of the formal, the moral, and
the wicked; and scornfully pity the poor and carnal world, that is, all that
are not arrived to their conceited pitch and elevation: and now having thus
dignified themselves, and debased others, they herd together, draw the Church
into their little corners, and proudly withdraw from the Communion of others,
who have less conceit, though more Christianity. They bid us stand off, lest we
pollute them with our unhallowed approaches, and having made us as the Heathen
and Publican, they cry, Come out from among them. The true Church, Soundness of
Judgment, Purity of Doctrine, and of worship (if we will believe them) is
confined to their Gange; just as it was to the corners of Africa of old, when
their friends the Gnostics were there. Thus they swell and swagger in their
fantastic imaginations, till some other Sect as well conceited as themselves
endeavor to take their Plumes from them, and to appropriate these glorious
Prerogatives unto their own party; and then they bustle and contend, Here Is the
Church cries one, nay but it is here cries another, till a third gives the lie to
them both, and then the scuffle grows warm of Pride against Hypocrisy, and the
self-conceit of one Sect against the Pride of another, and all against sobriety
and truth: and thus is the Church divided, the interest of Religion weakened,
and the world prepared for Atheism.

But (2.) Another instrument and Device, Satan uses to imbroil the Church, is
Fantastic heat under the name and notion of divine zeal. Fire is a subtle and
powerful Divider, and no fire like that which is supposed to come from the
Altar, though it be but a passionate flame kindled in a fiery temper that is
only tinctured with Religion. For every thing that is hot and vehement about
Religious matters wears the name and Livery of Zeal; and Zeal when it is
directed by good Principles, to the ends of sobriety and virtue, is a noble and
generous temper; but when it is actuated by ignorance and evil principles, and
hurried on by blind impulses, to the ends of rage and animosity, it is a
dangerous, and killing evil. And like a firebrand in a Magazine of powder,
which destroys without distinction, and blows up every thing that resists the
fury of its motion. This then being fair in its pretense, and mischievous in
its effects, Satan uses in his designs of dividing. He kindles some little
Religious warmths in eager and violent Constitutions, and blows the Coals till
natural passion be concerned and fired: So that at last what was at first only
a spark of Religion, becomes a mighty flame of Rage. Then breaks he out upon
the Church with this holy Fire, destroys that Charity which is the bond of
peace, and fills all with smoke and vapor, darkness and confusion. He
Christens this Jehu-like fury, a Zeal for God, and declaims against every thing
that is sober and temperate, as luke-warmness and indifference. He gets into
the Populace (who have many grains of Rage for one of Judgment) and hurries
the poor mistaken Bigot, together with the proud Pharisaical Dissenter, and the
silly conceited Schismatic, into the same unavoidable ruin, to eternal ages.

From which, etc.

SERMON XI. THE ANTIQUITY OF OUR FAITH Stated and Cleared.

SERMON XI.
JUDE I. 3. Beloved when I gave all diligence to write unto you of the common
Salvation, it was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you, that you
should earnestly contend for the Faith which was once delivered to the Saints.
OUr Savior tells us in the Parable, that where the Husbandman had sown the
good Seed, there the enemy scattered Tares, where God by his Spirit and
Messengers has planted Sacred and Divine truths, there Satan sets Errors,
Heresies, and Doctrines not according to Godliness: These were early in the
Christian Church, even in the original Purity and Simplicity of it. There were
then Deceivers, Lying Spirits, Seducers, who separated themselves from the
Communion of the Church, crept into houses, led captive silly men, and silly
women; privily brought in damnable Heresies, even to the denying the Lord that
bought them; turned many from the faith to follow fables, dreams, and senseless
imaginations. Such there were then, and St. Paul tells us that there must be
Heresies, 1 Cor. 11. 19. The lusts and various corruptions of men, in
conjunction with the permissions of God, make them unavoidable. Some of the
first we read of in the Christian Church, were the Judaizing Christians, who
taught the necessity of retaining the Mosaical law, the denyers of the
Resurrection, and the vile Gnostics who under pretense of more knowledge, and
higher privileges, abused Christian Liberty to all licentiousness, and
vileness of living, making shipwreck both of Faith and Conscience. Against
these, St. Peter, St. James, St. John, particularly write in their Epistles,
and this of our Apostle St. Jude, is all directed against that Heresy. In
opposition to which, writing of the Common Salvation, he says, it was needful
to write unto them (the true Catholics) and exhort them, that they should
earnestly contend for the Faith, which was once delivered to the Saints.

This was needful in his days, and it is certainly as necessary in ours, in
which all the old Heresies are revived, with the addition of new, on which
account the subject is too seasonable, and I chose it at this time, as a
Preface to the discourses, I intend on all the main Principles of the Christian
Religion, as I have already treated, in order, on all the Principal heads of
the Natural,

In the words read, two main propositions are employed.

1. That there was a Faith anciently delivered to the Saints.

2. That all Christians are bound to contend, and earnestly, for that Faith
which was delivered to those Saints.

I begin with the First. There was a Faith delivered to the Saints. Now aimidst
the great diversity, and contrariety of opinions, that at present are in the
Christian Church, each entitling it self to the Faith that was originally
delivered to the Saints, it may seem a matter of difficulty to determine which
is the right, the true Faith: which difficulty does not arise so much from the
nature of the thing, as it does from men's corrupt interests and affections,
disputing about it. And therefore abstracting from these, I shall endeavor to
set before you, the chief Characters of the true Faith, by which you may judge
what that is, and where it is to be found.

And 1. The Faith we treat of, is an Ancient, Primitive Faith. Quod verum id
prius: Truth was from the beginning. Diverse of the Doctrines with which our
Savior has enlightened every one that comes into the world, were before his
personal appearance in it. Before Abraham was I am, says He; and Abraham saw
his day, the discovery of his great truths and ways. He was the Author and
Finisher of our Faith: In him it begun; and it was consummate in his personal
teaching and instructions of his immediate Disciples and Apostles, who by the
Spirit delivered to us what they had received from him. Natural Truths are more
and more discovered by time: For many go to and fro, and Science shall be
increased. But those divine verities are most perfect in their fountain and
original. They contract impurities in their streams and remote derivations; and
the way to discover the corruptions is to stand upon the old ways, and see how
it was in the beginning.

By this Character of the Faith; that of the Roman Church is condemned. For all
the Doctrines and usages of that Church that are denied and opposed by ours,
are in comparison Novelties and Innovations; and whatever Antiquity they
pretend to, they were not primitive. Their Image Worship, Invocation of Saints,
Half-Communion, and Prayer in an unknown tongue, are directly, palpably
contrary to the Holy Scriptures: Their pretended Infallibility, and
Universality, their Indulgences, Purgatory, and Transubstantiation, with diverse
others of their Doctrines, and usages are by plain consequence condemned by
those Sacred Writings, which are the repository of the ancient Faith and
Practice; and both the one and the other were unknown to the first and purest
times, those of the first three hundred, nay six hundred years: which
assertions, I have in this place particularly and largely made good; and diverse
of our Learned Divines have in their writings fully proved it: Nor is there any
one thing which we condemn in the Roman belief or practice, but what has arose
by the corruption of times, long since the beginning; and indeed in the the
Church of Rome, there is an eternal fountain of Innovations, in the authority
they assume, of declaring; that is in good earnest, in making new Articles of
Faith. So that their people can never know when they have all; new things may
still be obtruded as necessary and essential, without end.

On the other side, the Character of Antiquity condemns the Sects also. Among
them there are some old Heresies received, but their principles and practices,
as opposite to those of our Church of England, were not in the first, best
times. Presbytery, Independency, Anabaptism, Quakerism may have been here, and
there of old in the brains of some particular conceited men, but never were in
any general practice any where; the eldest not two hundred years ago; and some
have arose in our own time. Their ways they pretend to, be contained in the
holy Scriptures; and if so, we would presently acknowledge them to be
Primitive: But they are in the Scriptures, only as those are interpreted by
their private Spirits; that is, not there, but in the fancies of the
Innovators; and these being their guide, in interpreting, Lo! here also is a
fountain of perpetual novellizing. And as long as the imaginations of men can
frame novelties, we shall never be at the end of new Sects.

We have seen the rise of some in our late times of confusions, and if ever we
should be so unhappy as to see such again (which God forbid) in all likelihood
from the same Source; other new, yet unheard of, Sects and Heresies would
arise, to the further dividing of the Chncurh, ad scandal of Religion. There is
nothing so pregnant with Novelties as imagination, and the Sectarian private
Spirit is no better nor worse than Fancy. I deny not, but these, all sorts of
them, do retain some of the Primitive Doctrines, as the Roman Church also does;
but their opinions and ways that are opposite to the Church of England, are not
such.

This our Church, without fondness or overweening, I may say, does profess and
teach the Ancient, Apostolical, Primitive Christianity, and has admitted no
new things that are contrary to it. It was reformed according to the
Scriptures; the Scriptures, as they are interpreted by the first General
Councils, and Fathers, those next the Apostles, who, we ought to believe,
understood best what were their doctrines and ways.

This Church in its constitutions is therefore truly ancient, so in every main,
every considerable thing; and truly Protestant, protesting both against Roman
and Sectarian Innovations.

2. Another Character of the Faith delivered to the ancient Saints, is, that it
was pure: 'Twas delivered to the Saints, and it made them such. The wisdom that
is from above is first pure. It teaches and produces Purity, Holiness, and
real Goodness, in Heart and Life. The business of it is to conform us unto God,
and to make us like him: And the Lord our God is holy.

And by this Character also is Popery condemned. For this teaches some direct
impieties and immoralities, and by the consequence of some other of its
Doctrines, the necessity of Reformation of life, is quite taken away; the Reins
are laid on men's necks, and Gods Laws are made void by their traditions.

Of the first sort are their Idolatries, and Invocation of Saints and Angels,
which God both in the Old Testament and the New, has so earnestly declared
against; as the highest dishonor to his Majesty, and affront to his Glory; and
which he stigmatizeth as the greatest impurities; and frequently calls
Fornication and Whoredom; they are spiritually so: Likewise their doctrines
and practices of deposing and murdering of Princes, and absolving the people
from their Allegiance, their dispensing with Perjuries, Rebellions, and other
sorts of wickedness, are highest immoralities, and most Antichristian; that is,
most contrary to the Spirit, Genius, and designs of the holy Jesus, which were
to redeem unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. Besides which
direct and point blank oppositions, to the Christian principles and Rules, they
strike at the root and main design of Christianity, by those their doctrines
that render repentance and change of life unnecessary.

For according to them, the favor of God and eternal Salvation may be had upon
easier terms: Crossings, Pilgrimages, Ave Mary's, Whippings, Fastings, with
Confession and Absolution, will do the business. There is no need of cutting
off right hands, of plucking out of right eyes, and mortifying the body, in our
Saviors spiritual sense; that is, of subduing and rescinding all inordinate
appetites and affections, (which are the great difficulties of Religion) the
bodily exercises will suffice; we may be safe, and Sainted without obedience to
those hard sayings. Or, if the other things should be omitted, it is but going
to Purgatory at last, and if you have money to leave for Masses and Dirge's,
you are secure of being prayed out thence. So that here the greatest design of
the Gospel, which is real, inward holiness, and purity, is destroyed: And
without holiness it is here made possible to see God. And this is the worst
thing that any thing that pretends to Religion can be guilty of.

On the other hand the Sects, whatever purity and spirituality they pretend, do
many, most of them, teach doctrines, and walk in ways that are contrary to the
purity of heart and life, that becomes a Christian. The Gnostics, who were
some of the first Fanatics in the Christian Church, pretended that they were
the spiritual, the pure people, and that all things to them were pure, on which
account they gave themselves up to all Immorality and filthiness: Sensual,
says the Apostle, having not the Spirit. They denied there was any moral good
and evils in the nature of things, and estimate of God. And this Heresy is
received among some of our Sects, God they think and say, sees no sin in them
his elect people. He loves not for the sake of holiness and virtue, but freely,
that is, for no reason but mere unaccountable will; and if so, it is in vain to
amend our lives, to live soberly, righteously, and godly, in order to our
acceptance with him: Though we are the quite contrary in all manner of evil
conversation, we may yet be his beloved, his chosen: This has the malignity of
the worst of Popery or Heathenism. And such a Principle is among some of the
Sects: I accuse not all others that do not affirm so much as this, do in a
manner make good works unnecessary: Faith, their airy Faith, that prescinds
from moral goodness is all. All is believing, receiving, trusting, relying;
which are great duties, parts of Faith, but this, as justifying implys more,
viz. an entire obedience to the Gospel. Such a Faith as this is that which St.
James writes so earnestly against, as dead, and unsignifying (of it self alone)
to the purpose of Justification, and acceptance with God. Again the imputed
Righteousness of Christ, is a great truth rightly understood, but by diverse
Sectaries it is abused to this false notion, that all Righteousness that Christ
wrought, is formally and properly ours, as if we had done it: So that we may be
holy and virtuous by his holiness, though we have none of our own, contrary to
that of St. John, Little Children, let no man deceive you, he that does
righteousness, is righteous, even as he is righteous. 1 John 3. 7. But these
fancy they are righteous, without doing Righteousness: if they can lay hold on
Christ, roll upon him, (as they phrase it) and firmly believe that he is
theirs, they are then completely righteous, by the imputation of his, though
they have none of their own: which Solifidian, Antinomian Notions, that are
lately spread among the Sects, place Religion in the fancy, as the Popish
Doctrines do in some external services; and as effectually as theirs, take away
the necessity of real reformation, and true goodness. I might add a great deal
more under this head, as their Doctrines of Infirmities, by which they excuse
themselves in their Spiritual sins, their decrying morality, as a dull, low,
graceless thing, the immoral practices of Schism, Disobedience, etc. that they
indulge and defend themselves in. These are impurities that are contrary to
that Faith which was once delivered to the Saints.

But now the Church of England teaches all the duties we owe to God, our
Neighbor, and our selves, in the just latitude and extent of them. It has no
shifts or evasions of Repentance, and Reformation. It allows no hopes of
Salvation but upon those terms. It teaches no practice that is impious, or
immoral, nor indulgeth any; whoever is an evil man in this Church, knows he is
so, by his own Principles he is condemned; and has no hopes of Salvation, but
what are grounded on effectual Repentance, and Reformation.

3. The Faith delivered to the Saints is peaceable. Those Saints were so;
Sheep, Lambs, Doves. Such was their Lord, the Prince of Peace, and his
Religion, the wisdom from above pure and peaceable. By this Character also
Popery is confuted, which tends to the destruction both of Ecclesiastical, and
civil peace. The former, the peace of the Church, they pretend to have best
provided for, by the Supremacy and Infallibility they have erected in theirs.
And by these all Controversies in Religion, are (they tell us) quickly ended.
But the misery on it is, that that which should end the Controversies, is it
self, one, and the greatest. They have an effectual Engine for Union, but they
themselves are not agreed where it is; and they are incurably divided about
this their ground of uniting. For some place the Supremacy and Infallibility in
the Pope, some in the Council, some in both; and this has not been only the
opposition of petty Doctors and Disputers, but Church is against Church: The
French and the German for one; and the Spaniard and the Italian for another:
Yea Pope has decreed against Pope in this matter; and Pope and General Council
against Pope and General Council. Lo! here is the Catholic Union, the certain
and infallible way of ending Controversies in Religion. A way they have, but
they cannot find it: Yea, they are together by the ears about that Infallible
way of ending all strife. And notwithstanding this rare receipt that is in
their hands, the disease, the great differences and disputes of their several
disorders, remains still uncured. And indeed that Church has laid a foundation
for everlasting differences and disagreements, by bringing numerary,
speculative, and doubtful Tenants into their Creeds; an Engine for endless
divisions. There is no possible uniting, but upon the few, main, certain
Articles contained in the Primitive Creeds. Additions to these are the chief
grounds of the Divisions of Christendom. So that the Roman Church provides not
for Ecclesiastical Peace, but destroys it by its disputable Articles of Faith;
and further so, by its other intolerable terms of Communion, the various
Idolatries and Superstitions it imposes, by which they drive the best and most
intelligent Christians from them: And so are themselves the Schismatics: They
make the breaches in the Church they complain of. And for civil peace, it is
clear in all Histories, that the Popes, and their Agents and Emissaries
(especially the Jesuits) have been the great embroylers and Incendiaries of
Christendom: The combustions and troubles of every nation in it, can sadly
witness this. The forementioned Doctrines of Deposing Kings, and absolving the
people from their Allegiance, are principles of everlasting Rebellions, and
disturbance.

But let us look on the other side. How is it with the Sects in respect of
peaceableness? why, they may say unto strife, Thou art our Mother, and to Feuds
and Animosities, you have brought us into the world. Unpeaceabless of
principles, and temper, breed and maintain them. They are broken from the
Church, and divided each from other, and amongst themselves subdivided, minc't
almost into Atoms. There is nothing but endless divisions, animosities,
jarrings, disputes among them: The ways of peace they have not known, they will
not know. They have causlesly separated from the Communion of the Church of
England, and for the same reasons must have left the Fellowship of the Saints
mentioned in the Text, and of all the Christians of the Primitive times, to
whom both in doctrine and many practices, they are most unlike.

And upon the same principles, new Sects grow out of them, that divided first,
and more evils spring from those others from time to time, to the worlds end. I
deny not but that there are diverse misled abused persons of peaceable, and
quiet Spirits, drawn in among them, and we are to pray, and to endeavor that
such may be regained; and if the Government should think fit to abate some
lesser things in consideration of such, to satisfy and recover them, it would
be charity and kindness, that I know not who would dislike. But those that are
of the right Sectarian stamp and temper, will never rest, or settle any where,
nor be satisfied with any concession. God Almighty may change their hearts and
minds by his power, but nothing less can; and all that we can do is to pray to
him for them: Nothing less than their whole wills, and an entire subjection to
their fancies, will content them: and if those were granted, we could not be
assured they would please them long; nothing uses to do so. They are Clouds
carried about with winds, Jude v. 12. Let the wind be where it will to day, no
one can say from what point it will blow to morrow. They are acted by a private
Spirit that is as little certain: The opinions it suggests are numerous, and
all accounted divine and sacred, (Gods truth, Gospel ways) they must not be
parted with, or silenc't; no, all Laws and Constitutions of Government must be
thwarted, overthrown rather: Love and Peace and all must be sacrificed to the
Idols; which being so, what quietness can there be from hence? what peace or
temper among such principles? These perpetually annoy, and disturb the Church;
and to know what they do in the State, let us consider Germany, Scotland, and
it is to be hoped (though we have frail memories on this side) we shall not
forget how peaceable the Sectaries have been in England, or not observe how
quiet they are at this day. Remember I hope we shall for Caution; I urge no
other remembrance. I wish they themselves did not remember them so well, as we
find they do by many of the same actions and discourses: That Kings hold from
the people; are only Trustees for them, and may be resisted and deposed, when
they fail in that trust, are Politics that do not much tend to civil peace,
and we know whose Principles those were; and we have no great reason to think
they have quitted them. I can give but brief hints of things that would afford
matter enough to fill Volumes, as both Popish and Sectarian disloyalty,
Rebellions and disturbances would do. But into these men's secrets let not our
Souls come.

The Church that we (some of us at least) profess our selves to be members of,
teaches no unpeaceable doctrines, is guilty of no such practices. It imposes
no Articles on our belief, as necessary to our Salvation, but the Ancient
Creeds; no terms of Communion, but such reasonable orders and decencies as are
free from all appearance of Idolatry and Superstition, or any thing else that
is unlawful; as will appear to any rational man, that shall take the pains to
consider, and will judge impartially: nothing that is more burdensome or
grievous, than the Rites and usages of the Primitive Christian Church were;
which assertions I have in this place lately proved, and diverse of our Divines
in their books have fully done it, to the shame of Fanatical Gainsayers. As to
the concerns of civil peace, our Church, with Christ and his Apostles, teaches
active, cheerful, conscientious obedience to the King, and subordinate Rulers
in all lawful things, and quiet submission to the penalties of not obeying,
when the things required are unlawful, plainly, certainly so: And that we are
not in this, nor in any case to resist. Suitable to this have been the
practices of the people of this peaceable Church: Among whom there has not yet
been found a Rebel. We never heard of a Church of England-man in the late wars
against the King, nor of a Sectary for him.

But 4. The Faith delivered to the Saints, was a reasonable Faith; the
understanding of man is the Candle of the Lord, Prove. 20. 27. The light of
Reason is his light; with this The true light has enlightened every one that
comes into the world, Joh. 1. 9. and one light is not contrary to another,
there is difference in degree, but no opposition of Nature. Faith and Reason
accord: Yea, Faith is an act of Reason: it is the highest reason to believe in
God: and the belief of our reason, is an act of Faith, viz. Faith in the truth
and goodness of God, that would not give us faculties to delude and deceive us,
when we rightly exercise and employ them. By Faith Reason is further
enlightened, and by the use of Reason Faith is applied. Religion and Reason
sweetly agree; and nothing can be Religious that is unreasonable. Religion is a
reasonable service. And by this Character Popery is disproved also. For that
imposes on the practice and minds of men, things that are extremely
unreasonable and absurd, as Articles of Religion: Such are the worship of
invisible beings, by Images of Wood or Stone, and especially the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation which is full of Contradictions; as that the same body can
be in a thousand places at once; that at the same time it may be bigger, and
less than it self; that it may move toward and from it self; That it may be
divided not into parts, but wholes: These, and numerous other absurdities and
contradictions, to the reason of mankind are contained in the senseless mystery
of Popish Transubstantiation. To defend which, the Doctors of that Church are
put upon this miserable shift of denying all reason in Religion, even the
greatest and most fundamental Article of it, That the same thing can be, and
not be: which some of them say is the only method to confute Heretics. And
while Reason and our Faculties are acknowledged, we cannot entertain their
nonsense, nor be answered in our just oppositions of their gross absurdities.

On the other side, the Character of a reasonable Faith condemns the Sects, the
greatest part of whose Divinity is made up of senseless, absurd notions, set
forth in unintelligible Fantastical Phrases; and these they account the heights
of spirituality and mystery, upon which they value and boast themselves, as the
only knowing, the only spiritual people. When there is nothing in all their
pretended heights and spiritualities, but vain imagination and dreaming; and in
v. 8. of this Epistle they are described by this Character, (...), Dreamers.
And as the light of Sense and Reason dispels the vain Images of Dreams, so
these admitted would cure Fanatical impostures and delusions. For which cause
there is nothing they so vehemently declaim against as Reason, under the notion
of carnal, and as an enemy to the Spirit, and the things of it. There is indeed
a carnal Reason, that is enmity to truth and goodness; but that is not the
reason of our minds, but the reason of our appetite, passion, and corrupt
interest; which is not reason truly so called, no more than an Ape is a man.
But for want of thus distinguishing the things that so differ, Enthusiasts rail
violently against all Reason, as the grand adversary of the truths and
mysteries of the Gospel. Their Tenants that she calls so will not bear that
light.

But the Church of England teaches no opinions, no mysteries that need such a
desperate course to defend them. Its Articles of Faith are all contained in the
Ancient Christian Creeds, which are no way opposite to Reason in any Article,
yea, Reason either proves or defends them all. So that we never give out at
this weapon, but are ready to use it upon all occasions against Atheists and
Infidels of all sorts. The Church of England owns no Religion but what is
reasonable.

5. The Faith delivered to the Saints was certain; it was delivered to them by
those that had it from the holy Spirit of God, in the way of immediate
inspiration. Those holy men spoke as they were inspired. And that they were
really so, was no fond imagination, or bold presumption, but a truth assured by
those mighty miracles they were enabled to perform. Those are Gods Seal, and
the grand confirmation of a commission from him: and to this proof of their
Doctrines, both Christ and his Apostles continually appealed. Here is the firm
reasonable Foundation of the Christian certainty: The truths we believed are
confirmed by Miracles, than which there can be no greater evidence.

But now the Roman Church destroys this ground of certainty by a multitude of
lying wonders, which they impudently obtrude upon the belief of the people, for
proof and confirmation of their false and corrupt Religion; the immediate
consequence of which is a suspicion thereby brought upon the true Miracles; and
here is way made for Skepticism and uncertainty in the greatest, and most
Sacred Christian Doctrines. And besides, the Church of Rome having introduced
among these many doubtful, uncertain, and many certainly false opinions, and
imposed them upon the faith of its votaries, under the same obligations as it
does the most fundamental Articles; what can be the consequence, but that those
who discover the error, or uncertainty of some of those pretended propositions
of Faith, should doubt all the rest? And indeed since the main assurance is
placed in the Infallibility of that Church, for which there is so no reason,
and so much plain evidence to the contrary: Since themselves cannot tell where
that boasted Infallibility is, whether in Pope or Council, if we should allow
them any such, it follows that their Faith is precarious, and has no
foundation at all.

In like manner the Sects among us resolve all their assurance either into a
bare belief, or the testimony of a private Spirit; for their ground of
crediting the Scriptures is but this Testimony; and consequently whatever they
receive from hence bottoms here. The Papists believe the Scripture on the
Testimony of the Church, and these believe them on the Testimony of the Spirit,
that is in earnest, the suggestions and resolutions of their own, viz. they
believe because they will believe, and they find themselves inclined unto it.

And upon the same reason, when the imagination and humor alters they may
cease to believe, or believe the contrary. And there is not any thing in the
world more various and uncertain than the suggestions and impulses of a private
Spirit. Besides, the Sects also have vastly multiplied Articles of Faith, and
made all their private opinions sacred, calling them Gospel truths, precious
truths, saving truths, and the like; when they are but uncertainties at the
best, and usually false, and senseless imaginations; by which way also they
expose the whole body of Christian Principles to suspicion, and so weaken the
Faith of some, and destroy the Faith of others.

But the Church of England secures the certainty of our Faith, by resolving it
into the Scriptures, the true seats of Infallibility, and the belief of that
into the Testimony of the Spirit in the true sense, viz. that Testimony that
God gave by his Spirit to Christ and his Apostles, in those miraculous works he
enabled them to perform: They did not only bear witness of themselves, that, as
our Savior argues with the Jews, Luke 11. 48. would not have signified much:
The Father bore witness with them, John 15. 8. and the works they performed by
his power, were the sure testimony: Believe me for the works sake, says our
Savior. Here is the ground of certainty. And the Church of England entertains
no Articles of Faith, but those principles that have been so confirmed, that
is, none but what are evidently contained in the Holy Scriptures. Whereas the
Roman Church (to mention no other) have made the absurd Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, sacred, though it is not only not contained in Scripture
but contrary to the reason, and even to the sound senses of mankind. And if
neither reason, nor so much as our senses, may be believed, what assurance can
we have of any thing? A ground is here laid for everlasting Skepticism and
uncertainty. And the Sects have laid the same in their numerous, silly tenants,
that are contrary to some of the most fundamental principles of Reason. Nothing
of which, can with any show, be objected against this Church.

6. The Faith delivered to the Saints, was Catholic. 'Twas delivered to all
the Saints, entertained by all: and was not only the opinion and belief of a
prevailing Faction, or of particular men in Corners. The Commission given the
Disciples, was to go and teach all Nations, and to preach the Gospel to every
creature, and accordingly it was widely diffused, and all that professed the name
of Christ, were instructed in his Faith and Religion; in all the articles and
duties of it, that were essential and necessary: In these they joined in holy
love and communion, till Sects came among them, that introduced damnable
Heresies, contrary to the doctrine they had received: These divided from the
Unity of the pure Catholic Church, and separated themselves from it, gathering
into select companies of their own, under pretense of more Truth and Holiness.

After this manner, the Church of Rome; which had for some ages been eminent in
the Catholic Church, did at last corrupt, and introduce diverse unsound
doctrines and usages, unknown to the Ancient Catholics; and being great and
powerful, it assumed the name of the Catholic Church to it self, and condemned
all other Christians as Heretics, when it was it self but a grand Sect,
against whose depraved doctrines and ways, there was a Church in all ages that
did protest. For the Greek Churches, which are of as large extent as theirs,
never assented to them; and diverse other Christians in all times, bore
Testimony against those errors and depravations. This Sect was large and
numerous indeed, but it is not the number, but the principles, make the
Catholic; Principles conformable to those that were delivered to the Saints.
From these they have departed. And the lesser Sects among us have done the
same, by the many vain additions that they have made to the Faith, and their
unjust Separation from that Church, which retains the whole body of Catholic
Doctrines and main Practices; without the mixture of any thing Heretical or
unlawful. A Church that does not damn all the world besides her own members, as
the Roman Church, and diverse of the Sects do, but extends her Charity to all
Christians, though many of them are under great mistakes, and so is truly
Catholic both in her Principles and Affections, I mean the Church of England
as now established by Law, which God preserve in its purity. Amen.

FINIS.
A SERMON Preached at the FUNERAL OF Mr. Jos. Glanvil, Late Rector of BATH, and
Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty: Who dyed at his Rectory of Bath, the
fourth of November, 1680. and was Buried there the Ninth of the same Month.

By Jos. Pleydell, Archdeacon of Chichester.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortlock at the Sign of the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard, and the White Heart in Westminster Hall. 1681.

REVEL. XIV. Ver. 13. And I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write,
Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, from henceforth, yea says the
Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them.
THe more attentively we consider the Christian Religion in any of its parts,
we find greater grounds for the confirmation both of its Author and excellency;
so infinitely does it surpass all those writings of that nature, which the
great Sages of the World, have, with so much superciliousness on their part,
and admiration from their respective followers, I may add too (all things
considered) not without meriting due praise from us, delivered to their
Scholars.

And this will appear evident and undeniable if we but parallel them in any of
the chief heads; for instance, in the principles upon which our Religion does
proceed, the precepts it contains, and the rewards it appoints; which division
will comprize the sum of what we profess: In all which the great Masters of
Heathen wisdom, do plainly discover, either a great deal of Ignorance, or
malice, in prevaricating that light they had reflected upon them from Jewish
tradition, so that it may be well doubted whether their Symbolick Divinity were
not designed rather to concel their own Ignorance in what they pretended to,
than to secure the rites and mysteries thereof from the vulgar's profanation.
For example:

1. Take first the Principles, those truths that are the Basis and foundation
of our Religion; such as are the Being and Nature of God, the Creation of the
World, the Fall of man, and his Redemption by a Messiah, the Immortality of the
Soul, and the Resurrection; it is plain the whole Philosophic world had none,
or but a very imperfect knowledge of almost all of them; However some, of their
lavish Charity, have endeavored to squeeze as much from their writings: Nay,
that they were not without some knowledge of our greatest Mysteries, viz. of a
Messiah under their Daimono-Latria, and even of the Trinity in Plato's Triad,
and the Resurrection of the body, under the Indians Palin-genesis: But no body
that has any veneration either for the Scriptures, or but for Truth in general,
but must see and acknowledge that all this is but tortured from them.

Nor may we deny this further, that whatever Notions of this kind they had,
were but traditional in respect of their Origin, and conjectural in reference
to their ambiguity and uncertainty.

2. The like is to be said of their Rules and Precepts of virtuous living. For
we may not detract thus much from them, that they have recommended many
excellent Institutes to their Sects. You shall collect among them many very
admirable sayings, such as these;

To know our selves; to abstain from vice; to bear afflictions: to do justly,
and speak truly (...) do as we would be done by; and many more.

Indeed for that kind of Divinity which was deducible from the Rules of common
prudence and observation, and depended not chiefly or solely upon Divine
Revelation, they have done extraordinary well: And if they had not furnished us
with so many famous examples of Virtue too, it would not reflect so much upon
the Professors of Christianity, which in the spirituality of its precepts has
as far exceeded all that they have writ, as some of their Lives have most of
ours; though that be not to be imputed to our Religion, unless it were justly
chargeable upon the vitiosity or defect of its Principles or Rules.

Thus miserably however do we compensate the Divine culture; and as if Nature
abhorring so great a disparity betwixt mankind, would thus balance the Heathen
with the Christian World; by opposing their Imperfect Knowledge, but severer
Virtue, to our diviner Laws, but greater licentiousness in Practice: Many of
them having, by as great proportions exceeded us in their endeavors after
goodness, as we do them in the knowledge and other means of it.

3. Last of all (which brings it to our present subject) Christianity propounds
nothing but upon the fairest and surest encouragement imaginable. For the
happiness of our Religion is both transcendently superior to their discoveries
and accounts of it; and then also we are sufficiently and unquestionably
assured hereof, i.e. it is not recommended to us upon plausible persuasions and
inconclusive arguments, but in the genuine sense of St. Paul's expressions, 1 Corinthians. 2. 4. in demonstration of the Spirit and Power.

So that we see there is a kind of peculiar excellency in the Holy Scriptures,
above all the Systems of the greatest Moralists; the foundation of our
Obedience being laid upon clearer and better principles, the practice of our
obedience being carried higher by the spirituality of its commands, and the
rewards of our obedience being incomparably greater, than what we can conceive,
much less could they promise or bestow.

It Is the last of these that is contained in the Text, and for which I am to be
further accomptable to ye in the prosecution of the words I have read. And I
heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed, etc. Wherein we have
these following particulars principally to be observed.

1. The happiness of good men described by its general nature, they are
blessed, and by its integral parts, they rest from their labors, and their
works do follow them.

2. The Security and Evidence upon which this happiness is promised and
asserted, yea says the Spirit.

3. The time of its perfection and accomplishment, partly in this life, but not
fully nor completely till death, saying Blessed are the dead that dye in the
Lord.

4. And lastly, the Influence which the consideration of these premises ought
to have upon us, both in Life and Death, in reference to Obedience and
Patience. And

I. To begin with the description of that happiness, those rewards, which are
propounded to us for the encouragement of our Obedience and Patience: Which are
so great, that I am utterly ignorant by what measures to describe them to ye.
The nature of that Celestial bliss as far transcending all our present
felicities, by which we should judge of it; as it does the very capacity of our
meriting it.

Sir Francis Bacon has observed, We can have but a very imperfect account of
those things, which receed any whit near those extremes of Nothing and
Infinity: because either by their parvity or immensity, they elude or confound
our knowledge.

And especially the latter, which choke the understanding; and is like the
beholding of the Sun, whose light and luster, by which we discern other
objects, marrs, and dimms our sight.

Such is the transcendent excellency of our future bliss, at once the delight
and amazement of our Intellectuals.

In the description whereof our highest expressions are so far from being
hyperbolical, that they amount but to a Litotes; so that after our utmost
endeavors we must content our selves with St. Paul's account of it, in his
First and Second Epistles to the Corinthians, 1 Ep. c. 2. v. 9.
his (...), and his (...), unutterable, 2 Ep. chapter 12. v. 4.
for that I take to be the meaning (and not as we render it unlawful) of (...),
and also unconceiveable.

So inevitably should we diminish the Glory of Heaven, by any expression,
illustration, or parallel whatever.

Which happiness of ours consists of, and is integrated by these two parts.

The total privation of all evil.

And the aggregate enjoyment of all good.

Both which as they are necessarily requisite to the nature of the things, so
are they contained in the very notion of the word.

For as the plurality of the Hebrew word (...) [Ashrei] ostendit omnigenam
beatitudinem; so more expressly does the Etymology of the Greek word answer
hereunto, (...) either from (...) immunity from evil, or (...) extremity of
joy; and accordingly it is described in my Text, first Privatively, and then
Positively.

1. For the privative part, Rest from their labors, or which is all one,
Immunity from Evil, by which this happiness is oft-times described: for though
the privation hereof simply and absolutely signify no part hereof, the absence
especially; for by that reason you might call a stock or stone or any other
insensible creature happy, as by the other a Horse or Dog might be said to be
so when dead: yet inasmuch as it is more than a negation, namely the being
delivered from a world of misery wherewith we are now infested, and more which
we had deserved, and were once obnoxious to, which we also then behold in
others of the same make and nature with us; the contemplation hereof, by which
it so widely differs from both the Instances, must needs fill our mind with an
ineffable delight and satisfaction.

Or at least if this indolency be no part of our happiness, yet is it so
absolutely needful to it, that we cannot tell well how to conceive of it
without this; and much less can such a thing be as perfect happiness and
degrees of misery conjoined together.

Nor did ever any Sect of Philosophers think otherwise, but those sullen and
self willed Stoics. That ever any body should be so mad to cry out in the
extremity of pain and misery, Quam suave, quam dulce hoc est, quam hoc non
curo! And I cannot but laugh at Possidonius his Rant, Nil agis, O Dolor, etc.

There are diverse instances of such who have born most exquisite miseries even
to admiration, as well out of a kind of hardiness of nature, as greatness of
mind; and in that they were less miserable than the delicate and impatient: but
whence was it? either from necessity, or hope, or both; this is Christian-like,
but that is brutish, if it were sufficient without the other, but it is not, for
perpetuity would certainly render any evil intolerable.

So that we are so far from being completely happy as long as any disease or
inquietude of mind or body does attend us; that the hope of being delivered is
the only argument that can afford us any solid and rational comfort in our
afflictions: For as to fatality, hoc ipsum est, said Augustus when one urged
it; and for the disease of Impatiency, it is (as one has excellently observed)
no proper consideration of comfort, but only an art of managing our trouble; so
as not to make it greater than really it is.

2. The other part of our happiness, and indeed the main, we call positive, and
consists in the enjoyment of all good; and is what St. John intends by their
works following them; i. e. they shall then receive all those glorious rewards
that God has promised to good and righteous men for all their service and
obedience. We should in vain go about to recount them, they are so many and so
great.

In two things the Scriptures chiefly place it; in the vision, and in the
fruition of God. This is life Eternal, Joh. 17. 3.
says this very St. John in his Gospel, to know thee the only true God, and
Jesus Christ; and again in his 1 Ep. Chapter 3. v. 2. It does not yet appear what
we shall be; but we know that when he does appear we shall be like him, for we
shall see him as he is. The other is called the being with Christ, Phil. 1. 23.
and the being united to him. St. John 17. 21. That they all may be one, as
thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us. But this
is not to exclude the other instances of our happiness, indeed it comprehends
all the rest.

For what are all the pleasures and contentments of the World, but as so many
rays of that Sun and emanations of that fountain?

They are all contained with much more perfection in God, than they were
created in their own natures: Whereupon it follows that they which are admitted
into his presence, have all the goodness and perfections of all the creatures
in the world united in God.

So that whatever can delight either body or mind, there it is; nor will there
be any room to wish for or imagine more than what we have; there being in him
(as an ingenious man expresses it) such a various Identity, that the fruition
of him at once satisfies and creates desires, that without satiety, this
without disquiet.

3. To which if we add the eternal duration of this state, we attribute unto it
a kind of complication of Infinities, a potential Infinity in the subject,
actual in the object, and eternal in the continuance of it:

Which single consideration is sufficient to advance it to an infinite
preference above all earthly things imaginable; because these things being
founded in matter, and that being in continual flux and motion, here can be
nothing permanent and lasting. Nor indeed would that be any addition to our
present felicity. It Is variety that makes these things appear excellent; their
mutability, is both the life and death of all present delights.

A few repetitions make us abhor our food; in less than a night and a day we
grow weary of our Beds; and it is so in all the other instances of our Nature,
and it is more so in those of our corruption.

But it is otherwise in the attainment of the ultimate end, where all our
appetites are arrested and detained.

Indeed we no sooner experience these things in the fruition, but we
straightway nauseate them; finding them so pitifully allayed with mixtures of
evil, and prove so miserably short of what we desire and expect from them. But
it is otherwise there, the excellency of those Celestial Objects will disappoint
our expectation by their transcendency, as much as in all other fruitions their
emptiness is wont to do.

So that Eternity, though but a circumstance which does only superinduce a kind
of extremity or perfection to what it is conjoined with; and may as well be
drawn in to enhanse our misery, (for what more than this makes the condition of
the damned so horribly dreadful, whereby they are excluded from all hope, the
very seed and lowest degree of felicity?) Yet is it so necessary to what we are
speaking of, as that without it those joys of Heaven, though otherwise absolute
and infinite, would suffer a contradiction, and become imperfect: And that not
only for the future, but the present, by introducing such passions as must
needs debase and allay the highest delights.

So that by being thus secured in the possession of our happiness, we receive
thereby an unspeakable addition to it.

II. Proceed we next to show you the Security and Evidence, upon which this
happiness is promised and asserted, and whether it bear any proportion to our
duty and the Rewards of it, for so we are allowed to call them; though not upon
the account of merit, yet by reason of their necessary connection with,
dependence upon, and that kind (such a one as it is) of proportion they bear to
each other.

There is a twofold evidence God Almighty has given us, for the strengthening
of our hope, and confirming of our faith, in the belief and expectation of the
other World. The first moral, grounded upon the testimony of the Spirit; the
other I call natural, and is grounded in the things themselves.

1. The first evidence of our future bliss, is the testimony of the Spirit,
express in the Text, Yea, says the Spirit. But then we must have a care of
what kind of Testimony of the Spirit we understand it: for, understand it as
it is vulgarly taken, for some act or operation wrought in and upon us, besides
the Enthusiasm of it, fain would I be satisfied, what validity can there be in
such a testimony, as it self needs something else to confirm it? for so this
testimony of the Spirit is to be tried by its concordance and agreement to the
word of God: nor do I know any other way to distinguish it from a motion or
suggestion of the Devil's besides. And though to err thus in this single
instance may not be very pernicious, for I am not mighty solicitous, how it was
wrought, so there be a firm persuasion in us of this truth; yet in other cases
I know how dangerous it is, nor is it safe in this, for it leaves a passage
open and unguarded to downright Atheism.

By the testimony of the Spirit therefore I understand the word of God, or the
Scriptures as made known and proved to us to be derived from this Divine
Spirit, which we may call the outward testimony thereof: for though St. John
knew this by the other way, as most certainly all others did who received any
Revelation; yet never was any other than the person himself assured that way.

Nor do I make degrees of more or less certainty in the way or manner of the
Spirit's revealing a thing; for the Apostles were as well assured of the
infallibility of their doctrine before they wrought any miracles, as we are by
them: but we were not nor could be so.

But this notwithstanding, in respect of us we must admit of such degrees; for
no body I hope will be so blasphemous to equal such private dictates they have
in their own breast to the divine authority of the Holy Scriptures.

So then I make this to be the moral evidence of future happiness: God has
said it in his word. And this I call a moral certainty, not in opposition to
divine and infallible; as they are sometimes contradistinguish'd; but only to
natural: for we can desire no greater evidence, we cannot have a higher
confirmation of any truth, than the veracity of Heaven to attest it.

I do not know any proposition that carries greater self-evidence than this,
That God ought to be believed in what he says; and therefore though we may
question the truth of the Revelation, it is impossible to do so of any thing we
acknowledge to be so revealed.

So that the stress of this point lies upon that great and necessary
praecognition in our Religion* namely, the Divine authority of the Holy
Scriptures. Upon which postulate if we proceed, there is as great certainty of
the truth of this proposition, That good men shall enjoy eternal happiness
after this life; as if we should again hear that Daughter of voice, and God
himself should sensibly attest it.

2. But there is another ground or evidence of our future happiness which I
call natural, because it depends upon that Intrinsic Relation and consent
there is between goodness and it; the difference between them being only in
degree, like the dawning of the Morning to the luster of the Noon. For what is
it to be happy but to be united to God? and what does unite us to God but Love?
and what is the love of God but Religion? And if you remove but all inward
imperfections, and all outward impediments, there remains no difference at all.
So that Virtue and Piety do not only dispose and prepare us for Heaven and
Salvation, but we thereby receive and experience the very beginnings and
anticipations of it.

And though in respect of the mutability of our will and affections toward God
and goodness in this world, we cannot be infallibly assured of it as to our own
particulars; because every alteration in the one produces a like answerable
effect as to the other: Yet in the general we may, even from hence, be very
well assured hereof; because there is nothing more required to the completing
of our essential happiness, than an advance and progression in the same
virtuous tract.

And however it looks in a Divine, if we will speak rationally to the thing, we
must allow the love and hatred of God to be the true natural causes of our
salvation and damnation, even of their very eternity; it being naturally
impossible to be other than happy while we love God, and contrariwise if we
hate him; and this is the only instant cause of its continuation through all
the durations of Eternity. And to remove your astonishment, see, how in this
lower world, many stupendous and admirable works are daily produced which were
mean and unnoted while they lay hid and contained in the seminal beginnings;
after the same wonderful manner by diverse minute gradations does this divine
Creature grow up from its first formation in our trembling and unstable
desires, to the stature and perfection of Everlasting Glory.

And yet there remains less doubt if we take in the Consideration of the Divine
nature. How else will you vindicate the Justice of God in all the odd and
confused occurrences of this World? Where Is your infinite goodness and bounty,
that suffers its servants always to be neglected? what will become of an
almighty and omniscient Justice if sinners are never called to an account? Or
one, or the other cannot be.

III. It Is true indeed the completing of this bliss (which brings us to our
next head) is neither promised, nor to be had in this life. It Is at Death these
rewards become due and payable.

-- Dicique beatus
Ante obitum nemo, supremaque funera possit.
It has been the constant method of Divine providence, to cause the most
excellent things to follow and arise from the most uncouth and unlikely. Thus
in the Creation order springs from confusion, and the Light is made to attend
the darkness.

Contrary to the methods observed by Nature, where the causes are ever more
worthy than their effects from their first beginning downward.

Now as he is pleased to transcend and deviate from the tracts and capacities
of natural Agents, thereby to assert his Prerogative, and render his
omnipotency more conspicuous to the world: So is he no less delighted to use
the same recesses in displaying his Grace; evermore ushering in his mercies
with the Black Rod, thereby inhansing and endearing our subsequent refreshments.

And though the goodness of those celestial inhabitants, and the happiness of
their condition, need neither foyl nor artifice to render that or their
acknowledgements of the Divine favor greater: Yet however if we consider these
things as a reward and encouragement of our obedience, the proceeding thus is
but regular and necessary; that we should do our work before we receive our
wages, and finish our undertaking, before we demand satisfaction.

Earnest and Security Heaven has vouchsafed us, but to deposite the whole in
hand, this were, not to encourage but bribe our Obedience. This were to destroy
Morality, and turn Virtue into Nature.

Nor yet is the Divine goodness less communicable in this life, but we are not
so capable of receiving it.

For look as in Nature neither the single excellency of the Object or the Agent
alone is sufficient to produce any notable effect, but both are required: So
likewise in Religion, all the effects of the divine grace and bounty (though
that be free and infinite) are limited and determined by our capacities and
reception.

So that while our Appetites, those (...), as they are called in Scripture,
that are to be the receptacles of all this Glory, are, either replenished with
the vain and sinful objects of this Life, or, are straightened and contracted by
the weakness and imperfection of this dull and lumpish matter, they must be rid
of the one and divested of the other, and then, we should be instantly happy.

You have seen the happiness of the Christian man; there are indeed
encouragements of another nature, namely, earthly blessings and temporal
rewards, our whole present interest, unless it happen to interfere at any time
with the other. Religion has descended to the securing of these too, and that
not only by moral designation, but by a proper and natural efficiency; so that
we cannot better prosecute our present interest, than by the methods of
Religion. And by this gracious and happy complication of the (...) and the
(...) together, they are made to become helpful and assisting to each other,
serving reciprocally as a means or motive either to other.

But this encouragement is neither proper nor adequate to Christianity; since
it may be as well pursued by natural, as by divine rules, better perhaps by
diabolical arts than either, nothing experimentally so enriching men, as
sordidness, oppression, and other violences and frauds. The Devil in all
likelihood, giving the fairest prospect, and most likely possession of the
Kingdoms and glory of this world.

But they are things, I have shown you, of a nature infinitely more sublime,
that Christianity propounds to its observers; The rewards of our Religion;
exceeding as well the capacities of our Nature, as all those other things. To
the attainment whereof, as all vicious practices are extremely contrary; so
have all the others Philosophic transactions been miserably vain.

Some weak and glimmering light the Heathen had of these things; which it is
not certain whether they collected from some fragments of tradition, or
extracted from the principles of natural reason; but which way ever it came, it
was so weak and imperfect, as served to shadow, not help to discover, but
eclipse the transcendent excellency of that State; till, as the Great Apostle
of the Gentiles says, 1 Timothy 1. 10.
Life and Immortality were brought to light by the Gospel.

And indeed without this all other proposals were unsuitable to its professors,
and disproportionate to the difficulty and severities of Religion. Cicero
says, "None ought to be deemed a virtuous or a just man, that will be allured
or affrighted from his duty, by any advantage or disadvantage whatever:" But
who, trow ye, would abide both these, upon no other consideration, than barely
to have acted according to the sentiments of right Reason, or in hope to
acquire an insignificant fame of Virtue, of which they could have no knowledge
or remembrance after death?

And for this cause I judge the Stoics more absurd in their morals, than the
Epicureans, considering the principles that is upon which they built. For it is
the premise and not the inference of theirs, that is so urged by the Apostle,
Let us eat and drink, 1 Cor. 15. 32. But now the Christian Religion propounds
such overtures to our Obedience and Patience, as may justly and reasonably
encourage us thereunto.

IV. For a Conclusion, let us take in the Importance of that Phrase of [dying
in the Lord] which relates primarily to Martyrdom; but must also be extended
to as many as live and dye in the faith of the Holy Jesus.

The result of all is this: That we would so consider this happiness, as every
of our great interest, that we forfeit not our propriety therein, by a vicious
and sinful life. There Is nothing else can render it hazardous or doubtful, but
that, which indeed in the very nature of the thing renders it impossible. Let
us not repeat Esau's folly, sell our birthright for a trifle; and for the sake
of some pitiful lust proscribe our selves out of our celestial inheritance.

Neither let us contemn our happiness for being feasible. Were wilful poverty
and certain Martyrdom, part of our duty, and inseparable appendages of our
Religion, there is tentation enough in the proposals, to make us conflict with
the greatest difficulties, and overcome them.

When Christianity was thus attended, and had nothing else to recommend it self
to the world, besides the reasonableness of its injunctions, with what holy
violence did those blessed Saints storm Heaven, and with a strange eagerness
pursue Martyrdom! But now as if the fervor of our Devotion were only kindled
and maintained by Antiperistasis: Now I say the Impediments are removed, and
Religion is become a part of our Civil obedience, and made necessary to our
secular interests, and guarded with a great many other temporal Phylacteries,
men are yet more hardly wrought upon to be Religious, the consideration of a
single lust shall be able to weigh down all.

And if any would seem to have a greater zeal for it than ordinary, as if they
were in love with the troubles of Religion, and not the thing; they suffer
their heat to spend it self in little piques and contentions, and about things
of none or ill moment, in maintaining of parties, and opposing their
Superiors, and not in Devotion, Obedience, Charity, Humility, and the like, as
they ought.

In short, Christians, let the thoughts of this blessedness, excite our
affections Heavenward, and quicken our endeavors: Let it animate us against
all difficulties, and buoy us up above all adversities; Let it cheer us in our
duty, quiet us in affliction, and comfort us in death. That so living unto
Christ, we may at last dye in him, and in the end be for ever blessed.

And now to accommodate all to our present case. It has pleased God to take
away this extraordinary man, for such, considering all things, we must needs
allow him; and because 'twas some we what early, I think of Dr. Hammond's
notion of (...) in the Text, the sooner the better, the better for him, no
doubt.

I had once thought to have given you his Character, but I am not ashamed to
tell you, I found me not able to do it worthy of him. And calling to mind a
saying of one of the Roman Historians, I soon desisted from any further attempt
of it; who when he was reckoning up some of the great men of that age, Virgil
and Ovid, Livie and Salust, and going to commend them, stops, and concludes
thus: "But of men of Eminency, as their admiration is great, so is their
censure full of difficulty."

As to those Relations that are more nearly interessed in this solemnity; I
would beseech them to remember, that all Indecency and excess of Grief, for our
deceased friends, must needs reflect upon the memory of the dead, or the
discretion of the survivers. God enable them to bear it: And supply this loss
to them by his Grace and Providence: Let me say, and to the Church of England,
by increasing the number of such men, of no worse Learning, Integrity, and
Courage; that are able, and dare defend her against the encroachments of Popery
and Fanaticisme.

Now to God only wise be Glory through Jesus Christ for ever. Amen.
FINIS.

