MAGNA VERITAS: OR, JOHN GADBURY, (Student in Physic and Astrology) NOT A
PAPIST, But a True PROTESTANT OF THE Church of England.

Published for the satisfaction of all such as know not the said JOHN GADBVRY,
and yet give Credit to all kinds of Scandals and Falsehoods that pass upon his
much injured Reputation since his late unfortunate Confinement.

For the mouth of the wicked, and the mouth of the deceitful are opened against
me: they have spoken against me with a Lying Tongue,

Psalm. 109.11. LONDON: Printed by A. M. and R. R. 1680.

JOHN GADBURY, Student in Astrology and Physic, Not a PAPIST, but a PROTESTANT
of the Church of England, etc.
. 1. AS the Egyptians in their Hierogliphicks painted Death like a Goddess with
a Sycle in her hand, bearing this Motto, Nemini parco, I spare no man: so we
find it true of Afflictions, those black Harbingers of the grim King of
Terrors, They spare none neither; there being no man free from them at one time
or other. Howbeit, it is not the manner, but cause of Afflictions, which
imbitters them, and renders them painful and uneasy. If we suffer for
righteousness sake (i. e.) innocently, and by the wickedness of false and
malicious men, a blessing attends upon our sorrows, which will certainly change
our Cross into a Crown, and procure us an heavenly content, beyond the measure
of our terrene troubles and adversities.

. 2. Afflictions are our Schoolmasters, and often bring us to God. It is good
for me (says holy David) that I was afflicted, for now I have known thy
statutes. And indeed, it is my sufferings, principally, that have made me to
cast mine eyes inward, and seriously to examine mine heart, how or wherein I
have offended against the Majesty of the King of Heaven, that this sad Judgment
under which I now labor, is come upon me.

. 3. I never was in love with a Pharisaical humor or temper (for indeed, what
has a poor mortal to boast, or to be proud of?) but yet, as the case now
stands, I may, I hope, in the strength of Truth and Modesty affirm (without
being subject to any severe Censure), That as for my actions between man and
man, I bless God, they are as little to be taxed as any man's of my degree or
quality. I have lived now fifty and two Solar Revolutions in this troublesome
World, and (which I esteem almost miraculous) have been so happy therein, as
never to have had any Lawsuit with any man excepting one, and that was in
behalf of two Orphans committed to my charge; and had I not then contended for
them, they, poor wretches! (altogether unable to help themselves) had been
exceedingly injured of their Right.

. 4. As to any Spirit of Contention or Contradiction, etc. whereby the world is
commonly governed and guided, I appeal to the Neighborhood among whom I have
lived, whether I have ever been guilty of yiedling to any such? and whether my
demeanor has not been rather peaceable and preserving, than any way
dissurbant or troublesome to any of them? [It is true, some scribbling
differences I have had, but I never began a quarrel with any man; and men that
are assaulted, must forfeit their reason if they do not defend themselves.]
Nay, I bless and magnify the God of Heaven (who by his good Angels has so
happily conducted me in all my actions of this life) that I can justly
interrogate with good old Samuel, -- Whose ox have I taken? or, whose ass have
I driven aside? or whom have I wronged of a shoo-latchet, or a thread? Let those
that know me speak, whether I have not been rather helpful than hurtful to the
people among whom I have at any time lived or resided?

. 5. If this truth be distrusted, I am sure the Keepers of the Prison where I
am confined, will be so just as to witness the same for me, from the many sad
complaints they (almost) daily hear from several poor people of my
Neighborhood, by reason of my unfortunate restraint, whereby I am
incapacitated and debarred from doing the common good I was constantly
accustomed to do, though, I confess, it was no more than my duty as a man, but
much more as a Christian: for, non nobis nati sumus; and even the brute beasts
that perish, would be as valuable as mankind, were it not for these
distinguishing acts of our Charity and Reason toward people in distress.

. 6. Albeit, I must and do acknowledge, that God's chastising hand is never
either upon a Person, Family, or Nation, for naught. He is a Just Judge, and the
punishments he permits to befall poor mortals, do naturally imply a guilt in
the person afflicted. Sin is the common cause of suffering; and the Just man
falls seven times a day, though he (by God's Mercy and Providence) do rise
again, and meet a restoration of his former state. Yet, I say, Sin is cause of
all punishment; and certainly some great and secret sin I must have committed
against the God of Heaven, that he has thus permitted, nay, perhaps,
commissioned his afflicting Angel thus sorely and severely to buffet me.

. 7. But for any known or open sin committed either against my dread Sovereign,
his Person, Crown, or Dignity, or against the Church of God as established in
England under Him; I openly profess and declare, That I am not either wilfully
or knowingly (whatever I may be ignorantly, viz. by an unfortunate concealment
of what I thought others ought to have revealed) guilty of any in the least;
and yet I have searched the very secretest corners of my soul as narrowly as it
is possible for humanity to do, for a discovery of any such latent unloyal, or
irreligious guests. And if in my scrutiny I have passed over any dangerous
angle or lurkinghole, without a through disquisition, I humbly beseech God of
his great mercy and goodness, to illuminate my troubled soul, and lead me to a
perfect and exact discovery thereof, and help me to find the black inhabitants
therein residing (if at least there be really any) to the end I might first
eject them their possession, and afterward repent me thoroughly that ever I
gave either being or harbor to such destructive Inmates.

. 8. That I have not knowingly committed any Crime against His most Sacred
Majesty, or the Government (although I know it is very hard and difficult for
any man to prove a Negative:) I have, first, God, and his holy Angels, and a
clear Conscience, to evidence for me. Nay, I can most truly say, I have not
erred against His Majesty, so much as in a thought. Secondly, All my Actions
and Expressions among my Neighbors and Acquaintance, are most remarkable
arguments on my behalf in this matter, and which I am sure will be justified to
my advantage, if occasion require it. For, were I really guilty of any thing of
that kind, living so near a loyal Cathedral, and among loyal-hearted persons, I
must have been taken notice of for such; and my discourses must, at one time or
other, have betrayed a soul or spirit within me, fit and adapted for so wicked
a purpose. But yet the contrary is sufficiently known of me. -- Nay, had I been
an Enemy to His Majesty, my conversation would have been among persons
Anti-Monarchical, and of disloyal and treacherous Principles and Opinions.
Whereas I have no near converse or concern with any man of either a Fanatic or
Papistical persuasion at all; but do chiefly correspond and accompany with such
loyal and religious persons, who are not afraid or ashamed to own the Interest
of His Royal Majesty, and that of the Church of England. And, we know, it is an
allowed Proverb, -- Homo cognoscitur ex sociis. Thirdly, If what I have said be
not yet enough to acquit me from the guilt of all knowable Crimes against my
Liege Lord and Sovereign, then let all my Writings since His Majesty's most
happy Restoration (and before also) be examined by any impartial and unbiassed
Judge, and I dare affirm that they will all be found to stand up, and fully to
justify for me. I spare to mention any thing of my having been always on His
Majesty's and His most Glorious Father's side in the late unhappy Wars. For,
could I have done more (in so good and so just a Cause) than I did, or was able
to do at that time, it had been but my dury, and such as my Birth and
Allegiance bound me to, as indeed they do every subject of what degree soever.

. 9. And here I would have transcribed sundry pages of my own Loyalty, out of
my several Annual Labors, for the better corroborating of the present
Argument, and the compurgating of my innocence as to the matter in question;
but that I conceive the same is so well known to all persons generally, and
believed too, by every body but those that are envious and malicious (whose
eyes I pray God to open) that there is scarce any need thereof. Besides, I am
in a great measure herein prevented by the kind pains of a worthy, cordial
(though as yet to me an unknown) Friend, in his publishing an ingenious, acute,
but most just and true Answer to a wicked, nay a murtherously designed
Libellous sheet of Paper [wrote lately against me (and this contrary to His
Majesty's late Royal Proclamation, which forbids all libelling against any kind
of persons, etc.) and called, Observations upon the strange and wonderful
Prophecies of Mr. John Gadbury, etc.] under the title of (...), who has
therein most humanely and obligingly vindicated my much wounded Reputation; for
which so courteous, and by me unexpected a kindness, I hereby return him my
very hearty thanks; and wish I knew him, as to this particular friendship, that
I might more fully acknowledge his generous and endearing Civilities.

. 10. But then, secondly, as I have committed nothing knowingly against the
King or the Government -- so neither have I ever done any thing against the
Church of God, as it is established in England; of which Church I do, and ever
did, and always shall acknowledge my Sovereign Lord King Charles the Second, to
be the Supreme, and none else upon earth besides. Away with such Anarchical
Creatures who (longing to be undone) would fain introduce (even against common
sense) a Foreign Head over a Domestic Body!

. 11. I have taken the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and am ready so to do
again if Authority think fit to require it. And it is my plain and positive
opinion, That those men which shall refuse the taking of such oaths as are
enjoined by the Law, do not deserve to receive any protection either from the
King or the Law. For it would be strange, and little less than monstrous, in
true Policy, that a Sovereign Prince shall generously oblige himself by an Oath
(as at the Coronation is customary) to protect and preserve his people in their
just Rights, Privileges, and Properties; and that the subjects should (upon
any pretense) scruple to take such Oaths of Fealty and Allegiance as by the Law
is provided, for the declaring their duty and obedience to him again. Such
Obligations are purely reciprocal, and may be termed Oaths of Unity, as well as
of Fidelity, whereby both Prince and people are married together, and [Quos
Deus conjunxit, nemo separet] accursed be those that shall endeavor to
dissolve the bond.

. 12. I do, and ever did honor the Reverend Clergy of the Church of England,
and esteem it my duty so to do. And I bless God I have most commonly frequented
the Service of the Church; and am sorry from my soul if at any time I have
omitted any duty thereunto belonging. I always reverenced my Spiritual Guide,
and with all willingness paid him his Dues, as knowing it to be a performing of
the Law of God and Man, and justly enjoined to all mankind, as well under the
Gospel, as under the Law. I was born, baptized, and bred a Protestant of the
Church of England, (and by Gods Grace afforded to me, I intend so to dye) and
although I have been falsely reputed a Papist, (by many malicious Enemies, who
being as much void of Conscience as Kindness, care not how untruly they scandal
me) I do most solemnly profess the contrary, having never in my whole life been
a member of any other Church than that of the Protestant Church of England, as
it is established (now) by Law.

. 13. I never yet had any acquaintance with any Popish Priests, as such, in all
my days; and if any such have at any time happened to be in my company, it has
been beyond my knowledge. I never was at Mass in my life; nor did I ever incline
to any Popish Tenets or Principles, as they stand in opposition to the
Principles of my Mother the Church of England. I have read that most Reverend
Prelate Archbishop Laud's Book against Fisher, as animated thereunto by the
Divine Writings of our late Pious Sovereign, King Charles the First of ever
blessed memory. As also, the Works of the Pious and Judicious Bishop
Saunderson; and Bishop Williams's Best Religion. I have likewise very carefully
consulted Dr. Jeremy Taylor's Dissuasive from Popery, both Parts. As also the
thrice learned Dr. Pieree his most excellent Sermon before the King, entitled,
The primitive Rule of Reformation. Neither have I forborne to peruse the Learned
Labors of Dr. Stillingfleet, Dr. Tillotson, Dr. Henry More, Dr. Butler, Mr.
Pelling, cum multis aliis, etc. of the Church of England against Popery; and do
profess my self to be so fully satisfied with them, as to keep me close to the
Church of England, under which I have been educated in every thing relating to
Faith, Doctrine, or Discipline; as also to a full and absolute renunciation of
all Popish Errors, Idolatries, and Superstitions, whatsoever. More especially,
of that damnable and most horrid Error and Opinion of Murdering Kings (God's
Viceroys on earth, whether theirs, or any other pretended Christians, who in
this come not short of them) the very thoughts whereof, I detest, abhor, and
execrate, as being not only against the very essence of all humane and divine
Laws, but is even the very doctrine of Devils, and can have no other original
or source but Hell it self.

. 14. I had well hoped that my having had a Relation to a most Reverend Prelate
of the Church of England, viz. the late most pious and learned, Dr. Joseph
Henshaw, Bishop of Peterborough, deceased, about twelve years (or upward)
together, would have acquitted me from the false imputation of being a Roman
Catholic; in which time I had the honor of carrying his Lordships duty and
service to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, every New Years day, and received
His Majesty's most gracious New Years gift to the good Lord Bishop again. The
truth of which His Majesty's Jewel-Office and Pay-Office will fully evidence
for me, as having my name there, to that very purpose; from the later of which
Offices I also annually received His Majesty's most bountiful Reward, as a
Messenger; for which I never forgot to leave my humble thanks to, and a prayer
for His Majesty's long Life and happy Reign; and for the same do still, and
ever while I have breath shall pray. And surely, had I been a Papist, or any
way inclined thereunto, I could not have had so great and so long an Honor
from so Reverend a Prelate of the Church of England, as was this my good Lord
and Patron. And had not my most unfortunate confinement hindered, I should have
prayed a continuance of the same Honorable (and to me most grateful and
delightful) Employment from the present Right Reverend Lord Bishop of
Peterborough, though as yet I have not the happiness of being known to him.

. 15. I must indeed acknowledge, that I have some acquaintance with persons of
the Romish Religion, and so I have among all kind of Opinions, as any man of a
popular practice cannot avoid. But it would be very hard, nay exceedingly
unjust, if I should therefore be reputed as a man guilty of all Opinions. I
have labored somewhat in matters of Controversy, for my own satisfaction, and
have oftentimes read much more than perhaps I have understood. I have
endeavored to follow St. Paul's Rule closely, viz. Omnia probate, quod bonum
est tenete, Prove all things, but hold fast that which is good; and therefore
have not refused to read Books of all Opinions, under the burden of which our
English World is too uneasy; and of which unnecessary Ware the Shops, Markets,
and Fairs among us are too full fraught in these our unhappy days. God in his
good time heal our Divisions, and once more restore us to unity and good order.

. 16. Again, had I been a Papist, or Popishly affected, why should I not have
shown it upon so remarkable an occasion as in the (to me) most unfortunate
sickness and burial of my dear Wife, but lately deceased ( viz. scarce four
Months before my sad Confinement) why should I not rather have had Popish
priests, than those of the Church of England, to have performed all Christian
Offices proper to her at such a time, as to pray by, and for her, and to give
her the holy Sacrament? This had been a time in earnest to have proved my
inclinations and good will to Popery, in case I had any at all for it; but that
I had none, will most fully appear, I hope, to all reasonable men, from the
Certificate following, under the hand of a Minister of the Church of England,
and Curate of the Parish of St. Margarets Westminster, the Parish of my
habitation and abode: A Copy whereof I did likewise annex to a Petition which I
presented to His Majesty and Privy Council (for their satisfaction) since my
unfortunate imprisonment.

Mr. Barthol. Wormell's Certificate.
THese are humbly to certify, That John Gadbury, of the parish of St.
Margarets Westminster, in the County of Middlesex, Gent. did about the
beginning of July last past, take the Holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper at his
own House in Brick-Court Westminster, with his dying Wife Mrs. Elizabeth
Gadbury, from my hands. In witness whereof I have hereunto subscribed my hand,
this tenth day of November, 1679.

Barthol. Wormell, Curate. Vera Copia.

Nay, further, I cannot but acquaint the world, that my good Father, Mr. Oliver
Gadbury, was always a real Protestant, and true subject of his Majesty, and son
of the Church of England, and but few years since dyed such, at Wornal in the
County of Oxford, where his Body now lies interred, his Soul being at rest with
God.

. 17. And for a greater strengthening of this my present Argument or Assertion,
viz. That I am no Papist, but a Protestant, etc. I aver, that the very nearest
of my most Honored Relations are very real and strict Protestants, as Sir
Thomas Curson, and his Honorable Lady, of Waterperry in the County of Oxford;
which said Sir Thomas is my Honored Uncle by my Mothers side, and a person
that I have very great reason to be careful how I offend either in my Religion
or otherways; he being not only my Uncle, but very great Friend, and so also is
his virtuous Lady. And I think, nay am sure, that both he and his Honored Lady
will most readily aver me to be a Protestant, as knowing me to be such, and to
have gone to Church with them, when at any time I have visited them in the
Country, and to have joined in prayers with them morning and evening, as they
most religiously and commendably use in their Families always.

. 18. But one thing more is urged, and makes a great noise against me, which I
may not forget to give the World some satisfaction in, and that is an unhappy
omission of the Feast for deliverance from the Gunpowder-Treason, on November
the Fifth day, in my Almanac. Unto which I can justly say, Truth be my
witness, that I know not by what unfortunate accident it came to be left out;
but this I am sure of, that it was not omitted wilfully, or in design; for I
do, and ever did own the Powder Treason for a damnable and horrid Popish Plot
(as I also do the present wicked one, under the black effects whereof poor
England so sadly groans.) Neither can it be thought upon a just and reasonable
consideration, that I should leave it out of my Almanac purposely, since what
I wrote annually, is ever subjest to the inspection and correction also of a
Licenser, who has power to defeat my design of that purpose. Nor can an
Almanackmaker print what he please. And if it be possible for a Licenser to
pass by a thing so material without correction, may not an Author be supposed
to be besieged with the same Imperfections or humane frailties?

. 19. And here I cannot but with all duty and humility acknowledge the Justice
of that severe reprehension of my good Lord Bishop of London, to me about it,
at the Council Table; since his Lordship did not know but that I might have
purposely omitted it. And I do hereby give his Lordship my most humble and
cordial thanks, for that he was pleased afterward to accept of my humble
Apology for the unfortunate escape, and hold me in some measure excusable.

. 20. Almanacks are not such contemptible and despicable things as the Vulgar
commonly imagine them. The Law esteems them as Books of Sanction, and therefore
they cannot be printed but by the peculiar Authority of the Kings most
Excellent Majesty; and it is therefore, also, that they are found commonly
annexed to the Holy Bible and Commonprayer-book. And if any man offer to write
an Almanac out of any other design, than for the serious service of the Church
and Nation, he is most justly punishable for the same. And let me be believed
(I beseech you) when I so solemnly protest it, Rather than I would willingly
offend either His Sacred Majesty, the Holy Church of England, or the Nation, in
writing a line of one, I would lose the hand that should guide my Pen to so
wicked and so malicious a Performance. So that I hope, this my publicly
renouncing of any kind of design or wilfulness in this most unhappy Omission,
will not only set met me right in the opinion of the Reverend Clergy (whom I
ever honored and revered with my heart, as I hope all my Writings and Actions
will testify for me) but also with His most Sacred Majesty and His Nobility,
and with the Nation in general, likewise.

. 21. If what I have written be impartially and duly considered, I hope I have
fully satisfied all such as were any way unsatisfied concerning my Religion
toward God, and my duty, loyalty, and fidelity toward my Dread and Gracius
Sovereign. And what I have here done, is ex intimus Medullis, and the very
Truth of my Soul, as I hope to see the face of God in glory; and no way
expecting that it should make the better for me in this my present Condition;
but only to take off that most uncharitable as well as most false imputation of
my being a Roman Catholic.

. 22. As for my present misfortunes, and unhappy confinement that I, to my
great loss and sorrow labor under, I wholly refer them, and my self under
them, to God Almighty (who is the only (...), or heart-searcher, and will, no
doubt, in his own good time, bring every secret Truth to light, and vindicate
my much injured Innocence, etc.) as also to the Mercy and Clemency of my most
Gracious Sovereign, beseeching him to believe me (as in fact I am) wholly
innocent, as to the popular Calumny which passes upon me as liberally as
untruly, viz. That I am a Roman Catholic or Papist.

. 23. To conclude, I shall and will ever pray for his Majesty's long life, and
happy and peaceable reign, as indeed I ever have done, and do really wish both
His Majesty and the Church of England as many better subjects and sons than my
self, as may be; but do most heartily pray, that neither of them ever meet with
worse.

And as the whole, and every part of what is here written, is true; so I most
humbly beg the great God of Heaven to help me, and clear mine Innocence, and
not otherwise.

Deus non Irridetur. JOHN GADBVRY.
Gatehouse, West. Dec. 29. 1679.
Postscript.
THE foregoing discourse being written in a Prison, where I had neither the use
of Books, nor yet the free Converse of any Friend to advise with, will, I hope,
incline all Just and Loyal Readers to the exercise of so much Candor and
Charity, as to pass by any Imperfections that they shall meet with therein. It
is only the Copy of my troubled mind, laboring to be delivered from the
popular scandal which so liberally passes on me concerning my Religion; under
pretense whereof my Loyalty has been wounded, and things laid to my charge,
that I not only execrate and abominate, but even tremble to name. And
certainly, if there be a time at all for a man to write an Apology, or to
appear publicly in his own just defense, it is when his Reputation is thus
prodigiously assaulted.

Albeit, I do not go about wholly to excuse my self; for, I do (with great
sorrow) acknowledge, that I have been (nescio quo fato) guilty of concealing
some Crimes, which too nearly endangered my Life: But this I did, not through
any malice, or prejudice, or disaffection to his Sacred Majesty or the
Government, (both which I ever did, and always shall Honor, as it is my Duty)
but truly and really in simplicity, like Absaloms Two hundred followers; or
rather, through Ignorance of His Majesty's Laws, Inadvertency, and a passionate
zeal to Friendship, etc. All which Imperfections, Offenses, Errors and
Frailties, his most Excellent Majesty of his Princely Clemency (upon my humble
acknowledgment of my Errors, etc. and Penitence for them) has been most
graciously pleased to pass by, and pardon: which said Royal Mercy, I shall
always most dutifully remember. And it shall be a just warning to me for ever,
how I make my Breast a Cabinet of dangerous Secrecy for any one; or yet to
concern my self with things above my Capacity, Condition, or Station.

Obedience is better than Sacrifice.

But, of these matters, I may (perhaps) more amply treat in a fitter place
hereafter, if God shall give me life, and his most Gracious Majesty permit me
leave.

In the Interim, I shall pray leave most humbly and truly to affirm. --

That I have no acquaintance with any one of the Lords in the Tower, nor yet
with the Right Honorable the Countess of Powis. Nor did I ever see the Face of
any One of them (to my knowledge) in my whole lifetime. God forgive them that
have affirmed against me the contrary; and those too, that animated or
encouraged them so to do.

Those persons do run a monstrous and disproportionate adventure, who,
endeavoring, by unjust means and ways to send me to my Grave (which a small
portion of time would save them the trouble of designing) do, at the same
Instant, send their own Souls to a worser place, except God in his great Mercy
prevent; which from such desperate and illicite Actions and Courses, they can
never have any real assurance of.

Neither do I only disown all kind of knowledge of any of those Honorable
Personages, but also deny that I have ever had any thing to do for them, or
either, or any of them, either directly or indirectly: Being (as I said) an
absolute stranger both unto their persons and affairs, otherwise than by the
Information I may have received from the public Prints, or popular report; of
which the whole world are partakers equally with me. Were it otherwise, I would
never dissemble the matter: No! although it related to the nearest and dearest
Friend and Kindred I had. I aim at Truth in all my Actions, not Interest; and
shall always, to my power, do so in all things, especially where the Honor of
my Sovereign Lord the King, and Peace of the Kingdom is concerned.

Howbeit, I have been most grossly abused in Print as to this very matter, as
well as to many others (and the Truth has been injured also), and my name made
a property for the Avarice and Malice of Mercenary Scriblers, and Venders of
their filthy ware, who, in this Age of Scandals, are so bold and daring, that
the very best of men, nay, even Magistracy it self cannot escape their
envenomed Pens Such Calumniators never considering, That a good name is better
than precious Ointment, and more to be coveted than great riches.

Nay, further, I must, in the strength of Truth aver, That I have not so much
as been in the Tower of London above once this Three years; and that was above
a Twelvemonth since; When I went to make a visit to my Honored Friends, Sir
George Wharton, Sir George Wharton being then ill, I could not see him, so
wrote a Letter to him only.
and Sir Jonas Moor, (which latter is since deceased) in the company of Mr.
Bromwich a Bookseller, near Ludgate, and Mr. Partridge, Author of the late
Astrological Vade Mecum, which Book I prevailed with the Honorable Sir George
Wharton to Patronize. And that was my sole and alone business in the Tower at
that time, besides the paying of my due respects unto those my truly Honored
and Loyal-hearted Friends.

God preserve his most Sacred Majesty, and grant him a long and happy Life and
Reign over us; and bless all the Royal Family from the malice of all such as
think and wish them ill; Protect the Nobility, Clergy, Gentry, and Commonalty
of this Realm; and give Peace unto these Disturbed Kingdoms, in these our
troublesome and unquiet days, if it be his blessed Will, Amen.

So prays, and so hops, An earnest Implorer of Englands happiness, and a
Renouncer of all kinds of Interests or Parties that are opposite to His
Majesty, and to the Government of these Nations, whether of Church or State, as
now Established by Law. JOHN GADBURY.

ERRATA.
FOl. 5. l. 6. r. (...), fol. 10. l. 16. for wrote, r. write, and for subjest,
r. subject, l. 18. for my, r. any, fol. 11. l. 8. blot out met, l. 17. for
intimus, r. intimis.


