CAIN and ABEL PARALLELED With King CHARLES and his Murderers. IN A SERMON
Preached in S. Thomas Church in Salisbury, Jan. 30. 1663. Being the Anniversary
Day of the Martyrdom of King CHARLES I. of Blessed Memory.

By HENRY GLOVER Rector of Shroton in the County of Dorset.

2 King. 9. 31. Had Zimri peace who slew his Master?

LONDON Printed by E. Cotes for Henry Brom at the Gun in Ivy-lane, 1664.

PErlegi hanc Concionem, cui Titulus (Cain and Abel paralleled with King
Charles and his Murderers,) in qua nihil occurrit Doctrinae, Disciplinaeve
Ecclesiae Anglicanae, aut bonis moribus contrarium.

Joh. Hall R. P. D. Episc.
Land. a Sac. Domest. Mar. 29. 1664.
To my Reverend Brother THOMAS HIDE D. D. and Chanter of the Cathedral Church
in SALISBURY.
I Am not solicitous to give the World any other account of the publishing of
this Sermon, but only this, That it was Preached at your Motion, and is now
printed at your Request; which was (it seems) animated by others of my then
Auditors, who desired to see what they had heard, and to have that in their
hands, which otherwise was too apt to slip through their ears. What Censures I
may undergo for this my compliance with your and their desires, I am not able
to divine; if it be from Wise men, remember you are either to bear the Blame,
or to make my Apology; if from others, I hope I shall be able to bear the
weight of their displeasure my self, and to requite their censures with
neglect. For the Sermon, I have only this to say of it, That it was intended to
upbraid none but the guilty, and among them none but the impenitent; and even
to them the only harm intended was but this, to set before them, as in a
Glass, the heinousness of their sin, that it might be a means (with Gods
blessing) to accelerate their conversion, and rouse them up from that Lethargy
of a dead and dedolent disposition of heart, in which the most of them lie yet
sleeping; If God per adventure will give Ephesians. 4. 19.
them repentance to the acknowledging of the truth, that they may recover
themselves out of the snare of the Devil, who are taken captive by him at his
will, 2 Timothy 2. 25, 26. Of the Principals, I must confess, I think there is but
little hope; but for the Accessaries, I hope they have not all sinned the sin
unto death; and therefore for them I shall put up S. Austines prayer (upon that
passage of the Psalmist, Let them be ashamed and confounded, etc. Ps. 70. 2.)
Sic confundantur Aug. Enarr. in Psalm. 69.
ut convertantur, quia converti non possunt, nisi confusi fuerint; let them so
be ashamed and confounded, that they may be amended and converted; because they
cannot be converted, unless they be so confounded. If this Sermon should prove
instrumental to do any such good upon any one of their souls, I should look
upon it as a great blessing both to them and me. But leaving the success of
that to God, I shall content my self at present with this demonstration of my
readiness to serve you, and so remain,

Sir, Your loving Brother, Henry Glover.

CAIN and ABEL PARALLELED With King CHARLES and his Murderers.
GENESIS 4. 10, 11. And he said, What have thou done? The voice of thy Brothers
blood cries unto me from the ground.

And now art thou cursed from the Earth, which has opened her mouth to receive
thy Brothers blood from thy hand.


IF I had the Liberty of choosing a Text this day, not only out of the Sacred
Bible, but out of any other History in the world, I suppose it would be
impossible to find a Parallel for that Tragedy which England this day saw
acted; there never having been such a piece of Villainy acted in the World
before. It is storied of Conradinus the son of Conrade the fourth, the last of
the Noble Family of the Barbarossae, that being taken Prisoner in Battle by
Charles King of Naples and Sicily, he was by the Instigation of Pope Clement
the fourth, publicly beheaded at Naples. Here was a King beheaded, but then
he had the honor to be beheaded by a King, not by a Tumultuous Rabble of his
own Rebellious Subjects; and which is more, the Headsman who did the Execution,
was presently beheaded by another, Ne extaret qui diceret tam generosum
sanguinem a se effusum: that there might not be one able to boast that he shed
that Noble blood. Here was some respect had to Majesty, but not so with our
Regicides. The sacred blood which they shed was vilely cast away, as if the
Person whose blood it was, had not been anointed with Oil, 2 Samuel 1. 21. It
being then impossible to find a Text that should represent this days Villainy to
the Life, we must be content with one that will do it, although in fainter
colors. And truly I think this of Cain (the oldest Murderer in the World,
except only his Father the Devil, who was a- Murderer from the Beginning) will
come closest home to our English Cainites, or rather Canibals, (who were the
greatest Murderers in the World, the Devil himself not excepted.) Woe unto them,
for they have followed the way of Cain, Jude 11. And then the sufferings of
Abel the first Martyr, will best express the sufferings of King Charles the
greatest Martyr in the World. Thus the day is a day of blood, and the Text is a
Text of blood; Innocent blood both, crying blood, and both accompanied with a
Curse upon the Shedders: The Lord said unto Cain, What have thou done? the
voice of thy Brothers blood cries unto me from the ground. And now thou art
cursed, etc.

We will observe in the Text but these two general Parts, a Cry and a Curse; a
great Cry, and a great Curse; the cry of Blood, and the curse of the Blood
shedder. Both these we shall see exactly fulfilled, as well in King Charles and
his Murderers, as in Abel and his. Where they run parallel, I shall endeavor
to compare them; and where they out-go Cain in Impudence and Villainy, I shall
as I pass along, take notice of it. And so I begin with the first part of my
Text, a Cry, a great Cry, The voice of thy Brothers blood cries unto me from
the ground.

There be four sorts of sins especially, that are said in Scripture to have a
Voice; and though men do not hear the Voice of these sins, yet God does. They
are,

1. The cry of blood here in this Text. Murder has a Voice, and a shrill
Voice: though it be but the blood of the meanest innocent Subject, it never
leaves clamouring till expiation is made by the blood of the Murderer. And God
has a Court of Inquisition for such bloody sins, Psalm. 9. 12. When he makes
Inquisition for blood he remembers them, and forgets not the Cry of the
humble.

2. The cry of that filthy, unnatural sin of Sodomy, Men with men working that
which is unseemly, as the Apostle speaks, Romans 1. 27. And this is a very crying
sin; Genesis 18. 20. The cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and their sin is
very grievous. Those lustful Benjamites which we read of Judge. 19. 22. were
unnatural Sodomites: Bring forth the Man (say they) that came unto thee, that
we may know him. And there went up a cry from Gibeah for that nights work, that
was never appeased, till almost the whole Tribe was destroyed.

3. The Cry of the oppressed, groaning by reason of their Affliction, under the
Bondage of their Tyrannical Taskmasters; and God hears the cry of such
afflicated, oppressed souls, Exodus 2. 23. The children of Israel sighed by
reason of their bondage, and they cried, and their cry came up unto God. Thus
when men by oppression and rapine do set their Nests on high, there is a cry of
the very Stones and Timber against the unjust Builder; The stone cries out of
the wall, and the beam out of the timber does answer it, Hab. 2. 11.

4. The Cry of the poor Laborers hire detained from him by fraud or violence,
and that cry enters into the ears of the Lord of Sabbath, Jam. 5. 4. When the
poor man is defrauded of his wages on Earth, he sues for it in Heaven, in forma
pauperis; and God will surely hear his cry, and punish thee for not paying of
him, Prove. 22. 22, 23. Rob not the poor, because he is poor, neither oppress
the afflicted in the Gate: For the Lord will plead their cause, and spoil the
soul of those that spoiled them. This denotes the grievousness of these four
sins that they have every one of them a voice, crying in the ears of the Lord
for vengeance.

This in the Text, is the first of these, The voice of blood. Innocent blood
you may be sure, for Guilty blood has no voice. The blood of a Malefactor let
out by the hand of Justice for the preservation of the Body Politic, makes no
more noise in the ears of God, then the blood that is let out of a vein by the
hand of a skilful Physician, for the preservation of the Body Natural. So when
a Murderers blood is shed by the Magistrate, it has no voice, its dumb blood;
because God has commanded it to be shed, Genesis 9. 6. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood,
by man shall his blood be shed. This then is Innocent blood (we are sure)
because it has a voice. And was not the blood that was shed this day such? Yes
certainly; If Abels blood had a voice, this could not be still. The same ground
of quarrel that Cain had against his innocent brother, these Regicides had
against their King: what that was S. John will tell you, 1 John 3. 12. Cain was
of that wicked one, and slew his brother; and wherefore slew he him? because
his own works were evil, and his Brothers righteous. This was it, and this made
them both not only innocent Aug. de Civ. Dei lib. 15 c. 7.
Sufferers, but eminent Martyrs. Facibus invidiae inflammabatur in Fratrem,
(says S. Aug. of Cain) and quem debuerat imitari, cupiebat auferre. Cain
envied his brother, because he was more righteous then himself, and so thirsted
for his blood, whose virtues he ought to have imitated. Had these Murderers
but looked with a Christian eye upon the virtues of the Royal Martyr, his
eminent Patience, and Meekness, and Charity, his constant Courage, and
Resolution rather to dye then do any thing unbeseeming a Christian and a King,
they had had a fair Copy to have written after, and had never left their Names
with such a curse upon them to Posterity. But the Devil of Envy and Discontent
was entered into their hearts (as he did into the heart of Judas,) and that
together with those other Fiends of Covetousness, Ambition, and Sacrilege, set
them upon this Hellish Project. Thus Esau being discontented because his
brother had the Blessing, vowed his death. Thus Cain being discontented because
his Brothers Offering was more acceptable to God, shed his blood. Thus Ahabs
discontent, because he could not have his Neighbors Vineyard, cost innocent
Naboth his life; and when he had killed, he took possession. Thus Judas being
discontented (as it is conceived) because he could not get money for the
Ointment that anointed our Saviors feet, Joh. 12. 5.) went away to the
Priests, and betrayed his Master. And lastly, thus the Devil not being
contented with his place in Heaven, rebelled against his Maker, and thereupon
procured for himself a place in Hell. Now, put all these together, Cain, Esau,
Ahab, Judas, and the Devil; make up (if you can) one compound of their several
sins, Envy, Malice, Discontent, Pride, Ambition, and Sacrilege; beat them all
together till they are become one great sin, and you have the very Picture of
these wretched Regicides, who acted over all their sins in this one Murder. No
wonder then to hear of a Voice, when Innocence is assaulted with such a legion
of Fiends together; what voice it is, you have in the next words, viz.

2. The Voice of Blood. Of Blood! that is not all. It is (...) in the Original,
The voice of bloods. What is the meaning of that?

1. Junius is of opinion, that it was put in the Plural Number, because it was
shed abroad upon the earth, and so ran here and there in streams, as if it had
been seeking out of new veins to disperse it self in: And so though it were but
Blood in the body, yet now it was shed it became Bloods. Vox sanguinum, i. e.
sanguinis caede fusi, and huc illuc dissilientis ex ictu. And then this
expression will serve to aggravate the sin of Murder, and to show the cruelty
of shedding Innocent Blood. The Bloodthirsty man is usually in Scripture
called (...) a man of bloods, so Psalm. 5. 6. And if it be so in the murder of a
private person, if that be a sin of such a deep die, that nothing but bloods
will serve to express the guilt of it; what shall we say of Rebellious Subjects
shedding the blood of their lawful Sovereign, and letting it out like water
upon the Earth? Surely this is Bloods indeed, and more then so, if we had more
then a Plural to express it by. As when you break a Looking-Glass in pietes,
every little bit of it will show you your face, and so there is not one face
but many, when the Glass is broken: so when that Royal blood was shed, every
drop of it had a several voice, and so it was not a Voice, but Voices; not
only a Voice of blood, but a Voice of bloods.

2. The Chaldee Paraphrase reads it, Vox sanguinis seminum, the voice of the
blood of seeds; or vox sanguinis familiarum, the voice of the blood of
Families; or vox sanguinis generationum, (as it is variously rendered) the
voice of the blood of Generations. Because it was not Abels blood only that
was shed, but the blood of all his Posterity, of all the Families, and
Generations that should have come out of his Loins, if he had not been
murdered. The blood of Abel should have run in the veins of many others that
were to descend from him; so that it was the blood of families, the blood of
Generations, the blood of seeds, which now by being shed lost its prolifical
virtue. God (it seems) takes notice of this; and in this respect Cain was a
Murderer, not only of one, but of many. You may see this more clearly in 2
King. 9. 26. Surely I have seen yesterday the blood of Naboth, and the blood of
his sons, says the Lord, and I will requite thee in this plat, says the Lord.
We read of none but Naboth that was put to death, no mention of his sons being
murdered with him, in all the history of his Trial, and condemnation, and
execution, 1 King. 21. 13, 14. How then was it the blood of Naboth, and the
blood of his sons? I suppose they are in the right, who do understand it, De
filiis nondum ab eo natis, sed qui geniti fuissent, si diutius Vide Munsterum
in 2 Reg* 9 26.
vixisset; Not of those sons which he had, but of those which he might have
had, if he had lived longer. And so though his sons were not murdered with
him, yet they were murdered in him. And God calls Ahabs family to account, not
only for Naboths blood, but for the blood of his sons too, which he might have
had, had he not been murdered. To bring home this to our present purpose. The
Murderers of his late Majesty shed more blood then they were aware of; blessed
be God, not the blood of all his seed, so far the Divine Providence would not
permit them to go. He has been pleased to preserve the sacred branches of that
Royal Root, and to make them flourish again, to keep alive that great Name in
his Posterity. And yet for ought we know, the blood of some of his Posterity
was shed in his. This we may truly say, That one unhappy stroke let almost all
the blood of his three Kingdoms out of his veins; and 'twas Gods great Mercy
that the whole Land (which in his fall was left almost lifeless, and bloudless,
and spiritless,) had not bled it self to death; which would surely have come to
pass, had not God himself been pleased to stop the issue of that blond with his
own hand, in the Restoration of our Gracious Sovereign. So 'twas vox
sanguinum, the voice of bloods. But whose blood was it? that is the next thing.

3. Vox sanguinum fratris tui, the voice of thy brothers blood. That was an
horrid act of inhumanity indeed. To kill a stranger is a savage act; to destroy
the Image of God in any person living (without just cause) is a grievous sin:
but to kill a brother, this dies the sin of Murder of a deeper bloud-colour
then ordinary, and leaves a double guilt upon the soul. To kill a brother is
(as it were) to let the blood out of a man's own veins, when as it is the self
same blood that runs in his brothers. A brother in the Greek Tongue is called
(...), because brethren do lie all in one Womb, in one Belly. And how inhumane
is it for those that drew blood and breath from the same Parents, to take away
that blood and breath one from another? so to kill a brother is heinous, but to
kill a pious, innocent brother, more heinous yet. When a man is persecuted for
his Piety, and murdered for his Innocence, and slain for Righteousness sake;
this is not only to strike at the Image of God, and destroy that in the man
(as every Murderer does,) but it is to strike at God himself in the man. When a
Christian is thus wounded, Jesus Christ bleeds, Act. 9. 4. The blood of
Innocents does cry, but the blood of Martyrs does shrick in the ears of the
Almighty. And thus was Cains sin aggravated in the person whom he slew. But
alas! Cain was a Saint to these men we are now speaking of. He shed the blood
of his brother, these of their Father, even the Common Father of their Country.
If we should alter the words a little, and in stead of fratris tui, say patris
tui, in stead of thy brothers blood, say thy fathers blood, we should make the
matter a little worse; but it would still fall short of the savage barbarity of
these Tragical Murderers. Had they with Romulus killed their own brother, or
with Oedipus their own father; had they with Medea chopped their children in
pieces, or kicked the child out of their wives bellies with Nero, or ripped up
their Mothers bowels, to see the place they lay in before they were born; all
this had been a sort of Piety to what these Monsters did. To be short;
Fratricide is a heinous sin, but Regicide is far more heinous then that. To
kill a man is homicide, to kill a father is parricide, but to kill a King is
Deicide; that is but Manslaughter, but this is a sort of God-slaughter: God
himself calls them Gods, and man is forbid to curse them, much more to kill
them; he must not use his tongue to their dishonor, much less is he permitted
to take up a sword for their destruction. Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor
curse the Ruler of thy people, Exodus 22. 28. You see then in respect of the
person whom they slew, how far these men have out-gone Cain in villainy; and you
shall see the same in other respects by and by.

Thus we have seen blood, and we have heard blood. The sight of blood is no
pleasant sight, and the voice of blood is no pleasant hearing; especially if
you consider to whom it cries, and for what purpose; which is the fourth
particular.

4. Clamat ad me, says God, it cries unto me. The word (...) here used, does
signify exclamare, vociferari, to whoop or hollow, to cry out with abundance
of earnestness and violence, as one that is in any great danger, would do for
help; and that generally not with any articulate, significative voice, (that is
(...)) but only with a great noise, as if the voice of blood were that which
would even fill the ears of God, that he should hearken to nothing else, till
that were avenged. So then it is not a small, still voice, but a loud, fearful,
shricking voice, and clamat ad me, says God, it cries unto me, that is, it is
a voice crying for Justice to the Judge of all the World; a voice crying for
vengeance to him, to whom vengeance belongs. It Is a voice of blood calling
and crying out for blood, that they who have shed blood may have blood to
drink; Rev. 16. 6. Thus does all innocent blood cry and shriek in the ears of
the Almighty. No other innocent blood that ever was shed in the world, has any
other note, but only the blood of Jesus Christ. That is indeed better blood
then that of Abel, and so speaks better things then that of Abel, Heb. 12.
24. It cried for Mercy, and for Mercy to the very Murderers, whose souls (some
of them at least) were washed with that very blood which their hands had shed,
Act. 2. 23. with 38. The efficacy and virtue of that Prayer of our blessed
Savior, Father forgive them, for they know not what they do, made that
precious innocent blood a sovereign bath, to cleanse their souls who had shed
it. And so the blood of Christ did out-crie even the blood of Christ; that is,
The voice of Christ's blood as Mediator, did cry louder for Mercy, then the
voice of Christ's blood as an innocent Sufferer did cry for vengeance. Thus that
blood cried, and still does cry for Mercy; but all other innocent blood
(having no merit in it self to cleanse souls) does cry for vengeance, and will
never leave crying till it be revenged. The souls of those that lay under the
Altar, (Rev. 6. 9. who were slain for the word of God, and for the testimony
which they held, cried with a loud voice, saying; How long, O Lord, holy and
true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the Earth?
Not as if those blessed souls were Vindictae Cupidi, or had the least malice,
or desire of revenge against their Murderers. Such an opinion will not suit
with that happy state of bliss in which they are. But as the blood of the
Sacrifice (says Grotius) which was poured at the foot of the Altar, did Grot.
in Apoc. 6. 9.
as it were mind God of the Sacrifice which was offered up to him upon the
Altar: So the souls of th^se Martyrs, which are said to lie (...) under the
Altar; do as it were continually put God in mind of their innocent sufferings,
and stir up his justice to take vengeance on their Murderers. So did the blood
of our Royal Martyr cry, and that under the Altar too, being slain for the
Testimony which he held, and it cried so loud, that all his Kingdoms heard it
from one end to the other, and shook at the noise, and could never have rest
till God heard the cry of it, and avenged it.

5. Once more, and I have done with the first part of my Text. A voice! a voice
of blood, of brothers blood, and that crying blood; not whispering, but
olamouring for vengeance. Now lastly, From whence does it cry? Why, clamat de
terra, it cries from the ground which had received it from the Murderers hand.
As if the Earth it self had showed some compassion in drinking of it in, when
the Murderer showed so much cruelty in the letting of it out. Or rather, as if
the Earth would have hid the blood, or Cain would fain have hid it in the
earth, but yet it could not be; for when it was covered in the earth, yet still
it did cry; and when it could not be seen, yet still it was heard. Thus
vengeance pursues Murderers, and (as the Poet could tell us) Raro antecedentem
scelestum Horat.
deseruit pede poena claudo; when such bloody sins do march in the Front,
vengeance will not fail to bring up the Rear. The very Barbarians themselves
had it either from Experience, or from Natural Light, that Murderers could not
go unpunished: which made them say one to another, when they saw the Viper
hanging on S. Paul's hand, Act. 28. 4. No doubt this man is a Murderer, whom,
though he has escaped the Sea, yet vengeance ((...), the Goddess of Justice,
says Vatablus) suffers not to live. They acknowledged that there was a
Nemesis, a Vindictive power somewhere, that would not fail to execute vengeance
upon men of blood: the blood will cry still, when the man is dead and buried,
that owned it. And thus it is here, Vox de Terra, a voice out of the earth, but
yet a voice that (like the cry of Sodoms sin) reaches up to Heaven, and a
voice that pursues the Murderer down to Hell. John Baptist was the voice of one
crying in the Wilderness, Isa. 40. 3. but this is the voice of one crying in
the earth, and crying out of the earth. That voice out of the Wilderness called
for Repentance; but this voice out of the Earth calls for Justice. We read of
the Wizards in Isa. 8. 19. that they did peep and mutter out of the earth.
Forerius says, that the (...) there rendered Familiar Spirits, Forer. in Isa.
8. 19.
were spiritus in sepulchris mortuorum, and locis subterraneis, qui Rogati voce
stridula respondebant; some subterranean spirits lying in the sepulchers of the
dead, which gave answers to those that consulted them, in a strange kind of
hissing voice. But now, as if Necromancie and Witchcraft were but a petty sin
to this; the blood of the Innocent does not peep and mutter, but cry and roar
out of the earth. And when the Murderers think it is safe covered, and there
shall be no more tidings of it, when they have hid it, and buried it, and hope
it is forgotten, even then there is spiritus in sepulchris mortuorum, a spirit
in the sepulchers of the dead, that lifts up its voice afresh, and cries out in
the words of Job, O earth, cover not thou my blood, Job. 16. 18. And thus we
have found it true by experience; there was spiritus in sepulchr^ Regis, a
spirit of vengeance that cried out of the Kings Grave, and never left crying
till the curse came a dozen years after upon the shedders of it. Which brings
me from the Cry to the Curse, the second part of my Text, And now art thou
cursed from the earth, which has opened her mouth to receive thy brothers
blood from thy hand.

Cain was cursed presently, though the curse did not presently overtake him in
all the parts of it: so are all Murderers, so especially were these. No sooner
is the stroke given, but the curse falls; as the Bullet is at the Mark in the
very instant that the Powder fires, so says God* Nunc maledictus es, Now, at
this very instant, thou art cursed, etc. But before I come to take notice of
the Curse it self, and to compare the curse of Cain with the curse of
King-killers, I shall crave leave a little further to compare the Persons and
Dispositions of these men, with the Person and Disposition of Cain; that when
we have seen how well they agree in their Qualities, we may the more admire the
justice of God, who has made them to agree so well together in their Curse.

1. It is observed by the Jews that Cain was grown upon the matter an Atheist,
before he slew his brother. There is in the Jerusalem Targum, a Dialogue of
what passed between Cain and Abel in the field. Cain said to Abel, There is no
judgment, nor Judge, nor any other World after this; there shall no Reward be
given to the Just, nor revenge taken of the Wicked; the World was not created
by the Mercy of God, nor is it governed by his Mercy: why else was thy offering
accepted and not mine? And Abel answered, There is a judgment, and there is a
Judge, and a World to come, and a Reward for the Just, and vengeance for the
wicked; The World was created by the Mercy of God, and is governed by his
Mercy; because my works were better then thine, therefore my offering was
accepted and thine not. Thus they contended together in the field, and then
Cain rose up against his brother and slew him. Jonathan Ben Uz^el adds, Fixit
lapidem in front ejus, and interfecit eum, He beat out his brains with a
stone. So that (I say) taking it upon the Authority of these ancient
Paraphrasts, it appears to be at least their Opinion, that the Devil had first
tempted Cain to Atheism, to a disbelief of judgment and the World to come,
before he could tempt him to Murder. And truly, I think our King killers were
of Cains Religion, that is, of none, as arrand Atheists as he. It seems to me
impossible, that such a sin should have been committed, by men that did believe
a judgment to come, or had any thing of Faith, or of the fear of God left in
them: So that as S. Bernard says of Cain, Nec dum fratricida, fideicida fuit,
he had Bern* Ser. 25. super Cant.
cut the Throat of his own Faith, before he killed his brother. We may say the
same of these men* They were fideicidae, before they were Regicidae, Men of no
Religion, before they could act a Villainy, that was so contrary to all Religion.

2. Cain talked with Abel his brother, before he slew him, ver. 8. Some
understand it thus; That Cain for the present, dissembled his Anger, and gave
his brother good words, that he might get him out into the field, and have the
fitter opportunity to kill him. And then, here is in Cain a notable example of a
bloody hypocrite* who fawns and flatters, that he may kill and destroy. So Joab
took Abner aside in the gate to speak with him quietly, and smote him there
under the fifth rib, that he died, 2 Samuel 3. 27. And as if our King-killers had
learned this craft from their Father Cain himself, they held the King with
pretended Parlees, and Treaties, and a seeming desire of accord, even when the
hearts of many of them were fully set to murder him. God deliver us, and the
Kingdom from such Crocodiles, who weep over the head, when they have a mind to
feed upon the brain; from such Judas's, who have oil upon their tongues,
whilst they have murder in their hearts, whose words are smoother then butter,
and yet they are drawn swords, Psalm. 55. 21.

3. Josephus tells us, That Cain after he had killed his Joseph. Antiq. lib. 1.
cap. 3.
brother, and was gone out from the presence of the Lord, turned Robber, and so
became the first Robber as well as the first Murderer in the world. And here
certainly our King-killers have out-gone him. As the whole world cannot match
them in bloud-guiltiness, so neither can it equal them in Robbery. The Tartars
themselves, among whom Theevery is tolerated by a Law, were never so great
Thieves as these. They Robbed three Kingdoms of their lawful Sovereign, and
they robbed the lawful heir of his Kingdoms, and they robbed the Church of its
Revenues, and in doing so, they robbed God, Mal. 3. 8. They robbed the People
of their Pastors, and they robbed the Pastors of their maintenance; they robbed
the Nation of infinite sums of Money, and they robbed hundreds of Families of
their whole Estates. And (which was worse) they did what they could, to rob us
all of that which is dearest to us, our Religion and Christianity. Never were
there such Robbers in the world as these; here Cain himself lies behind, and
cannot come near them.

4. And as they were more Notorious Robbers, so they were more impudent
Murderers then ever Cain was. He drew his brother out into the field, a private
place; his Conscience being (it seems) so startled at the Guilt of his sin,
that though the World was so thinly peopled, that there were none but his near
Relations on earth, yet he durst not commit it openly, but drew him into a
secret place, thinking to conceal the Murder, and probably to have made such an
excuse to his Father, as Joseph's brethren did to their Father Jacob, That some
evil beast had torn him in pieces, Genesis 37. 33. so heinous a sin is Murder in
the eyes even of wicked men, that it is ashamed to walk barefaced, though the
sword of Humane Vengeance be not drawn to pursue it. But these wretches acted
their villainy in the most public place of the Kingdom: as if Murder were now
become Meritorious, and the greatest of Crimes durst impudently proclaim it
self to be a Virtue. They poured out this sacred blood upon the top of a Rock,
and poured it not upon the Ground to cover it with dust, that it might cause
fury to come up to take vengeance Ezekiel. 24. 7, 8. so that Cain was a modest,
shame-fac'd Murderer, compared with these men. S. Hierom tells us from the
Tradition Hieron. in Ezekiel. 27.
of the Hebrews, that the place in which Cain slew his brother* was the Field
of Damasous, which thence took its name Sanguinem Bibens, Drinking Blood. And
there was as much reason that the place where this sacred blood was shed,
should have been called Aceldama, The field of Blood, had there not been some
kind of Expiation made, by shedding the blood of some of the Murderers near
the same place. And so the curse fell upon them in a most exemplary way; as if
God had said to every one of them in particular, as he did here to Cain, And
now thou art cursed from the Earth (from that very same Earth) which has
opened her mouth to receive, etc. which brings me about again to a more
particular survey of the Curse it self, and the correspondence that may be
observed, as well in the Punishment as in the Sin, of Cain and these Murderers.

Maledictus tu a Terra, that is a heavy Curse. You may observe the difference
between Adams curse and Cains; Adams was Maledicta Terra propter te, Genesis 3.
17. the curse lighted mainly upon the earth: but Cains curse came home, and
lighted upon his own person, Maledictus tu a terra, cursed art thou from the
earth. That was, Cursed be the earth for thy sake; but this is, Cursed be thou
for the earths sake. When God curses a man's Goods and Possessions, it is not
half so much, as when he curses himself, his soul and body. But Cains was
both, a double curse; he was cursed and the earth too. Cursed art thou, there is
the curse upon his Person; and the earth shall not yield her increase, there is
the curse upon his Possessions. One single curse is not enough for such
Murderers, they are followed with curse upon curse, Cursed in their Basket, and
in their Store; Cursed in the City, and in the Field: So was Cain; he built a
City, but (it seems) stayed not long in it; the furies of his Conscience (as
it is thought) drove him out into the Field again, and the City was called by
his Sons name, ver. 17. And lastly, Cursed in the fruit of their Body, and in
the fruit of their Ground, and in the fruit of their Cattle. Deuteronomy. 28. 16, etc.
All this came home upon Cain. And the heaviest of all temporal curses is, when
God (who often visits the sins of the Fathers upon the Children) does curse
the fruit of a wicked man's body, and gives him cursed children for his cursed
sins. Cain was cursed in his soul, and cursed in his substance, and cursed in
his posterity. His children were cursed children, not one of them came to good.
Their wickedness infected the whole world, and brought the Flood, and that
Flood swept all the posterity of Cain away, not one left. I do not wish this
curse upon the children of our King-killers; rather let them live to see all
their Fathers sins which they have done, and consider and do not such like,
that they may not die in the iniquity of their Fathers, Ezekiel. 18 14, 17.

And now, let us consider how God has brought home the rest of Cains curse
upon the children of Cain, those men of blood that murdered the King; and by
the dreadfulness of the curse, learn for ever to detest and abhor the sin. The
cry of that Royal blood you have heard already, and all the Land heard it, and
groaned under it for many years; but now the Curse has overtaken the Cry. We
will pursue it step by step, that we may see and admire the justice of God in
the exemplary punishment of that enormous sin.

1. That the earth was cursed that received the blood of Abel, ver. 12. When
thou tillest the ground it shall not henceforth yield her increase. We are told
that blood defiles a Land, Number. 35. 33. that it does ever; and the Land cannot
be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the blood of him that
shed it. Therefore there was no satisfaction to be taken for the life of a
Murderer, because the Land could not otherwise be purged, ver. 31. so says
Solomon, Prove. 28. 17. A man that does violence to the blood of any person,
shall flee to the pit, let no man stay him: that is, let him die without Mercy,
let no man mediate for him. But beside this, A bloody Land being thus defiled,
is sometimes in Gods judgment, made a barren Land: and the soaking of an Estate
in blood, is equivalent to the sowing of it with salt. Psalm. 107. 34. A
fruitful land turns he into barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein. The Country of Sodom and Gomorrah was turned into a salt Lake, for the
wickedness of the Inhabitants. Thus does Gods curse many times get into wicked
men's estates, so that they crumble away without any other reason to be given,
further then that the Flying Roll is consuming the beams and the timber, Zach.
5. 4. Let them look to that, who have built their houses in blood. This is
certain, That the curse for this Murder did hover a long time, like an Eagle
over the whole Kingdom, which has been by reason of it, for many years a Land
of Nod, that is, a Land of trembling. There was a cup of trembling put into our
hands, and we were made to drink the wine of astonishment, and were never quiet
till this blood was revenged. The voice of it shook the whole kingdom, and
shattered it in pieces. And so part of the Curse fell upon the Earth.

2. Cain himself was cursed that shed this blood. And this is one great part of
his curse, that he should be a Fugitive and Vagabond upon the earth, ver. 12.
that is, That he should be pursued hither and thither, by the Furies of his own
Conscience, driven up and down the world, as one that is pursued with a Hue and
Cry by the Ministers of Justice, so that he should never find a quiet
Habitation more as long as he lived. So Junius expounds this part of the Curse,
that by it is meant, Corporis and animi instabilitas, ex diris conscientiae,
the unsettledness both of his body and mind, through the terrors of his
Conscience. And thus Euripides brings in Orestes after he had slain his mother*
(...), running up and down Greece, having his Conscience stung, like a Beast
that is pricked with a Fly, and so never able to be quiet any where. This
punishment was very exemplary in the Jews, after they had crucified the Lord of
Life; Dispersi, Tertul. Apol. c. 21.
palabundi, coeli and soli sui ext^rres, vagantur per orbem; sine homine, sine
Deo Rege, says Tertullian. They had never a certain abiding place since, but
as banished men, they put in where they may be permitted to live; never a
Temple, nor public Sacrifice; never a King to govern them, nor a God to take
care of them. Insomuch that Nicephorus calls them Theatrum Vindicta Divinae,
the Theater of Divine Vengeance. And this was Cains punishment; He was not yet
in Hell, but Hell was got into him, and that made him restless, endeavoring
(if it had been possible) to flee from himself, as carrying his own Tormentor
in his own bosom. The Guilt of his soul set Spurs (as it were) to his body*
and made him continually to be in a restless motion. And this (if you consider
it) is the very Curse that is fallen upon the Regicides, those of them
especially, that have hitherto escaped the Sword of Justice. They are in the
Land of Nod, Mobilis and Vag^, frighted with the Noise of the Fetters of their
own Consciences, and still afraid lest they hear the feet of the Revenger of
blood behind them. Thus is that Curse fallen upon them, then which David (by
the Spirit of Prophecy) could not imprecate a greater upon the enemies of God
and his Church, Psalm. 109. 10. Let them be continually Vagabonds, and seek
their bread out of desolate places. Indeed we read in Scripture of a company of
holy Vagabonds, that did wander about in Sheeps-skins, and Goats-skins, being
destitute, afflicted, and tormented, of whom the world was not worthy, they
wandered in Deserts, and in Mountains, and in Dens, and Caves of the earth, Heb.
11. 37, 38. This was not their curse, because not for any crime; nor their
misery, but their happiness. The world was not worthy of them, though they were
not thought worthy to live in the world. But to wander as Cain did, with a
guilty conscience up and down the world, this is a Curse indeed, the very curse
that the remaining Regicides are now under.

3. Cain despaired when he heard his sentence. My punishment (says he) is
greater then I can bear; or as others read it, My sin is greater then can be
forgiven. He that before could not be brought to Repentance with the sight of
his sin, is now upon the sight of his punishment, driven to desparation. And
this S. Bernard calls the greatest Bern Ser. 3. de S. Andr.
of Cains sins; Grande illud scelus evomuit, major est iniquitas m^a, etc. He
vomited out (says he) that great blasphemy, My sin is greater then can be
forgiven. A sin that is injurious, 1. To the Mercy of God; for it makes Mercy
must be triumphed over, and led captive by Satan's malice. And therefore S.
Bernard having repeated those prodigious words of Cain, My sin is greater then
can be forgiven, cries out, Mentiris Latro, Thou lie Villain, Major enim est
Dei pietas quam quaevis iniquitas, for the Mercy of God is greater then any
iniquity of man. 2. To Merits of Christ; For it is to charge the Death and
Passion of Jesus Christ, with weakness, and impotency, and insufficiency; as if
the Devil were more mighty to destroy, then Christ is to save. To which the
same Father Bern. super C^^t. Ser. 61.
replies again, Quid tam ad mortem quod non Christi morte salvetur? What sin is
there so deadly, that Christ's blood cannot heal? Yea, but Cain (says he) was
not a member of Christ, and therefore had nothing to do with the merits of
Christ. He could not say, Quod mihi deest, usurpo mihi ex vesceribus domini, I
will fetch honey out of the howels of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah; quoe
viscera per vulnera patent, whose very bowels you may see through his bleeding
wounds. 3. It is utterly destructive to true Repentance, and so a sin against
the very Remedy. For this is it which makes wretched sinners desperate, when
they look upon God as all Fire and Fury, Wrath and Indignation, Vengeance and
Terror, but they apprehend nothing of Mercy and Compassion in him. This was it
that made Judas hang himself, and Cain run from God. And truly, I am afraid
this Curse fell upon many of the Regicides too; upon some the curse of
Desperation, upon most of them the curse of Obduration, that same (...), a hard
and impenitent heart, Romans 2. 5. S. Gregory says Greg. Mag. in Psalm. 51. 11.
upon this speech of Cain, that he committed the sin against the Holy Ghost. I
dare not say this was that sin, but if Aug. Expos. inchoat* Ep. ad Romans
we may judge by S. Austins (...), who makes it to lie mainly in final
impenitency joined with desperation, I doubt many of the Regicides came as near
to it as Charing Cross is to Whitehall, None of them (that ever I heard) even
when they came to Execution, manifested any great signs of Repentance, for this
horrid Murder; some died stupidly, others justified it, others excused it. They
that are yet alive, have their hearts hard enough, were their hands but strong
enough to act over the same sin again. So that here too is Cains Curse right,
The plague of an impenitent heart is fallen upon them.

4. Cain was afraid that every one that met him, would slay him: such was the
terror of his guilty conscience, that he took himself to be an Anathema, an
execrable devoted person, an Outlaw that any one might kill that would. Nay,
not only so, but the word may be read in Fagius in loc.
the Neuter Gender, Quicquid invenerit me, etc. whatsoever does meet me, will
slay me. And so he was afraid not only of men, but of the beasts, and creeping
things, and fowls of the air. He was afraid lest God should arm the very
irrational creatures to be the Revengers of this blood. As (you know) God sent
Hornets to drive out the Canaanites, Exodus 23. 28. and commanded Bears to tear
in pieces those lewd children that mocked the Prophet, 2 King. 2. 24. And this
very terror of Cain, lest every thing that met him should slay him, lay upon
the hearts of our King-killers too. A Panick fear surprised them, as it is the
property of the Workers of Iniquity, to be afraid where no fear is, Ps. 53. 5.
They were scared with their own shadows, and (if Report lie not) with their own
dreams; the very thoughts of their hearts were as so many Scorpions still
stinging them, and that in the time of their greatest Prosperity. They lived in
perpetual Frights and Fears as wretched Cain did. And so this part of the Curse
fell upon them too; They were afraid that every one that met them would slay
them.

5. The Lord set a Mark upon Cain, which was partly to secure him from his
fears of being killed by the next he met, and partly to warn others by his
example to take heed of shedding blood. What this Mark was, is very uncertain.
Some of the Jewish Writers have a fancy that it was a Dog which always kept
him company, and suffered no person to come near him. A fancy that will suit
well enough with our King-killers, who (no doubt) had a Dog to wait upon them
ever after; they were dogged with the terrors of their guilty conscience,
which followed them still close at the heels, till vengeance overtook them.
Others say, it was a truculent bloody aspect, that frighted all that came near
him, so that they would say, Fugiamus hinc, iste est crudelis ille homicida,
qui fratrem Fag. in ver. 16.
suum occidit; let us flee hence, this is that cruel Murderer, who killed his
Brother. Others again say, It was a perpetual trembling of all his members;
which they gather from the Septuagints Translation, (...), that he should go up
and down the world groaning and trembling. Lastly, others will have it to be a
continual trembling of the earth under him, so that it made all persons afraid
to come near him; and this they gather from the Land of Nod, that is, the Land
of Trembling, in which he dwelt, ver. 16. Whether the earth did shake under
Cain, I know not; sure enough the whole Kingdom shook under the Murderers of
the King. Be the Mark what it will, it was that which made him an Example and
Terror to others, and a greater terror then his death could possibly have
been. Our Law condemns Notorious Murderers to be hanged on a Gibbet, there to
rot, and this in terrorem. Now suppose Cain had been served so, in less then
twenty years there had been no Mark nor Memory of such a Person, nor perhaps of
such a Sin. But now that Cain was driven up and down the world, for the space
(as it is conceived) of several hundred years with Gods Mark upon him, as a
living, walking Monument of vengeance, this was such a punishment, as was most
likely to effect the ends for which God appointed it, viz. to deterr others
from Murder. And surely God has set a Mark upon these Murderers too, enough (I
hope) to deterr all but themselves from the like sin. He has set a Mark of
infamy upon them and theirs; he has made them an astonishment to themselves
and the World; and (which is worse) he has (as I noted before) set a mark upon
the souls and consciences of many of them; he has seared them with an hot
iron, 1 Timothy 4. 2. and given them up (as it is to be feared) to a reprobate
mind, Romans 1. 28. so they have Cains Mark upon them; and in this also they
share in his punishment, as well as in his sin.

6. Cain (being condemned) with his Mark upon him, went out from the presence
of the Lord ver. 16. That is, Ab Ecclesia fidelium ex^lavit, says Fagius, He
was banished from the Church and Ordinances of God; he never frequented them
more, nor offered sacrifice more, after he had killed his brother. And being
thus cast out of the Church, he lost the light of Gods countenance, which was
so sad a part of his Curse, that Cain himself complains of it, ver. 14. And
from thy face (says he) shall I be hid. Gregory the great upon that passage of
the Psalmist, Psalm. 51. 11. Cast me not away from thy presence, etc. has these
words, A facie Dei projicitur, cut spies veniae post peccatum negatur; He is
cast out from the presence of the Lord, who grows desperate after sin
committed. Cain was now in a desperate condition, and cries out, From thy face
shall I be hid; that is, I shall never approach near thy Gracious presence
more, I shall be out of thy Protection, and special favor. So Gods hiding of
his face, signifies the withdrawing of his comforts, care, and protection from
a person, Psalm. 13. 1. How long will thou forget me, O Lord, for ever? how long
will thou hide thy face from me? Gods hiding his face from a man, is his
forgetting of him; and his forgetting of him is nothing else, out his leaving
him out of his protection and special favor. It is the withdrawing of the
light of his countenance from a man, which if it be for a season, is called
Desertion; if for ever, it is Hell: so that when Cain was gone out from the
presence of the Lord, he was (as it were) in Hell, while he was upon Earth. And
this part of the Curse is eminently fulfilled upon the Regicides and their
Adherents, who have voluntarily pulled down Cains curse upon their own souls;
and by excluding, and separating themselves from the Church and Communion of
Gods people, have gone out from the Presence of the Lord. This is remarkable,
that the greatest part of them never cared to come near God in his Ordinances,
in any part of his Public Worship, since they killed the King. God indeed hid
his face from Cain, but these men have hid their faces from God, and run out
from his presence without driving: which is so exemplary a Curse upon them,
that he that runs* may read it. For as Cain, after he went out from the
presence of the Lord, was Mobilis* and Vagus, a wandering Runnagate, that could
never be quiet in a place: so these men, after they had forsaken the Communion
of our Church, were never settled in any thing, but ran from Error to Error,
and from Delusion to Delusion till many of them had quite cast off the
profession of Christianity. These were they who separated themselves, sensual,
having not the spirit, which they so much gloried in, Jude 19. They went out
from the presence of the Lord.

7. And lastly, It is a received Opinion among the Jews, that Cain, running
about in the Woods, was killed by Lamech instead of a wild Beast, in the
seventh Generation; and so he met with his reward at last, though it Aug. Qu.
ex Vet. Test qu 6.
were long first. I know S. Augustine denies this, upon the account that Lamech
was not the seventh, but the fifth Hieron. ad Damasum. Ep. 125
from Cain; but S. Hierom so far defends it, as that it was majorum nostrorum
sententia, an old Tradition that Cain was killed by Lamech, who was the seventh
from Adam, though not from Cain. And this is that which we may rest somewhat
secure of too, that as God has given some of these wretches their reward in a
great deal less time; so for those that yet remain, the Revenger of blood will
pursue them, and at last, overtake them too, though they may be suffered a
while for greater terror, as Cain was, to be Runnagates and Vagabonds upon the
Earth. In Tom. 9. Hieron. Ep. 5.


I shall conclude all with a saying of S. Hierom, or whoever was the Author of
that Epistle, Ad Virginem in exilium missam, which is among his Works, Nullus
tam crudelis homicida est, quam qui ita erga alterum saevit, ut non parcat
sibi, none so desperate a Murderer, as he that will destroy himself to be
revenged upon another. Cain never thought what a mischief he should do to
himself, in killing his brother. For beside all the former curses, this misery
he brought upon himself, that now he was deprived of his brothers company,
counsel, and assistance upon all occasions. And certainly, had not our
King-killers been possessed with a spirit of strong delusion, they must needs
have foreseen, that beside all the misery they should infallibly bring upon the
Kingdom, they did but thrust a knife into their own Throats, when they killed
the King. But thus it is, when God hides his face, and gives men over to an
infatuated spirit. They were like the Madman that beat out his own Brains with
his own hands; Et immemores salutis suae, propria manu seipsos interimunt, in
Reges suos proprias convertendo vires, says Council. Tolet. 4. Can. 74.
the fourth Council of Toledo; And being unmindful of their own safety, they
kill themselves with their own hands, who lift up their hands against their
Kings.

And thus you have seen how Cains Curse in every particular is fallen upon the
Regicides; that we may say of them, as S. Paul of his Countrymen the Jews, That
wrath is come upon them to the uttermost, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 16. And God grant that
the Curse may rest there, and never fly farther abroad, and that the Land may
be cleansed from that blood. And for the Kingdoms peace and settlement, let us
put up that Prayer to God, which the children of Israel were taught to pray
when a man was found slain in the field, Deuteronomy. 28. 8. Be merciful, O Lord, be
merciful unto thy people whom thou have redeemed, and lay not innocent blood
unto their charge. O let the Guilt of this blood be forgiven the whole Nation,
and let the blood of Christ Jesus cry louder for us, then the blood of King
Charles against us. Even so, O Father, for Christ Jesus sake, thy dear Son, our
only Savior; to whom with thy self, and thy Eternal Spirit, Three Persons,
One Glorious God, be all Glory, Praise, and Thanksgiving, etc.

FINIS.

