AN EARNEST INVITATION TO THE SACRAMENT OF THE Lords Supper.

By JOSEPH GLANVILL Rector of Bath.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed for John Baker, at the Sign of the Three Pigeons in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1674.

To the Right Reverend Dr. Peter Mews, LORD BISHOP Elect OF Bath and Wells.
MY LORD,
I Was just sending away the last sheets of the ensuing plain discourse to the
Press, when the news came of your being made Bishop of this Diocese: I was
exceedingly transported with the tidings of so great a blessing befaln this
part of the Church, and could not restrain my joy from running out into this
Application and Address, which I intend not so much to congratulate your new
Dignity, as the happiness of Us, your Clergy, and this whole People, in the
relation we now have to so excellent a person. Your Lordships wisdom, justice,
piety, and diligence have made themselves so eminent in the long continued,
happy, and applauded Government of one of the most famous Universities of the
world, that we confidently promise our selves great felicities from the
Paternal Presidency and Authority of such an experienced Governor; And I
believe there is not a concerned man, who is sensible of the advantages of good
order, but blesses God and the King for so gracious and desirable an Election.
This, My Lord, I might speak upon the public Fame of your known merits, but
besides that I have had particular experience of your wisdom and candor, which
gives me a greater passion to declare the veneration I have for you; and I wish
I could do it in a way suitable to your great worth, and mine own resentments of
it; but instead of a proper testimony, I must beg your Lordship to accept of a
sincere one; and such I here make you in this small offering, the slender
First Fruits of your Diocese.

The Discourse I first designed only for the use of my own people, but I knew
not how to get transcribed Copies enough for them; and I considered too many
others needed some such exhortation, as well as those of my particular Charge,
and therefore thought that this little Essay might not be wholly useless to the
Public. I have writ it in a plain and unheeded style, because I judge such most
fit for practical matters, especially in applications to the populace; and take
it for an established, eternal Rule for such Addresses, whether by preaching or
writing, that they should be performed in the way that is most easy and
natural; and nothing ought to be studied in the language for such occasions,
but how to express the matter most sutably and plainly. But I need not have
made this Apology to your Lordship, who know, That good sense in an easy and
proper phrase is for ever the truest and best eloquence: There is more cause I
should crave your pardon for prefixing your Lordships name before a discourse
of so many other imperfections: This, my Lord, I do, and have this to plead for
the obtaining it, that I was transported by the occasion and the desire I have
to make known how happy I esteem this Diocese in so venerable a Prelate; and
how much particularly I am rejoiced at this welcome Providence, being

Right Reverend Father, Your Lordships most affectionate Honourer and humble
Servant, I. G.

TO THE PEOPLE of my Charge.
My Dear Neighbors.
ALthough We of the public Ministry cannot expect to do much by our
persuasions, and endeavors, in such an Age as this; Yet we ought to persevere
in our work with Courage and Resolution, and not suffer our selves to be
overborn by any difficulties, or discouragements what soever: For Duty belongs
to us, but events unto God, who will reward the Laborers whatever be the
success of their Labors. And as every Minister of Religion ought to be active,
and resolved in the work and patience of the Gospel; So he shall then best
acquit himself in it when he studies the proper needs of the Age, and place
wherein he lives, and accordingly directs his endeavors to provide for them.
Now there is nothing, that I know, that is wanted more in our Days, than a due
sense of the necessity, and advantages of the Holy Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, the general neglect, not to say contempt of which, has, I am
persuaded, been a great and sad occasion of the debauchery, and divisions that
are amongst us; And I verily think, that there could not be a more effectual
means to reduce us to Sobriety and Union, then a frequent, and reverend use of
that divine Iustitution. From this persuasion I have earnestly, and often (as
you can bear me witness) pressed this great duty upon your consciences, and
affectionately recommended it to your practice. I have represented its Nature
with all possible plainness, and urged its Necessity with a vigor in some
measure suitable to so great an occasion; I have told you the danger of wilful
neglect on the one hand; and the benefits of due performance, on the other; But
notwithstanding all, there are too many of you, that seem yet insensible, and
unconcerned. I have publicly desired those that are either ignorant or
dissatisfied, to accept of my private help, and Instruction, and have offered
them the utmost of my assistance for their better information, and direction.
And after all this, I know not what I can do more to serve you in this great
interest of yours, except I put something into your hands that may be ever with
you, and that you may consider on all occasions. Public Teachings by word of
mouth, are too much looked upon as customary exercises, and on that account,
they loose their force with some; and the greatest part even of the better
Auditors cannot keep their minds so close, and intent, to a Discourse spoken,
as to receive it in its full evidence, and power; or though the hearers are
never so diligent, and careful, our words are forgotten quickly, and the
affections that they raise, vanish without any considerable effect upon their
wills. For which Reasons, I have resolved upon this Course, to cast some of the
plain things I have preached concerning the Holy Sacrament into writing; That
those who are unfit for that great duty by reason of Ignorance, may have the
properest means of Instruction that I can provide for them, always in their
power, and when they please, before their eyes: And that those that deprive
themselves of the Benefits of this most excellent Ordinance, by reason of the
Mistakes of their erring understandings: may also have the most suitable help I
can give, toward the setting their minds right, and the reconciling them to
their Privilege, and Duty.

For these purposes, I shall (as my manner is) represent what I have to say in
the most distinct, and easy way I can contrive, avoiding all things that are
hard, either in notion or expression; And strive, as near as is possible, to
speak all along to the most ordinary understandings. For I look upon plainness
as the best dress for Truth; and my great care, and endeavor constantly is, to
be understood by all, as far as the subject will bear.

In the pursuit of what I intend I mean, by Gods help, to proceed in this
order. (1) I shall discourse with all convenient brevity, and plainness, the
Nature and design of the Lords Supper; and

(2) Give the General Reasons to enforce the Duty; under which head, I shall
apply my self to two sorts of Refusers, viz. Those that neglect (1) on the
account of pure carelessness, and stupidity, and (2) Those that stand off upon
the score of mistakes of Conscience. In treatting with the former, I shall show
that their obstinate refusal takes off all pretense they can have to
Christianity, and puts them into the state of Infidels, and Heathens, yea into
a worse condition, than that of mere unbelievers. As to the other sort, viz.
The dissatisfied in Conscience, I shall consider their Reasons against
Communicating with us according to the way of our Church, and show that they
are no justifiable grounds, why they should refuse to join with us in that
solemn part of Christian worship.

CHAP. II.
I Begin with the First, The Nature of the Lords Supper. Concerning this, there
has been an infinite diversity of opinions, and disputes; The effects of which
differences have been much Noise, and many Tumults, Schisms and Wars, with a
vast heap of mischiefs, and calamities to the Christian world: I shall not
therefore trouble you with any thing of needless controversy, or notion, on
this argument; but state it so far only, as it relates to practice; And I shall
take all I have to say about it from the Word of God, the best Rule to guide us
in the Enquiry. And if disputing men would have been content with its
declarations in this matter, all the trouble, and mischiefs had been avoided.
But this has been the misery; some govern their thoughts of this Holy
Institution by corrupt, and novel Traditions, and others by mere vain and
arbitrary phancies; Yea, Those who have been right in the main, have yet so
mingled the plain truth with allusions, and spoken of it in such a
fantastical, and uncertain way, that ordinary understandings have been
confounded, and those that are for downright sense, without the mixtures of
imagination, have not been able to tell what to make of that, which they heard
described in such a phanciful, and various fashion. This particularly has been
my own case; I had heard men preach so humoursomely, and so diversely about the
Sacrament; So much out of their own heads, and so little out of the Oracles of
God, That I was quite bewildred, and lost, and come at last to that pass, that
I knew nothing at all of it; which ignorance, and confusion of thoughts was the
natural effect of such discourses; For when men once ramble in the way of
phrases, metaphors, and conceits, as they loose themselves, so they perfectly
dazzle, and amaze those others, whom they should instruct. I therefore betook
my self to the plain expressions of Scripture concerning this matter; In them I
found an easy account in the nature, and design of this divine Ordinance. And
whither shall we go to enquire after it but to the words of Institution
themselves? These I shall consider first; and then gather together those other
passages of Scripture, which tend to the further explication of it.

1. The words of Institution are Mat. 26. [ Take, Eat, This is my Body. v. 26.
and Drink ye all of it. For this is my blood of the new Testament, v. 27. 28.]
To which is added in the Gospel of St. Luke [Do this in Remembrance of me.]
Luke 22. 19. These words I shall severally explain, and then infer from them
what is the nature, and design of the holy appointment.

Take, Eat, This is my Body -- and, This is my Blood -- Here I take notice,
That Body, and Blood, do not relate to the bread, and wine; But to the actions,
Eat and Drink, as appears plainly in the (...)
Original. 'This not this bread, and this wine, are my body and blood, but this
Sacramental eating and drinking of it; In this Christ's body and blood, viz His
Incarnation, and sufferings are represented to us. And yet by a Figure, The
consecrated Elements may be called his body and blood also; so the Form at the
eating the paschal Supper was, This is the bread of affliction which our
Fathers did eat in Egypt; Not the very same, but a Memorial of it, and the
State of bondage from which they were delivered. Thus 1 Cor 10. 3, 4. Manna is
called spiritual bread, and the Rock, spiritual drink, and that Rock, Christ:
Not that they could possibly be so in the Letter, but they signified that
spiritual food, and were tokens of Christ's Prefence. And thus the Sacramental
Bread, and Wine may be called his Body and Blood, that is, Figures and
Representations of them: and that, not barely of his sufferings, but (as the
Basil.
Father notes) of all the Mysteries of the Incarnation, which are signified,
and included. Thus anciently the Elements were called, Figures, Symbols,
Images, sensible things instead of spiritual, and we know it is in common use to
call the Picture by the name of that it represents, as this is a man, and that
an Angel. So that there is no ground for the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, in
these words, as the Roman Church pretends. But I wave disputes, and come to the
next expression to be considered.

[ This is the New Testament, or (...)
Covenant in my Bloud] viz. The Sign, and Seal of the Covenant made in his
Blood; a Covenant wherein God ingageth to bestow on us pardon of Sin, and
eternal Life; and we promise faithful and sincere obedience. Thus in the eldest
times, Eating, and Drinking were Covenant Rites: as we may see in the compacts
between Isaac and Abimilech, Genesis 26. 30. and between Jacob and Laban, Genesis 31.
44, 46. So that the Sacrament is not a bare Sign, but it is the Seal of Gods
gracious Covenant made with us in his Son.

[ Do this in Remembrance of me] It has always been usual to commemorate, and
remember Benefactors and great Mercies by Feasts, and Festivals. The Heathens
had their AS (...) --
Feasts in memory of their Heroes; And the Passover, a Type of this Supper, was
appointed to preserve the memory of the Israelites deliverance out of Egypt.
Exodus 12. 14. The Lamb was eaten with bitter herbs, to commemorate the
bitterness of their servitude; the Red Wine was a Remembrance of their blood
which Pharaoh spilt, and the unleavened bread, to remember them, that they
carried such out of Egypt at their departure: and thus our blessed Savior has
appointed this holy Rite to imprint upon us the memory of what he has done,
and suffered for us, that we might not forget our Deliverance by him, from a
bondage greater than Egyptian.

And now from these main passages thus explained, it is easy to infer, That The
Sacrament of the Lords Supper is a Memorial Feast appointed for a solemn
Remembrance of Christ our Lord; and a Seal of the Covenant that God has made
with us in him. Two things then it is principally designed for, (1) To Remember
us of our Lord, and Savior, and (2) to be a Seal of the Covenant of Grace; of
each briefly.

(1) It Is for a Remembrance, not only of his Person, or only of his Sufferings,
or any other particular part of his Ministry; But we are by it required
thankfully, and affectionately to call to mind, All that he has done, and all
that he has suffered; His Life, Doctrine, and Laws; His Passion, Resurrection,
and Ascension; His Victory over Sin, Death, and Hell; and the gracious Covenant
that God has made with us through him: These are all included in his Body, and
Blood (as I intimated before) of which the Holy Sacrament is a Sign, and
Memorial: And the remembrance of these, which we are called to by the Divine
Institution, is not only some slight, and passing thoughts, but a solemn and
most serious fixing of them upon our minds, in order to the inflaming our
affections with love, and our wills with resolution, that we may live
answerably to that excellent Religion of the Holy Jesus which we profess.

(2) It Is the Seal of a Covenant [ The new Testament in my bloud] The Covenant
is, That God will give pardon of Sin, and eternal Life, upon the conditions of
Faith and Repentance. This He seals to us in the Sacrament, and assures us,
that he, for his part, will make good his Promises, and we on ours, seal, that
we will endeavor to perform the conditions. So that the Lords Supper is a
Sacrament by which we confirm those engagements we are entered into at Baptism.
Then our Sureties undertook for us, that we should be faithful in the
Convenant, and in this holy Ordinance we take all those obligations upon our
selves, and in our own persons promise to act according to them.

This plainly, and in short, is the nature and design of the Holy Sacrament;
concerning which, there are some other expressions in Scripture which I shall
consider briefly, in order to the further explication of the sacred Mystery.
The chief are these. It Is called (1) The Cup of blessing. 1 Cor. 10. 16. 2) The
communion of the Body, and Blood of Christ, 1 Cor. 10. 16 and in the duty it is
said (3) That we show the Lords Death. 1 Cor. 11. 26.

(1) The Cup of Blessing, viz. of Praise and Thanksgiving. Our Savior Matthew.
26 gave thanks when he took the Cup. The Jews used to conclude their paschal
Supper with a Cup of Wine, at which time they sung an Hymn and therefore called
it the cup of (...)
praising and (...)
blessing. And the Heathens also after their feasts had their (...)
cups of Praise to their Gods; which some take to be the Cup of Divils
mentioned by the Apostle, I Coa. 10. 21. So that by this we are taught to
remember our Lord at his Table with praise and grateful acknowledgements: And
therefore the Ancients from hence called the Lords Supper, the Holy Eucharist,
namely, a Feast of Thanksgiving, and the Solemnity was always attended with an
hymn of Praise.

(2) Communion, (or (...)
Communication) of the body and blood of Christ, viz. The Sacrament is a sacred
Rite in which God communicates, and imparts to all worthy Receivers, the
Benefits of Christ's Incarnation, and Sufferings. He does then ratify, confirm,
and solemnly exhibit them, to those that duly attend upon that Divine
appointment.

(3) [ As often as ye eat -- ye do show the Lords death] viz. (1) Declare unto
men, with joy and glorying, that we believe he dyed for such purposes and that
he has procured inestimable benefits for us by his Death. That therefore we
will adhere, and stick unto him; and that neither death, nor life shall
separate us from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord. And (2) Imports our
showing and declaring this also unto God, and pleading it with him for his
pardon, and his grace, for the sake of that meritorious Passion which we set
forth, and commemorate. These passages fall under the Account I have before
given of the Ordinance, and show how we are to Remember our Lord in it, and
what we may expect in so doing.

Thus briefly of the Nature and design of the Sacrament, I might have run the
matter into a large Discourse, but I resolve all convenient brevity. In what I
have said, you will find all things that are necessary and essential to the
Ordinance; For the niceties and disputes that are about it, you need not
trouble your selves with them; But so much of it as I have represented (I mean
in the substance of the particulars) it is fit you should know: And therefore I
entreat you, especially those of the more ordinary understandings, to return
back, and fix your thoughts a while upon those periods, and read them over and
again, till you have a clear, and distinct apprehension of the Subject they
explain. I know the thoughts of most are very confused, and much in the dark
about it, and while they are so, they cannot demean themselves as they ought in
the performance of the Duty, nor receive those benefits that otherwise they
might from it. I beseech you therefore not to content your selves with a
single, and running reading; Many Divine Truths will not enter into our minds
at first sight; or, if they do, they are gone, as soon as they are received:
Though they are never so plainly expressed, yet they many times seem dark, till
we look again; Or though they strike our minds fully, yet they pass out of
Memory, except we reflect, and think them over; I hope therefore you will do
your selves this right; And I thus urge you to consideration of my accounts,
not as if I fancied I had made any discoveries in them, which were not made
before (No, These are known things among the Intelligent sort of Christians)
But I do it, because I speak to the meaner, and less improved understandings.
And perhaps from the Representation of the affair which I have given, the
others also may receive the advantage of a clearer order, and method to their
thoughts, and be delivered from many unnecessary and uncertain notions that
they have imagined to be of great consequence to be believed and known, when
either they are not true, or not considerable.

CHAP. III.
I Come now to the main thing I design, viz. (II) To urge this great duty which
I have thus explained, and to do what I can to persuade you, to the
conscientious practice of it. Now there are two things that commonly oblige men
to action, namely Considerations of Duty and of Interest. And there are both
here, in the highest degree, to engage us. I shall discourse of each.

(1) We have the Motive, and Reason of Duty, and Duty in such circumstances, as
have the greatest obligation in them. A Lord, who has all right to our
obedience both by nature, and by dear purchase, has commanded us to do this.
And, A Savior, who has rescued us from the Jaws of Hell, and Earth, and has
procured for us endless life and glory, has required it of us. Here is the
Authority of just Power, and the Obligation of astonishing Love. We are bound
by the submissions we owe a Sovereign Lord, and by the gratitude we owe an
adorable Benefactor. The Son of God, the King of both the worlds, The Redeemer
of Men, it is He that commands; and his commandments are not grievous; had he
put upon our necks a yoke heavier then the Jewish ceremonies, had he enjoined a
greater number of costly and laborious Rites than those, and required so many
of such services from us, as would have taken up all our time, and employed all
our strength, and wearied all our powers; Yet these we ought to have observed
without repining, and thought all but small homage to his Greatness, and small
acknowledgment of his Love. All these had been nothing in compare with what he
has done for us freely without merit, or obligation; Nothing, to his leaving
the bosom of the Father, and the glories of the upper world, and the
Hallelujahs of the blessed; Nothing, to his descending to a world of Infamy,
and woe; Nothing to his suffering the scorns and contradictions of Sinners, the
Death of the Cross, and the wrath of God: So that we had been wretchedly
ungrateful should we have stuck at any of these, or as much as murmured at
them: But our Lord has not given us any such trial of our Love, and obedience;
He has delivered the world from the Yoke of Ceremonial bondage, And (besides
Baptism) has appointed but this one Rite for us to observe; A Rite, that is
neither troublesome, nor costly, tedious, nor laborious. And what Prodigies of
baseness shall we make our selves, if we refuse to take notice of this his
gracious Institution? With what face can we look up and call our selves by his
name? How shamefully are we upbraided by the practice of those we count
barbarous? Let us look abroad into the world and consider the most brutish
Idolaters; They will cut their beloved flesh, and burn their dearest children,
and sometimes, suffer themselves to be crushed to death by the Carriages that
bear their Idols, because their Infernal Gods require, and are pleased with
such testimonies of their homage. Has the Devil such obsequious servants? Are
those Cruel Rites, whch he appoints, observed with so much duty; Will those
poor wretches do, and suffer any thing rather than displease their ugly
Deities? And are we Christians; Professing Servants of the Son of God, our
Sovereign and Redeemer. and do we neglect this his main, just, and gracious
appointment Is this too much to do for him? and do we owe him so much less than
Cannibals do their Idols? Certainly those men of the Desert, those wild Savages
of the Woods shall rise up in judgment with such a Generation of pretending
Christians, and shall condemn it. Methinks their diligence and exactness in
those hard and painful services, should cover us with blushing and confusion at
our carelessness and neglect of the easy duty our Lord requires from us: And we
shall see great reason to be ashamed of our omissions, if we consider, that our
blessed Redeemer had lived a Life of poverty and dishonor for our sakes; He
had instructed us in the way of Happiness by his excellent Doctrine and
Precepts; and had gone before us in an incomparable example; and now he was
just about to complete his Love, by offering himself unto death to deliver us
from it, and thereby to give an instance of the most amazing goodness that ever
was; At this time, he injoines his Disciples to do something in Remembrance of
Him. And Lord! What is sufficient to be done in memory of such Love? Had he
required the dearest of our blood, and the choicest of our substance to be
offered to him in acknowledgment, should we have thought such demands
unreasonable? Would ordinary ingenuity have scrupled to make those Sacrifices
for such kindness? But he calls not for these. He looks for no Firstborn of
our bodies, nor chief of our Flocks; No, He appoints only a feast of Memorials,
and commands us to remember his Love in that: And shall we not observe him in
so small a matter? Has he not deserved to be remembered by us? or do we know
any better way, to signify our remembrance of him, then that which himself
has prescribed? Should we not do as much as this, at the request of an
ordinary dying Friend? And is not the greatest, and the best that ever
creatures had, worthy of such a testimony of affection from us? I am sure there
is no one can be so brutish as to deny the justness of the Duty, and methinks
none should be so unworthy as to refuse compliance with it. I beseech you
therefore, if the Considerations of Duty can do any thing with you; If there be
any obligation in the highest Authority, if there be any allurement in the
sweetest love, If your profession of subjection to Christ be not only a
Complement, and if he have any real interest in your Souls; give this proof
then, of your being in earnest, that, which you would be thought, Refuse no
more of his Invitations; Neglect no more of his calls; Consider the expresness
of his command, and that this Law is peculiarly his; His in such a sense as (
Baptism excepted) no other Law is. For his other injunctions are but
enforcements of the Laws that God had written in the old Scriptures, and in our
hearts, But this is his own proper commandment; by obeying him in this, we
particularly own him as our Lawgiver, and by refusing we renounce him.

But if the considerations of Duty should not prove so powerful with you; there
are others which generally use to be of more force, namely those taken from our
interest. And here

(II) I desire you to consider the great benefits that a worthy Communicant
receives from the holy Sacrament. This is not a mere barren Ceremony, or
unprofitable Rite, but an instrument and means to produce and to convey
unspeakable blessings to us. Here we receive

(1) Confirmation of our Faith: All habits are increased by being exercised,
and this Ordinance requires great exercises of the grace of Faith: For here we
make a solemn declaration of it, and thereby bind it stronger upon our souls.
And to the exercise of this Divine Grace, and the sincere and public
profession of it, there is no doubt but God will superadd his special aid and
blessing, that out of weakness it may be made strong. So that if your Faith be
weak and trembling, if you are perplexed with vexatious doubts, and temptations
to unbelief, apply your selves to this holy Ordinance as to the proper remedy.
Declare your Faith, and pray for more. If you believe, God will help your
unbelief, Mark 9. 24.

(2) Our Repentance will be heightened by our Due Communicating at the Lords
Table, and that in respect of all its great Acts, viz. 1. Sense and Sorrow for
Sin; 2. Confession of its and 3. Aversation from it. For the First,

(1.) The evil of Sin is never so well discerned as in its effects. It is sweet
in the mouth, but bitter in the belly; And there is no greater evidence of its
vileness and malignity, then that we have in the sufferings of our Lord, which
are set before us in the Holy Sacrament. And certainly sin must needs be an
accursed thing (says the considering Communicant) That the blessed Jesus must
thus be made a Curse for it; That is doubtless a mighty evil, that cannot be
expiated but by the blood of God; And Sin, without question, has unspeakable
malignity in it, since it laid such a load of wrath upon the shoulders of
Omnipotence, as made him complain, and sweat, and groan, and die. The good man
has never such a sense of the evil of sin, as when he is awakened by the signs
and images of Christ's Sufferings, and when he sees it writ in Characters of
Blood. Besides, the baseness and ingratitude of Sin is made evident in all the
representations of the Divine Love, which we have at the Lords Table; We see
there, that it is an abuse of the greatest, and most tender Goodness; and there
is nothing that more affects ingenuous Souls, than the sense of such
unworthiness, and this will beget the liveliest, and most kindly sorrow. They
shall look on me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn. Zech. 12. 10.
The tenderest grief arises from the apprehension of abused Goodness; And the
more ingenuous Spirits are sooner brought to be troubled for their sins, by a
sense of Mercy, than of Terrors. Now there is nothing that gives a truer, or
greater representation of Divine Grace and Kindness than the Holy Sacrament,
and therefore this is a very effectual means to beget and increase a
penitential sense, and sorrow for sin. And upon this

(2) Follows Confession, which is one expression of these. The apprehension of
an Angry Majesty drives a sinner to desperation, and prevents his Confession.
When the Lord asked the man in the Gospel with some severity, How came thou
hither, not having a wedding garment, he was speechless. Terrors beget
stupifying fear, which stops the mouth, and damns up all the passages to and
from the soul; whereas the discoveries of goodness and mercy open the heart,
and melt the seal upon the lips; They invite Supplications, and beget
Confessions; and therefore the Sacrament, which is a memorial of the greatest,
sweetest, and freest mercy, tends in the nature of it to the producing humble
confessions and acknowledgements; and it does it likewise.

(3) As to the Aversation of Repentance by the same way. The top and perfection
of Repentance, is, to turn from our evil ways. God invites his People to this,
by the Argument that is most powerfully pressed upon us in the Sacrament,
namely, That of his pardoning mercy and kindness. Return thou backsliding
Israel -- and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you, Ier. 3. 12. His
readiness to pardon is the great motive to return, and the Sacrament is the
Seal of the Covenant of Pardon. Despair of Mercy keeps men on in a sinful
course. Thou say there is no hope, say they in the Prophet Ierem. 2. 25.
They thought their case desperate, and it follows, I have loved strangers, and
after them will I go. The Devils persist irreclaimably in their hatred of God
and Goodness, because the unalterable Sentence is past upon them; And if men
come once to quit their hopes of Happiness, they will also in a short time quit
the thoughts of God and Virtue, and give themselves up to the swinge of their
Appetites and Inclinations. Whereas on the other side, Hope is the great
Encouragement and Spring of Endeavor, and where this is enlivened by a full
and quick sense of pardoning Goodness, that Soul will feel a mighty Motive to
reform and turn from sin. Now the Sacrament is the Seal of that Covenant which
assures us of Grace, and pardon, and the firmest ground of our best hopes, and
most glorious expectations. Thus the Grace of Repentance receives increase in
all its exercises, from this Divine Institution; and so does

(3) That other most excellent Grace, Love, both as it relates 1. to God, and
2. to our Neighbor. (1) In the Holy Sacrament the Mysteries of Divine Love are
unfolded in all their circumstances of wonder. There we see pardoning,
redeeming, bleeding, dying, Love. Love, suffering for all our sakes; and Love,
procuring all things for our interests. Love descending to the Grave, and Hell;
and Love triumphing over both; Love leading Captivity captive, and obtaining
gifts for men, Light, Life, and a glorious Immortality. Such Love, and Love
beyond what we can say and beyond what we can think, is represented at the Holy
Sacrament; and this must needs fire every soul, that is not as cold as the
earth, and as dead as the Grave. Love begets Love, and one flame kindles
another. And if we think of this Love, and consider it as we ought when we come
to the entertainment of Love, this would excite our affections, and turn our
Souls into holy flames, and so our dead Powers will live, and our dull sleepy
affections will awake into new spirit, and vigor. We shall live by Love, and
act by Love, till we are received into the nearest embraces of Love, and
swallowed up in that immense ocean of Love. Now Love is the best, and most
pleasing of all our passions? and Love to God is the best, and most pleasant of
all Loves; A Love free from those tortures, and disquiets, that shame, and
those griefs, that are produced by absence and uncertainties, loss and guilt,
when this passion is placed upon other objects. This Love is the Fountain of
Delight, and the spring of Action; that sweetents our troubles, and stirs up
our endeavors, that makes duty agreeable, and difficulties easy, that is a
present Heaven, and the foretast of a greater. This also (2) Tends to the
increasing our Love one to another. It is a Feast of Love to our Fathers House,
and our Lords Table; The Guests are Brethren, and professing Children of Love.
Here are all the engagements to love set before us; The Love of our Lord, and
his express Commandment job. 13. 34. The Relations we stand in to God, and to
one another. We cannot well choose but pity our Brothers Infirmities, and
pardon each others faults, when we see how much God has pityed our miseries,
and how graciously he has pardoned our offenses. Our animosities will be
abated, and our thoughts of malice and revenge will die. Our Indifferences will
be kindness, and our kindness Love; when we consider the inexpressible Love of
our common Lord, and the blessed effects of that Love; Reconciliation made,
Happiness procured, and Sin, and Death, and Hell conquered: A sense of these,
will swallow up all our little picques, and displeasures, and so fill us with
the thoughts of Gratitude, and Love; That we shall forget our enmities, and
embrace our enemies, and shed abroad our kindness upon all about us, yea and
extend it to all the world in prayers, and good wishes. And now, This Spirit of
Charity is a most divine temper, and a great happiness: It Is a sweet, serene,
and pleasant thing, a reward to it self, if there were no other: Whereas envy,
and malice, and all the degrees of them, are an hell and torment to the Soul,
they are great sins and their own punishment; And a right use of the holy
Sacrament will abate, and remove these, and therein also administer blessed and
unspeakable advantages to us.

(4) Our Hopes are nobly advanced, and strengthened by this Ordinance. When the
good man considers the Justice and Holiness of God, and the perfection of his
Law; and then takes a view of his own sinfulness, and innumerable
imperfections; His Spirits fail, and his hope is giving up the Ghost; he sinks
into trouble, and almost into the regions of despair: Now all the relief that a
man can have in such a state, is to be drawn from Gods Covenant to pardon sin,
and to accept of faith and repentance instead of perfection. This is the Tenor
of the Gospel, and the foundation of our hopes; and this Covenant is sealed and
assured to us at the Sacrament; so that thence the fainting Soul may derive
life, and quickening. And when the drooping Christian comes from seeing God
putting his Seal to his pardon, and to the promises made him of eternal Life;
His hopes recover, and his spirits return unto him; His Soul leaps for joy, and
all his powers are full of content, and pleasure: And over and above this, God
is pleased at such times especially, to vouchsafe more abundant manifestations
of himself to the Soul, sealing his love upon it, and giving it so much
assurance as may deliver it from its unreasonable doubts and suspicions, and
make it in part partaker of our Masters joy. But this will be a particular by
it self. Therefore

(5) The holy Sacrament is an excellent means to heighten a Christians Joy and
Comfort. For there we are in a special exercise of our Graces, and by them are
prepared for Divine peace and pleasure, That peace of God which passes all
understanding, Phil. 4. 7. and this is something more than that content that
naturally arises upon, and results from the Actions of holiness and virtue;
and is superadded by the nearer applications of the Spirit of God to the Soul;
This pleasure and satisfaction God is always willing to bestow upon us, but we
by our sins indispose our selves for it, and it is not to be given but to
prepared Souls; And now according to the greater, or less degrees of our
preparations, and exercise of our graces, we shall have more, or less of this
spiritual joy, and satisfaction in our Communions. But besides the joy which is
special, and extraordinary, The Ordinance in its own nature tends to delight
and pleasure. We had raised storms, and tempests by our sins, and provoked him
whom we can neither resist, nor avoid; His Countenance was full of dread and
terrors, and Death and Hell stood ready for the command to seize upon us: And
must it not needs fill those with joy and transport, that were just now in this
dreadful state, when they shall see the Heavens cleared, and the storms gone;
to behold smiles and love in the face of the offended Majesty; to be assured
that he is reconciled, and his Arms are open to receive us; That Hell and Death
are destroyed, and Life and Happiness procured for us? All these are set before
us in the holy Sacrament, and did we use it as we ought, our souls would be
transported with joy, and we should have a delightful foretaste of the
happiness and triumphs of the Blessed; and all our Lives would be Anthems of
Praise and acclamation to the adorable Author and procurer of our Blessings,
And this

(6) Is another happy advantage we derive, or may do, from the holy Sacrament,
viz. That it heightens and spirits our Gratitude and Praises. Praise and
acknowledgement of Divine favors, are all the return we can make for them; and
we are to offer up these Sacrifices for our selves, and all the other
creatures: But the commonness of our mercies takes away the sense of them; and
we pass them over with slight and customary acknowledgements; This ordinarily
is our course, and it is a very disingenuous and ungrateful carriage to the
bountiful Author of our beings, and blessings: But now at the Holy Sacrament,
Divine favors are particularly and solemnly represented, our remembrance
awakened, and our affections excited; and the devout Soul pours it self forth
into holy Eucharist, and thanksgiving. The heart is full, and the mouth flows:
All the powers rejoice, and rejoicing breaks forth into Songs of Praise: And so
begin that blessed employment, which shall be the work and happiness of Heaven.

Thus we shall receive increase to our Graces, and our Comforts, from the
frequent, and due use of the Holy Sacrament, and all other spiritual advantages
are containd under these. And as by these particulars we may encourage our
selves to our duty, so in them likewise we may see how we are to demean our
selves in the discharge of it: what acts we are to exercise, and by what
considerations we may stir up our graces, inflame our affections, and
strengthen our resolutions.

And now the Benefits that I have represented to encourage and invite you to
the holy Sacrament do not only concern the thorough, and grown Christian, but
even all that own the profession of Christ's Religion, and have not renounced
their baptismal engagements by leudness, and impiety; For such have some
degrees of Faith, Love, Repentance, and other virtues; But the unhappiness is,
that these, in the most, are very low, imperfect and in a degree that will not
secure their condition: These graces must be advanced to nobler measures, and
to such degrees, as may prevail over the contrary habits, and dispositions;
Till the matter comes to this, we are under the Law and a spirit of bondage; in
a condition of impotency and weakness, and not arrived to the glorious Liberty
and Power of the Sons of God: This, all that profess the Christian Faith and
Hopes, ought to aim at, and endeavor after; and the Sacrament is the most
proper and likely means for the advancing of our imperfect Graces to that noble
height. So that all professing Christians are concerned in the duty, and
capable of the benefits. And to all those that have such thoughts, and such
desires, the Considerations I have presented will be of moment. But for the
rest that are careless and unconcerned, dead to such spiritual Motives, and
stupidly careless of the duty, and the privileges that attend it; They are not
Christians, but do as much as in them lies, to renounce their Religion, and to
put themselves into the condition of Heathens and professed Infidels. This is
that I come next to discourse.

After all my persuasions, and most earnest endeavors, I have too much cause
to think that some among you neglect the holy Ordinance not for any reason that
they have, or can as much as pretend; but from mere brutish stupidity and
unconcernment. They care not for these things. The motives of Religion, and
another world can do nothing with them; such considerations are not felt, but
past over their Souls without making any impressions on them. And now, as for
such, I come to show, That they disclaim Christ, and his Religion, and are by
no means to be reckoned into the number of Christians. This I prove by the
following particulars.

First, They renounce a main Article of the Creed, viz. The Communion of
Saints, their Communion with (1) Christ, and their Communion with (2) one
another. (1) Christ invites us to his Table, and prepares a spiritual
entertainment for us; and in that there is a solemn and special intercourse
between him, and his Church; which on our part consists in the exercise of our
Graces; and on his, in the benefits, and blessings he bestows. He invites us to
come and to meet him there to enjoy spiritual correspondence, and communion
with him: And now, wilfully to refuse the invitation, is to signify our
contempt of the holy Jesus, and so declare that we care not for any nearness of
correspondence with him. And such neglectors in effect say, that they love the
converse and communion of their vain, and vicious company; That they can spend
their time pleasantly in their conversation, upon an Ale bench, or place of
idleness, or debauches: But for Christ Jesus they like not his company, and
care not for any intimacy of acquaintance with him. This is the direct language
of such practices, and neglects, and what kind of Christians are such as these?
(2) They renounce the Communion of Saints one among another. The holy Sacrament
is the Feast of Charity, and Christian Love, and there our affections are
united to God, and to our brethren. There we profess to be of one Body, one
Society, and to be all members one of another. So that those who neglect and
refuse this holy Symbol of Love; break off from the Society of Christians, and
declare they will have nothing to do with them, as far as they are concerned in
that name, and relation: That they will not be of the flock, and number that
Christ calls his; but would rather have their lot with the world, and herd of
mankind, who are strangers to the Covenant of Promise, without hope, and
without God in the world. Ephesians. 2. 12. That they value not their privileges,
nor care for their hopes. This is the meaning of their neglect, and such
Christians are the wilful refusers.

(2) They renounce their Baptism. This is the Sacrament of entrance into
Christianity, and here engagements are laid upon us without our knowledge or
consent. At the Sacrament of the Lords Supper we solemnly engage, and take
those obligations upon our selves. If we refuse to do this, we withdraw our
consent from what was done in our stead; we make our Baptism void, and put our
selves into the state of Infidels and Heathens. The Indians were by the
Spaniards driven to Baptism in droves, like Cattle to the water, without
knowing what it meant, or what they did in it: were these Christians by virtue
of such a Baptism? Especially, is there any reason to think those of them such,
who as soon as they were free, made open declarations against it. And are those
among us Christians, who were signed with that Religion when they could not
help it? and profess against it by their actions and neglects, as soon as they
are in capacity to do it? who disown it, when they are solemnly called to put
their seal, and to declare their allowance and approbation? Their sureties
engaged for them that they should believe the Christian Faith; keep God's
Commandments, and renounce the World, the Flesh and the Devil: But say these by
their practice, what had they to do to undertake such things for us; we will
stand to no such engagements: we are called on to make this good our selves in
person at the other Sacrament, or by our neglects to declare it void: but we
will not tie our selves, or own any such engagements on us; we will leave our
selves at large to believe what we please, and to practice what we fancy, and
to gratify and worship, as long as we think fit, the World, the Devil, and the
Flesh, our friends, and dearest correspondents. All this likewise is plainly
signified in the neglect of the holy Sacrament; and therefore certainly such
are no better Christians than the wild men of America: which will further
appear if we consider.

(3.) That by it they deny the very profession of Christ Jesus; They will not
as much as claim, nor pretend to him, in any solemn, significant way. To say
that we are Christians, and now and then to hear a Sermon, these are not
profession enough: They are but cold declarations of our opinion; no good
significations of our Faith. The right profession of Christianity is made, by
our presenting our selves at the Lords Table, and owning our Faith there; that
is a solemn and public confession and acknowledgement. To hear Sermons is too
often but curiosity or custom; to say we are of the Christian Religion, is but
a declaring in what way we have been brought up; and mere education-Faith is
but a faint, unsignifying thing; It is but opinion and a low degree of assent.
It Is true, a man may be a Formalist and an Hypocrite when he comes to the Lords
Table, as well as in other lower significations of his Religion. But however,
he makes a profession, and that which is proper and solemn: whereas the
wilfully negligent refuse to make any due confession of Christ and his
Religion. They openly deny him before men, and such he will deny before his
Father which is in heaven, Mat. 10. 33. To withdraw from the profession of
Christianity in times of difficulty and persecution is a great sin; but it is
such a one as admits of some extenuation from the frailty of humane nature, and
the temptations of fear and self love; But to deny the profession of Christ in
times of Liberty and encouragement, this is an affront to the Holy Jesus, for
which there is no shadow of excuse, and must arise from contempt, and a confessed
neglect of him. Such persons publish to the world, that they own nothing of
Religion; but count it a disparagement to be thought any way concerned for it.
And so are by no means to be accounted Christians. Further,

(4.) Their refusal and neglect is a quitting and renouncing the whole Covenant
that God has made with sinners in his Son. The Covenant on Gods part offers
Grace and Glory; and on ours, it binds to Faith and sincere obedience. We are
called to the Sacrament to see God confirming what he has promised, and
assuring us to make good what concerns him: On the otherside, we are to present
our selves there, to profess our readiness and resolution, to perform our part,
to keep the terms to which we are engaged, and upon which we expect the
promised blessings. Now if we wilfully refuse this Confirmation, we withdraw
our selves from the Covenant, and declare that Grace and Glory are things that
we neither care for nor expect; and that we will not tie our selves to any
faith or homage; but would be as free as we can, to follow the Devil and our
Lusts: and so are far off from being. Christians.

CHAP. IV.
I Have thus briefly shown you what is signified and employed in the neglect of
the Holy Sacrament. Many of you that are guilty of this sin, would I supposed
be loath openly, and in words, to renounce Christ and his Religion, and yet
while you continue in this obstinate, dangerous neglect, you do it, as fully as
if your tongues declared against that name and profession. And I think when any
such as these turn Papists, Turks, or Jews, they do but change to some show of
Religion, from none at all. So that it is no real disparagement, or loss to our
Church, when those Infidels declare in words, what before they sufficiently
signified by their practice. They go out from us, because they were never of
us, 1 John 2. 19. They do not change their Religion, for they had never any
before which they might exchange.

This, Sirs, in serious truth, is the condition of those that wilfully refuse,
and neglect the Duty of Holy Communion: And me thinks it should make such
tremble to consider, that they live in a professed and impudent contempt of God.
You pity Heathens, and ignorant Americans; but there is work enough for your
pity at home, and their condition certainly is not worse, than the condition of
those careless negligent sinners among our selves. Yea, the Apostle tells us,
That it is better never to have known the way of truth, than after we have known
it to turn away from the Holy Commandment, 2 Pet. 2. 21. and our Savior says,
It shall be more tolerable for the dark Tire and Sidon, at judgment, than for
the enlightened Capernaum and Bethsaida, Matt. 11. 22. We think their condition
dreadful that say, there is no God, and no doubt it is so: And certainly their
state is not less deplorable, That acknowledge there is a God, but defy him,
and carry the matter so, as if in good earnest there were no such being. To
live at large without the ferious profession of some Religion, is brutish, and
unnatural; And those Savages that do so, deserve not to continue in the
societies of men, but are fitter to range among the wild beasts of the woods.
And such are those among us, that never make any solemn profession of any
Religion, by any act of their own. They have no Religion, but that of their
Climate, which they neither understand, nor mind; they are Christians by the
Christianity of others (viz. the general profession of their Country) or they
are none at all; and if they live and die in this condition, wild men and
Cannibals will at the last be in a better state than they.

And now, Sirs, Reason for this carelessness and dangerous neglect, I am sure
you have none; Nor do the sort I am now dealing with, pretend Scruples of
Conscience; But yet some Excuses there are, which you know are but vain, that
you use upon occasion to take off the edge of reproof, and to seem to justify
your selves by them in the sight of men.

Thus they that were invited to the Supper in the Parable, Like 14. 18. made
excuses, One had bought ground, and he must see it; a second, had bought Oxen,
and he must try them; and a third, had married a Wife, and could not come. None
of these pretenses had any good reason in them; they were some thing to say,
and had a little color, but they were not the causes of their not coming to
the Supper, No, the true ground was their contempt of the Master, and his
Invitation: and therefore Matt. 22. 3. it is said, They would not come; Their
excuses were looked on, as flat denyals, and the reason is given after: It was
not their Ground, nor their Oxen, nor their Marriage; but their disesteem of
the Lord, and his Feast, They made light of it, v. 5. But though these excuses
were not good, yet they had something specious in them: 'Twas business, and
considerable occasions that were alleged: and such affairs they really had,
for it is said in St. Matthew, that they went their way, one to his Farm, and
another to his Merchandise; so that there was something true in their pleas,
though the main thing for which they were brought was false. But now, if they
had sent word, that the Lord's house was so far off, that they were not able to
go to it, though really it were within some few furlongs of their remotest
dwellings, and not further than the Markets, which they constantly frequented:
There had been more folly in this excuse. If they had said, that there was not
room for them all in the Lord's House, when they knew, that it was never full
on such occasions, and that a great part of those that were invited, would not
come, so that they were sure to find too many empty places; the excuse would
have been interpreted as a mockery, and a scoff at the invitation. If they had
told the Messengers, that they would not come, except they had each of them a
Chair and Cushion provided for him, and might sit in state and ease at the
Entertainment, this had been greater arrogance than appears in those Refusers.
If they had sent the Lord word, that they would not feast with him, at such, or
such of his Houses, that were appointed, and were most convenient for their
reception; but they would have it here, or there; at home, and next door; in
places much less fit: This would have been a very humorsome and very rude
answer to the Invitation. If further they had said, that the Feast began too
soon, and that they could not rise so early, though the Sun was up many hours
before, and they were abroad every day earlier about their other business; This
also had been an affront to the Master, and a contempt to his kindness. But if
these surly, unworthy people should have been humored in all particulars, and
things should have been so managed, as to have avoided all these pretenses: And
yet if after such condescension they should have refused, they had confuted
themselves, and given the lie to their excuses: But, if notwithstanding all
this, they should have cried out that they were perishing for want of bread;
and clamoured, and complained heavily that provision was not made for them;
what could have been said to such an impudent, brazen'd sort of Hypocrites?

Sirs, there are some among you that understand what I mean: I speak not thus
out of ill will to upbraid any of you, but I ought to mind you, and to
endeavor to convince you of your sins. What ever colors the guilty may set
upon their neglects, and contempts of Holy Ordinances, before men, God will not
be deceived, or mocked; there is no putting tricks upon him. If you will not be
persuaded to your duty, he knows the reason, and it is in vain to make false
flourishes, and excuses. Yea, some men's pretenses are so openly untrue, and
gross, that they cannot as much as hope to deceive men by them. Every one sees
the falsehood, and lying of their allegations; all their actions proclaim that
they do not themselves belive, or mean any thing that they say; and yet they
have the prodigious impudence to lie on in the face of God, and conscience, and
men. So seared, and hardened are some in their perverseness and hypocrisy, and
act at that rate, as if it were a play-game, and sport of wit to show how many
ways they had to evade their duty, with some show of reason. Sirs, when this
vile sort of evil men have the forehead to pretend Religion, they become the
most mischievous miscreants upon earth; and the fittest Instruments that Satan
can desire or use for the affairs of his Kingdom. But no more of them now.

Friends, I am exceeding troubled to see how undutifull to God, and how unkind
to themselves, how foolish and unreasonable many men are, when they seek for
little occasions to pretend, as reasons against the greatest and most important
Duties; when that which would excuse nothing else, shall excuse them unto God
for a neglect of his worship, in the greatest Instances of it: An aching finger,
a few Drops of rain, the cold Air, a Fit of Drowsiness, an impertinent visit,
or such like trifles, are enough to be pleaded for absence from the House of
God, and Holy Communion with him. My wife was not at home, or she was busy, my
Child's head aked, or I had friends to dine with me, therefore I could not be at
the Sacrament. Therefore I could not! For shame false man! offer such excuses
to thy Master, or thy Prince, when he commands, and expects thine attendance,
see how he will take them from thee: yea offer such but to thine equal, that
waits for thee on affairs of moment, and try how kindly he will receive the
disappointment on such grounds. Do thou use to say, I could not go out to
market to buy necessaries, because 'twas cold weather; I could not go to Dinner
to my kind Neighbor next door, that invited me, because I had a corn upon my
great Toe? Are such pretenses too trifling to be used on such ordinary
occasions, and are they enough for the greatest? will they serve to excuse thy
neglect of feeding thy soul with the bread of life, and thy making provision
for eternity? Will they answer for thy not waiting on thy Lord, the Lord of
Life and Glory, when he invited thee to the Feast of Love, at the House of
Banquets? What thoughts have thou of the priveledges of the Gospel, the
Communion of Saints, the peace of Conscience, the joys of the Holy Ghost, the
foretasts of Glory; what, I say, do thou think of these, if they have not so
much power with thee as the most acknowledged trifles? With how much less
respect and devotion do thou serve God, than wicked men do the Devil and
their Lusts? When they invite to jolly meetings and communion in debauchery and
beastial madness, do the Blades use to make such excuses? Are they diverted and
kept off from their brutish satisfactions by such Nothings? certainly they
could not so excuse themselves to their lusts and vile Companions. And do you
pretend to be worshippers of the God of Heaven, and worshippers of the best and
purest sort, to be Christians, and expectants of eternal glories as rewards of
your services; and do you thus serve your Maker; now and then when the humor
takes you, when the Devil has no business for you, and you have nothing else
to do? Are you not ashamed to confess that Religion has so little power with
you, and that every thing can do more with you, than your duty to God, and the
interest of your souls? Do you thus work out your salvation? Do you thus seek a
Kingdom, a heavenly Kingdom, and everlasting Kingdom? Is this the work and
patience of the Gospel? Is this running, and striving, and fighting, and giving
diligence? Is this cutting off right hands, and plucking out right eyes? Is
this forsaking all and following Christ? If there be any reason, if there be
any shame, if there be any Conscience, if there be any sense of God and
Religion in you, let not small matters keep you from this your greatest duty
and concern; Make no more such vain and selfcondemning Apologies. I know not
whether it were not better for you once for all, to say you are no Christians;
than to insist on such shameless pretensions for your neglects of Christ and
his appointments. I add no more on this head now; I pray God you may lay to
heart what I have said.

CHAP. V.
I Pass now to discourse with the other sort of Refusers, viz.

(2) Those that stand off upon the score of mistakes of Conscience. In applying
my self to them, I shall consider the most weighty objections that carry any
color of conscience with them. And though I know many pretend scruples of this
sort, when in earnest they are not the reasons of their neglects; yet because
they are so to some, I shall take them to account. They are of two sorts,

(1) Such as hinder men only sometimes, and in part.

(2) Such as wholly obstruct their Communion, and are pretended as grounds, why
they cannot partake with us at any time.

Of the first kind are these that follow; viz.

(1) We hear sometimes, [I would not have neglected the holy Sacrament, but I
was not in charity; such, or such a person has abused me, and I was at odds
with him; so that I durst not come.]

To this I say, That in such an occasion, thou art seriously, and impartially
to consider, whether thy displeasure were just, or unjust; upon the determining
of this will depend the state of the case If

(1) Thy displeasure were just, and thy Neighbor has done thee wrong, and
persists in it without repentance, or reparation; it is no uncharitableness to
be out with him, or think amiss of him. In such a case, thy anger is no sin; so
long as it keeps it self within just bounds. Be angry, and sin not, says the
Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 26. they may be parted And what is no sin cannot unfit us for
the holy Communion. For that Ordinance does not oblige us to be reconsiled in
our thoughts to wicked, and injurious men, while they impenitently continue
such: It will indeed require us not to revenge our selves on them, to do them
wrong, or to desire their ruin, or as much as hurt; but not to have kind and
good thoughts of them while they continue obstinate in their sins, and
injustice: otherwise it were in the power of every wicked person to hinder the
good man from the Sacrament, when he pleased. On such an occasion (I say) we
may be innocently angry, and not only pity the injurious man, which many times
is but a proud, though more plausible word to disguise anger by. And the man
that is but thus justly pleased with an offender against God, and himself, is
not indisposed for the Sacrament thereby. If this be your case at any time, you
ought not to permit the injury of another to do you so much more, as to keep
you from your attendance on Christ at his Feast of Love.

But (2) If upon examination you have found, that your anger, and displeasure
was unjust; then the sin, and the wrong was on your part, and you ought to
repent of it, and resolve against it, as a preparation for the holy Sacrament.
And if you do so, the Sacrament will be a proper means to your end? There you
will find considerations, and helps for the cooling of the heats of your
passion; and for the allaying the boylings of your rage, and animosity: I say,
if you are convinced in your conscience, that your wratb is undeserved, you
ought to repent, and if you do so, you ought to use the Holy Sacrament for the
confirmation of your repentance.

So that the scruple of not being in charity cannot justly keep any from the
Sacrament, but those that know they hate their brother without a cause, and are
resolved to persist in that hatred; such as will not be reconciled to one that
has done them wrong, though he repents, and endeavors reparation: And such,
in effect, renounce Christ, and declare that they expect no benefit from his
merit, or mediation for the obtaining pardon for themselves. If this be your
condition, you may well be afraid to come to the Holy Sacrament; and you may as
well tremble to pray, Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that
trespass againstr us. For this is directly praying against your selves. I hope
it is not thus with any of you that make this exception.

But your neighbor you think is an evil man, has done you injury, and not
asked your pardon, or sought your amends; you are therefore displeased with him,
and feel much anger in your mind against him; but yet are very ready to forgive
him upon his acknowledgements and desire of forgiveness. If it be after this
manner with you, you ought not to abstain from the Sacrament for this reason;
but rather to address your selves to it, to provide and pray that your just
anger may not grow into malice and rage; that you may not be provoked to repay
your enemy one injury for another, but that by the due use of those holy
mysteries you may be more inclined to forgiveness, when he shall be fit for it.
This I think is sufficient for that doubt.

(II) Some plead; [I have so much business fallen upon me, that I have not time
to prepare my self, and therefore I cannot come]

In Answer to this, I shall say something that concerns 1 Business, and
something 2 that concerns Preparation.

(1) As to Business. Does your Business afford you time to eat, and drink, and
sleep, and none to fit your souls for spiritual entertainments, and converse
with God?

(2) Have you any greater, have you any better business, than to prepare your
selves to remember the Love of your dear Lord, to meet with him, to renew your
Covenant with God, and to receive pledges of his pardon, and his love? Do you
not reckon, that this is business; and the most important and necessary
business; and shall the greater matters give place to the less?

(3) Is not much of the business that hinders, needless? have you not
voluntarily involved your self in more affairs than it was necessary you
should, or than your state or station in the world required? might not some of
it have been put off to some other time; or might not the time that you spend
in impertinencies be employed in some of that business?

Ask your Consciences these questions; and know, that what ever business you
take upon you more than is consistent with your duty to God, and to your souls,
that business is your sin. But if your business were not voluntary, but thrown
on you by Providence; the doing such necessary business is Gods work; and while
you do it in his fear, and with an eye to his glory, you are doing somewhat
that is a preparation for the Holy Sacrament, or at least that which does not
by any means indispose you for it. And hence I pass to the Answers that concern

II. Preparation. As to this take these two things.

(1) There are Preparations required to Prayer and Hearing, as well as to the
Sacrament; Meditation is the Preparation for Prayer, and Prayer the Preparation
for Hearing; and I hope that notwithstanding your business you perform these
duties: If not, you are to repent speedily of your neglect, and to take the
first opportunity of the Sacrament, there to confess your sin, to declare your
repentance and resolutions of amendment; to beg pardon for what you have
omitted, and grace to assist you in what you resolve. But if you have performed
those holy services, then I say,

(2) That those performances joined with faith and repentance are preparations
for the Holy Communion. For when we hear, and when we pray, we do the same
thing that we do at the Sacrament, though not with that solemnity; we remember
Christ when we hear, and we do the same, and renew our Covenant with God when
we pray, (in which two I have told you the nature of the Ordinance consists;)
so that these acts are dispositions and preparations for that which is the more
solemn performance. A good life in the discharge of our duties toward God and
man, is an habitual and constant preparation for the Sacrament; and a true
Christian is always ready and prepared to remember Christ, and to confirm the
Covenant whereby he is a Christian. It is indeed very fit, that we should take
some time before we approach the Lords Table, to call together into our
thoughts the several great instances of the love of our dear Savior, which we
are to remember there; what particular sins we have to confess, and to resolve
and covenant against; what graces we want, and are more especially to implore.
These things we should do, but they are not works that will require much labor
or time, if we have been constant in the other preparatory duties of
Meditation, Prayer, and Hearing; for they do habituate such thoughts and
resolutions to the souls of good men. But if thy case be such, that thou have
been an evil man, and negligent of all spiritual duty; but art now sensible of
thy sin, and desirous to reform; that sense and those desires of amendment (if
they are sincere, and if thou understandest the nature of the Sacrament, and
Gods Covenant that is sealed by it) are thy preparations. The more time thou
take, and the more prayers and thoughts thou imployest with other means, to
make the sense of sin deep, and the desires of reformation intense and great;
the more thou art prepared, and the better things are like to succeed with
thee: But if thy preparations are of a lower, and more imperfect degree, (if of
the true kind) thou ought not therefore to abstain; God will pardon thy
infirmities, and accept of thy sincerity, and strengthen thee so, that thou
shall be better prepared against another opportunity, if thou art not wanting
to thy self. But as to this, I may have occasion to speak more under the next
Head, to which I now come:

Viz. (II) To consider the Scruples of Conscience, that keep some off wholly
from public Communions. They are either of such as refrain, because (1) they
think themselves unworthy, or (2) of those that do it because they think others
unworthy, or (3) of such as refuse on the opinion, that the way of
administration is unworthy. Most of the considerable and usual doubts will fall
under one or other of these. I begin with those of the first sort.

(1) We would come to the Holy Communion, but alas we are not worthy of so
great an honor and privilege; and we are afraid to come, because we hear that
he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own damnation.]

To this, proposed thus in the general, I answer (1) we are also unworthy of
common mercies, of meat and drink and raiment; and of the more usual spiritual
mercies, that God should speak unto us, or that we should be permitted to speak
unto him; shall we therefore starve our selves, and go naked? shall we
therefore refuse to hear, and pray? In the Sacrament there is something of
duty, and something of privilege; when we are commanded to do a duty
reasonable and just, shall we refuse because we are unworthy? when we are
invited unto a benefit great and free, and necessary, shall we resist it
because we are not worthy? To do thus is to render our selves more undeserving.
When God offers favors, we may and ought to accept, though we are unworthy of
them.

(2) All men are unworthy in the sense of the Law. Every man in his best estate
is altogether vanity, Psalm 39. 5. We are all an unclean thing, and our
righteonsuess is as filthy rags, Isa. 64. 6. The meaning is, all men are
sinners, and their best services are imperfect and polluted. There is none
righteous, no not one, according to the strictness and severity of the Law,
which require unsinning obedience. This unworthiness then is not a reason why
thou should refrain; yea

(3) If thou art sensible of this thine unworthiness, and desirous to be made
more worthy, thou ought for that reason to come. It Is such that Christ
invites: Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give
you rest, Matthew. 11. 28. He came not to call the righteous, but sinners to
repentance, Matthew. 9. 13. Ho every man that thirsts, come -- Isa. 55. 1. The
Spirit and the Bride say come, and let him that is athirst come, -- Rev. 22.
17. Sense of spiritual wants, and desire of spiritual supplies, is part of
Gospelworthiness; and that which gives a right to the Sacrament. Thy being an
unworthy sinner, is not a reason why thou should refrain, except thou art
obstinately resolved to continue so. The Beggar is never the more unworthy of
an alms, because he is in rags, and great misery; nor the sick man the more
unworthy of the care and pains of a Physician, because his disease is great and
violent upon him. If indeed the Beggar loves and chooses want, and scorns
charity; if the Patient hates and resists the Physician and his applications;
in such a case the one is unworthy of relief, and the other of the means of
health. If this be thy case in spirituals, thou art unworthy; and till thou art
of another temper, I would not persuade thy coming. But if on the other hand,
thou art sensible of thy sins, and desirous of pardon and grace to reform, thou
have the qualification that renders thee one that may and ought to come: and
thou art worthy, as a Beggar is of an alms, or the Sick of physic; that is,
thou want it, and Christ invites thee to come, to receive supplies suitable
to thy wants. So that if it be thus with thee, the sentence of the Apostle
pronounced on him that eats and drinks unworthily will not concern thee.

But the doubter presses the matter more particularly; Knowledge, Faith, and
Repentance are necessary to this worthiness: But I have no knowledge; I cannot
believe, I cannot repent; and therefore am not worthy.]

I shall speak to these distinctly, and apart.

As to what concerns (1) Knowledge, I propose these things.

(1) Perhaps thou art mistaken in the degrees of Knowledge that are necessary.
It is not necessary that thou should have knowledge in deep and controversal
points, no, nor yet in many doctrinal opinions about Religion, that are less
speculative, and nice: It is not necessary that thou should be acquainted
with the disputed matters about the Sacrament, or be able to discourse largely
upon the subject. No, Necessary knowledge is in few things, and those
practical. If therefore thou art instructed in the main plain points of
Christian Doctrine, and in the great rules of Christian Life; if thou
understandest the Sacrament to be a Remembrance of Christ, and a confirming our
Covenant with God; and know those easy things I have before set down about
it: There is no reason then why thou should plead ignorance in bar to thy
duty and privilege. But

(2) If thou art really ignorant in those plain things, thy ignorance is
inexcusable; it is a great sin, and an argument of prodigious carelessness and
neglect. For no one can want capacity to know things so easy, and no one can
want opportunity to know things so common, and no one can plead excuse for not
endeavoring to know things so necessary. If this then be thy case, repent of
thy stupidity and carelessness that occasioned thy ignorance, and apply thy self
presently to thy spiritual Guide, or some honest knowing Neighbor to instruct
thee in those great and necessary matters. Be afraid and ashamed to live a day
longer in such dangerous darkness amidst so much clear light: And till thou
have got out of this state of wilful blindness, meddle not with holy mysteries.
But this, I hope, is the condition but of very few of you: Those that make the
objection are mostly such as do it upon the former mistake, which I have
endeavored to rectify.

(II) Want of Faith is pleaded. And to this scruple I say,

(I) Perhaps thou art out, and have been mis-taught in the Doctrine of Faith.
It may be thou take Faith to be an assurance of salvation; or supposest that
it requires thy assent to many Principles, and such as are unreasonable, or
doubtful; or perhaps thy mind has been confounded by phrases, and various,
metaphorical; and dark representations of Faith; so that thou do not as much
as know what it is, or wherein it consists. These all have been, and often are
the cases of many well-disposed Christians. The good man is not absolutely
assured of his salvation; or he doubts sometimes of many doctrines and opinions
that he has been taught to believe as Fundamentals, or his understanding is
confused by variety of odd notions; and therefore he thinks he has not Faith,
and dares not approach the Holy Table. If any of these be thy condition,
rectify thy thoughts; and thou will be rid of thy vain fears: Consider the
matter freely; look on it in the light of Scripture and Reason, and thou will
find, that those conceits about Faith were groundless. Lay this down for
certain, that the plainest and most obvious account of it is truest; For God
would not make that the great condition of the Gospel, which is difficult to
understand.

Now the plain, scriptural, rational Notion is this, Faith in the general is
the belief of a Proposition affirmed; Divine Faith, the belief of something
upon a Divine Testimony; Gospel-saving Faith is such a belief of Divine
Testimony, as has influence upon the heart and practice, and conforms them
unto it. If now we believe other Testimonies, but not that which God has given
us by, and of his Son, our Faith is merely humane, and we have nothing to do
with the holy Sacrament. If we believe the Revelations of God in the Gospel,
but that belief has not yet had such power upon our affections and
conversations as it ought, and as we desire: In this case we may, and it is our
duty, to come to the Lords Table, to profess that degree of Faith which we
have, and to pray for more; that it may be made so strong and lively, as to
transform our hearts, and all our powers into the likeness of it, and into his
likeness who is the Author and finisher of our Faith. And finally, if our faith
has already had this effect upon us, we are to come to the Sacrament for
further confirmation of it. This is the short and plain account of the matter;
and if I should run it out into further discourse, this part would be
disproportioned to the rest. If my brevity leave any of you unsatisfied in
this, or any other thing belonging to my subject, I am at hand, willing and
ready to give you further satisfaction. But

(2) It may be the weakness and imperfection of thy Faith makes thee think thou
have none. In this case ask thy self the question. Do I think that Christ Jesus
was an Impostor, and that the Gospel is a Fable? Thou startlest and abhorrest
these thoughts: Hence thou may be assured that thou have some degree of
Faith. But that (it may be) is very small and low: Be that the case; Ask thy
self then again, whether thou have any desire that thy weak Faith should be
strengthened, and thy imperfect Faith should be improved to greater and nobler
measures? If thou art a person fit to be dealt with under this Head of
Conscience, it is thus with thee; thou art sorry for this imperfection, and
desirous of growth and improvement: And if so, apply thy self to the Holy
Sacrament, as to the proper means of growth, and remedy of thy imperfections.
Here thy Faith will be exercised, and by exercise it will be felt; so that thy
doubts, whether thou have any or no, will be cleared off, experience will
assure thee. And how thy Faith will by the use of this Ordinance be quickened
and advanced, I have shown already. Thus to the Objection from the supposed
want of Faith. But

(III) The good man thinks that he wants Repentance too: He cannot repent he
says, and therefore is not worthy. In answer, I take notice that

In Repentance two things are considerable, viz. 1. Sorrow for sin, and 2.
Turning from it to a life of Holiness and Virtue.

(I) It may be thy sorrow is not so intense and great as thou think is fit
and suitable to such an occasion: Thou can not weep and grieve so much for thy
sin as the evils of it requires, and yet thou may not wholly want the grace
of Repentance. All indeed are sinners, and all must repent: But men are sinners
in different measures, and degrees of guilt; and their sorrow and humiliations
will likewise be different. Deeper Convictions and greater agonies and pangs of
sorrow may be expected from them whose sins have been capital and notorious,
than from those others whose lives have been more civil, and less tainted with
ranting enormities. It may be then, thy Education has been sober, and thy
inclinations not bent toward the grosser vices; thou have not committed any
horrid crimes, or such sins as look ghastly in the conscience; and consequently
thy Conversion has not those terrors, and that dread in it, those melting
sorrows, and violent expressions of grief that thou observest in some others.
Though it be thus, thou have no reason to be discouraged, if thy sorrow be so
much as to engage thee to humble thy self before God, sincerely to beg grace
and forgiveness, and to obtain from thee hatred of thy sins, and resolutions
against them; that sorrow of thine is godly sorrow, and part of true
repentance, though it have not the greatest degrees of vehemence: These may be
wanting on another account also in them that are truly penitent; their tempers
may be more cold, and their passions calmer, than others are; and on this score
their resentments less notable, and the expressions of them less eager: So that
violences in sorrow are not always arguments of true repentance, nor the
absence of them a sign of impenitency and hardness. If thou art so sensible of
sin as to desire and endeavor to overcome and forsake it, thou art a penitent
in part, and thou ought to come to the Sacrament for the strengthening of
that sense, and to gain more assistance, and more resolution to subdue thy sin.
And if there be any real defect in thy sorrow, repair thither, that it may be
awakened, and excited to degrees more becoming and effective.

But (2) The Objection presses as to the other part of Repentance. I cannot
leave my sin, and therefore dare not approach the holy Mystery. But do thou
desire it? do thou endeavor it? If so, though thy desires are imperfect, and
thy endeavors weak, yet it is thy duty to present thy self at the holy Table.
There thou may expect to have thy desires increast, and thy endeavors
heightened and encouraged. And how both the former act of repentance, which is
sorrow, and this of aversation, are promoted by the Sacrament, I have
particularly shown in the former periods, to which I refer you for fuller
answer to this and such like objections.

Thus of the scruples that arise from the first Head, the apprehension of our
own unworthiness. I descend to another.

(II) Some abstain from the Sacrament because of the Unworthiness of Others;
wicked men are admitted, and they will not have communion with such. Yea, they
are commanded to have no fellowship with them, Ephesians. 5. 11. and to come out
from among them, 2 Cor. 6. 17.

For the answering this, I propose these things to be considered.

(1) Have thou taken the Method of our Savior, Matthew. 18. 15. with the sinner,
from whose communion thou think thou must withdraw? Have thou privately told
him of his faults? Have thou admonisht him before witnesses? Have thou told the
Church? If so thou have done, and he persist still in his wickedness, he will
no doubt be legally excluded from Christian Communion; and so the foundation of
thy doubt will be taken off.

(2) How art thou sure, when thou see those thou call wicked come to the
Sacrament, that they do not repent of their wickedness, and come to the holy
Ordinance to beg pardon for their sins, and strength against them? How do
thou know that they are not come to bind themselves by deep resolutions, and
sacred vows, to a spiritual warfare, and a new obedience? Their coming makes
profession of such designs and resolutions, and how do thou know that that
profession is insincere? Have thou a way of prying into the heart?

But the man returns to his sins as soon as he has done, and hence thou will
say, thou know his hypocrisy. This indeed were something, if it could be
certainly foreseen; but how he will demean himself after the Sacrament, thou
can not foretell; This may have more effect upon him than former Sacraments
have had: This, I say, may be, and charity thinks no evil, but believes all
things, hops all things, 1 Cor. 13. or, if it now again prove otherwise, it
is no certain evidence that the man only made pretense, and show; he might
then mean and design truly and well; but temptations and his lusts were too
strong for him, and carried him away against all his endeavors and resolutions.

(3) Thou performest other sacred duties, in which thou remembrest Christ, and
have communion with God, in the company of evil men. Thou joynest in hearing,
and public prayers with such; and why may thou not be present at the
Sacrament with them?

If it be pretended as a reason of difference, That hearing the Word, and
Prayer, are converting Ordinances, but the Sacrament is not so: I ask thee
then, whether thou meanest by [converting] a turning men from open Infidelity
to the Profession of the Christian Faith, and the owning of Christian Virtues?
or only the turning those that professed this Faith and Religion before, to the
practice of them. If thou intendest the former, the Sacrament indeed is no
converting Ordinance; nor are the Word and Prayer ordinarily used for such
purposes among us, where the Gospel is already generally professed: And thou do
not bear the company of the wicked of which we speak in the places of public
worship, upon any such expectation.

But if by converting ordinance, thou meanest (as is most likely) such a one as
God uses as a means to cause men professing the name of Christ to depart from
iniquity, to turn from sin to holiness, and from the power of Satan unto God; I
see no reason why any should think, or say that the Sacrament is no converting
Ordinance.

If it be not, either it is because the Sacrament is no proper means, or because
God will not concur by his Grace with it. Neither of these can be said with any
show of reason: Not the former; for why should not the solemn remembrance of
Christ, and the consideration of what he has done and suffered be a means for
the killing of sin, which he came to destroy, and the promoting holiness, which
he lived and died to advance? yea, what can be supposed more likely and
powerful for the promoting of that blessed purpose? why should not the sign and
seal of Gods gracious Covenant to give pardon and eternal Glory to all that
forsake their sins, and live an holy life, be a fit instrument to provoke those
that understand it, to renounce their sins, and to devote themselves unto
holiness? why should not that solemn, sacred engagement, that all that know
what they do lay on themselves at the Sacrament, to endeavor to depart from
every known evil, and to practice every known duty, be a means to oblige them
to it? Certainly there is nothing that in the nature of the thing seems to be a
more likely instrument to convert men from a life of sin to a life of holiness;
than the sacred remembrance of our Lord at his Table. So that if this Ordinance
be not converting, it must be, because God will not concur by his grace in it:
But whoever says that, speaks what he cannot know, and cannot prove; he talks
without book, and against it; and is so extravagant in his assertion, that it
would be folly to attempt the confuting of him.

This I have said on this occasion, not to engage in a Controversy, but to
clear a matter of Christian practice. And the very root of this Objection lies
in this conceit, That the Sacrament is not a converting Ordinance; For which,
there is nothing but Fancy, and the bare sayings of some mistaken men. But now
if, as I have proved, The Sacrament may be, and is an Instrument of Conversion;
Then, why should any refrain, because evil men are admitted to it?

(4) If wicked men come to the Sacrament that are not prepared for it, their
unpreparedness is their sin, and they shall answer for it; But we ought not
therefore to neglect our duty, because they have omitted theirs. We may, and we
ought to advise, and admonish them to prepare themselves for the Ordinance
before they come to it: If they will not follow our brotherly admonition, we
cannot help it; we have done what we can to render them more worthy, and their
sin shall not be laid to our charge. To prepare our selves for the holy
Communion, and to address our selves unto it, is that which we are sure
concerns us; If we neglect, it is our sin, and other men's sins will not excuse
us. Their sinning in one kind, should be no reason why we should sin in
another: There is no reason that we should starve our selves, because others
take the bread that belongs not to them.

(5) If we are worthy Communicants, and others receive unworthily, They have no
Communion with us, nor we with them: They only eat bread, and drink wine; but
we partake of the mystical body and blood of our Lord. Our Communion is with
the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ, and with the Faithful, worthy
Receivers; but the unworthy partake neither with us nor them. If an Ape leap
upon the Table, and eat of the bread where Friends are met at an entertainment,
Is he therefore a Guest? is he one of the Company? If writings are to be
mutually sealed there among the Friends, and that Creature catches up the
Seal, and does as the Covenanters do, is he therefore a party? He does the same
action, but not with the same designs and ends; and these make the communion.
The case is thus in reference to those ungodly men that intrude to the
Sacrament; and the pious Communicants have no reason to think themselves
concerned in their company. Their bodies are together, but their spirits act
and move different ways. The Communion is spiritual; and only those that
receive as they ought have fellowship with Christ, and with one another. And
this were enough to answer that part of the objection also, that is taken from
Scripture, where we are forbid to have fellowship with wicked men. But I add

(6) When Christians are prohibited wicked Fellowship, Ephesians. 5. 11. It is
evident that the prohibition concerns heathen mysteries, which are there called
the unfruitful works of darkness, because they were used in close recesses; and
v. 12. the Apostle says, It is a shame to speak of those things that are done
of them in secret. Christians were not to communicate with the Heathens in
their abominable Mysteries: No, nor may they partake with wicked men in any
action of vice, nor make them their bosom friends, nor be concerned with them
in other matters more th^n needs; especi^lly if they are openly profane, and
obstinately ungodly. But it does not therefore follow, that they must forsake
their Lords Table, and the most solemn expressions of duty to him, because evil
men intrudingly present themselves unto it.

And whereas Christians are commanded to come out from among them, and to be
separate, 2 Cor. 6. 17. It Is plain, that the persons they are required to
separate from were Heathens and Idolaters: For they are called Unbelievers, v
14. Infidels, v. 15. And that they were Idolaters, is intimated v. 16. What
agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? whence it follows, wherefore come
out from among them. So that this place does not concern the present business;
Christians were to separate from the Worship of Heathen Idolaters, but it does
by no means follow hence that they must forsake the true Christian Worship,
because evil men (who yet profess Christ) afford their presence at it.

And this may suffice for Answer to the Objections taken from the unworthiness
of others that are admitted in mixed Communions.

Lastly, The unworthiness of our Way of administration is pretended by some, as
a reason why they cannot communicate with us. As to this Objection I shall not
say much, because the Toleration His Majesty has granted, has given the
Dissenters the liberty of their own supposed better and fitter methods.
Therefore I shall only speak briefly to two exceptions of this sort.

(1) The Sacrament is administered among us in the way of Forms of Prayer, which
they think to be contrary to spiritual Worship. And (2) kneeling at it is
required, which they suppose to be contrary to the first example, and so an
irregular posture of receiving.

To the first, I say these things, (1) Worship and Prayer may be spiritual,
where Forms are used: For the spirituality does not consist in the invention of
words, but in the due intention and engagement of the soul. If we pray in
faith, with humility, self-resignation, and holy desire of the good things we
pray for, we pray in the spirit, though by a Form. And if, on the other hand,
we express our selves in conceived Prayers never so fluently and earnestly, and
have not those dispositions of soul upon us when we pray, our prayers are
formal, though without a form. Which of these is fittest in it self, I shall
not dispute, but only say, that neither is unlawful, but both have their use:
and add, that one sort may be properest at one time, and the other sort at
another season, so that it is silly superstition to be devoted to the opinion of
one of them, as absolutely to condemn the other as unlawful. In public
Worship, Forms have the advantage in securing the gravity and solemnity of it,
and in this too, that the Worshippers know what it is they join in: But in
secret devotions conceived prayers may sometimes suit better with particular
occasions, and may engage the affections more. So that either of these may be
used, as shall best accord with the ends of pr^yer. And when the public
Authority of the Church requires the one, we may not scruple it, though we are
more affected with the other; especially, since we may in private take the
liberty to use which of them we think fittest. (2) Those that are most against
Forms, pray by them, when they join with another that prays, though he do it
never so much extempore: For the Peoples minds are not concerned in inventing
the words they pray by; the Minister gives a Form to them. And if you may pray
in the Form of a private person, dictated to you suddenly, and without
deliberation, and which you do not know before, whether it will agree with good
sense, or sound doctrine; why then may you not do it in the Forms of the
Church, composed by wise and reverend persons upon mature consideration and
advice; especially when they are such, as we do, or may know before to be pious
and grave, suitable to Christian necessities, and Christian truths? There is no
good reason that I know to make a scruple of the latter, if we admit the
former. But I shall say no more now of this subject, which would require a
particular discourse. I come to the second Branch of the Objection.

(II) Kneeling at the Sacrament is not agreeable to the first example; our
Savior administered to his Disciples sitting, and perhaps you fear there is
something of Popery in the posture of Kneeling.

I answer (I) we are not bound to a nice and punctual observance of all the
circumstances that were in the first example: The Sacrament was first
administered in the Evening, in an upper room, only to twelve persons, and
those Men, and Ecclesiastics, or at least such as were destined to be so: But
even the Objectors do not think we are obliged to act in the Sacrament strictly
after the example of these particulars: and why should we suppose our selves to
be tied in the matter of Posture, more than in those other Circumstances, which
we acknowledge to be of no binding nature. (2) The posture of those times at
Meals was not sitting, but leaning, according to the then Custom of the Romans.
So we read John 21. 20. That the beloved Disciple leaned on his Masters breast
at Supper. And though the English Translation renders, Luke 22. 14. He sat
down, and the Disciples with him; it is in conformity to our phrase and custom,
which is sitting: for the word in the Original [(...)] does not imply that
posture, but is applicable to any other that is used, as well as sitting. So
that if we are strictly tied to the original posture, we must lean at the
Sacrament, and neither sit nor kneel. But (3) the Institution has not bound us
to either the one or the other, but left the matter to be determined by the
general Rules of Decency and Reverence; And since the Fathers of the Church
have commanded kneeling, as the posture most expressive of our humility and
reverence in receiving the pledges of divine Love, I see no reason why any
should boggle at it; much less why they should refuse their Duty, and their
Privilege, abstain from their spiritual food, and the solemn remembrance of
their dear Lord, rather than do a thing so innocent, so decent, and so
reverend, which the Authority of the Church requires from them. He has but
little appetite to his meat, that will not eat it except he may do it in such a
fashion as is agreeable to his own humor.

I, but the Objector doubts, that there is real danger, and something of Popery
in the case; the Papists use kneeling to signify their adoration of the Host,
and the Scrupler fears there may be some such thing in our practice. But this
fear is very uncharitable and groundless, since our Church does so vehemently
and constantly declare against the Transubstantiation of the Romanists, and the
adoration of any creature; And since we are always told, that kneeling is
required for no other reason than to signify our humility and reverence: And
though the Papists do express more by that posture, yet since our Church
declares, that this is all she intends in reference to the consecrated
Elements, there is no ground why any should think more is meant by it. Kneeling
signifies reverence as well as worship; and the declaration of the person
himself is enough to show which of them he intends. But besides, though the
Papists adore the Bread as the real Body of Christ, and therefore kneel before
it, yet that can be no reason why we should not in this remembrance of our Lord
adore Him Himself: They kneel to him as present corporally; we worship him as
virtually and spiritually present.

This I might urge further as a positive Argument for the posture of Kneeling,
over and above the use of it, as an Answer to the Objection. Thus all
acknowledge, That Christ is to be worshipped. Receiving the Sacrament is the
proper worship of Christ; and kneeling is a proper signification of adoration:
It follows that on this account kneeling is sit, and fittest to be used in the
action of Communion. But I shall pursue this matter no further; what I have
said may satisfy the modest and reasonable; and people that are set and
resolv^d in their opinions, will not be satisfied with never so much more.

I should now draw to an end, but I am loath to leave you without some
particular Rules of Preparation; These I shall lay down plainly and briefly in
the ensuing periods.

CHAP. VI.
THe Persons that are to come to the Sacrament may be distinguished into two
sorts, viz. Either such as do repent and are sorry for their Sins, but have not
yet in any good degree prevailed over them; or, Those other more improved and
grown Christians, who in considerable measure have mastered their Sins, and are
endowed with many habits of Holiness and Virtue. The first sort are yet under
the Law, viz. a state of sense and conviction of Sin, but have not attained to
the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God, or the state of power over them. But
the others have arrived to that power in competent measure, so that sin does
not reign in their mortal bodies, because they are not under the Law, but under
Grace. For distinction sake I call the first sort, Bare Penitents; the second,
the Faithful. Now the Preparations that concern these are different as their
states are.

1. For the bare Penitents, and sorrowers for Sin, I advise them to prepare by
the Rules following.

(1) Endeavor to make your selves as sensible as you can of the evil of sin;
Consider it as enmity unto God, and to your own happiness; as the basest
ingratitude, and the greatest deformity; as a thing to be hated for it self, if
there were no consideration had to its effects. Look upon it as the destroyer
of your present, as well as future peace and felicity; as the enslaver of your
souls to the Devil, and that which debaseth them to the likeness and condition
of beasts. Aggravate such considerations in your thoughts by all the
circumstances that may render sin odious to you. (2) Consider the gracious
nature of the Covenant that God has made with us in his Son; That by that
Covenant he has assured all true Penitents of pardon of their Sins, and
strength against them. So that be our Sins never so many, or so heinous, they
will be forgiven, if we repent and turn from them; and be they never so strong
and violent upon us, they may be overcome, if we accept, and use the grace that
the Covenant offers to us. Represent these things duly, and frequently to your
thoughts, and for the making the deeper impressions on them, collect those
places of Scripture that speak so fully of the Love and Mercies of God, his
readiness to pardon, and desires of our happiness, the frequent and free offers
of his kindness; His invitations to Sinners to come unto him, and his often
bewailings of their obstinacy and hardness in running from him: Consider that
he sent his Son into the World to seek, and to save them that were lost, to
bring sinners to repentance, to take away the sins of the World, to deliver us
from the wrath to come, and that the World through him might be saved; I say,
draw together such passages, dwell upon them in thy Meditations, till thou have
filled thy Soul with them. And then thou will find great encouragement to seek
for pardon, and wilt be supported against those faintings, and despondencies,
that the mere sense of Sin, without a Savior, might occasion in thy Soul.

(3) After this, summon up all thy Resolutions against thy Sins: Consider thy
Baptismal engagements, how just and reasonable and necessary they were; Resolve
to confirm them by new Vows. Content not thy self with some cold and indefinite
intentions of leading a new Life some time or other, but endeavor to settle in
a firm, unalterable purpose of fighting against Sin, and living unto God. Do
all thou can by Reason and Religion, by the Considerations of Duty and of
Interest, to fix thy soul here. And then,

(4) Be earnest with God in Prayer, to give thee a fuller sight of Sin, and
clearer, surer thoughts of pardoning Mercy: To present thee with more arguments
to heighten thy resolutions, and to make thy soul more capable of being moved
by them. I say, apply thy self unto God by Prayer, public, private, and secret
prayer, confessing thy own vileness, acknowledging his Mercies, and resolving
new obedience. And being thus prepared,

(5) Look on the holy Sacrament as thy great Duty and Remedy As that to which
God calls thee, and the state and necessities of thy soul call thee; As that
Ordinance in which thou art to seek, and may expect pardon and strength,
resolution, and peace. Consider this, and raise thine appetite and
expectations; for they that hunger and thirst after righteousness shall be
filled.

And now when thou have exercised thy self in these acts, and the time of the
holy Communion approaches, Then

(6) Employ thy time in awakening and affectionate thoughts of Christ thy Lord.
Consider the greatness of his Condescension, the kindness of his Undertaking,
the boliness of his Life, the purity of his Doctrine, the heaviness of his
Sufferings, the power of his Resurrection, and the glory of his Ascension. Turn
thy thoughts earnestly, and often, upon these and such instances of the History
of the holy Jesus, and by them dispose thy self to a befitting remembrance of
him at his Table.

And (Lastly) Gather up all thy thoughts and resolutions together, viz. thy
apprehensions of the vileness of sin, of the Grace of the Covevenant, and the
merits of thy Lord; Thy purposes of leaving every evil way, and of renewing thy
baptismal Vows; and say to thy self, Now is the time come that I must use these
thoughts and resolves, that I may obtain pardon, and strength, victory over
sin, and assurance of happiness: My Lord invites me to the great representation
of the evil of sin in his own sufferings; to see his Body wounded, and his Soul
made an Offering for Sin, in the Type of Bread broken, and Wine poured out, To
remember his Conquest over Sin by Death, and a glorious Resurrection; To see
the Covenant of Grace and pardon sealed: He invites me to these Privileges,
and call upon me to bind my self stronger in this holy Covenant, and thereby to
make my self the subject of those blessings it assures and conveys. I say,
employ thy Soul in such thoughts, and bring them with thee to the Lords Table,
spread them before him there in humble Confessions, Supplications, and
Acknowledgments, and thou may then expect to receive the benefit thou art
seeking after.

These are Preparations for a bare Penitent, that has yet made but little
progress in subduing of his Sins. And though the highest degrees of all these
are not absolutely necessary to the coming of such to the Lords Table; yet the
more they have been exercised in them, so much the better it is, by so much
they re more prepared, and so much more they may expect of the benefits. But if
your minds, that have not been used to spiritual things, will not fix long on
such thoughts and meditations: Engage them, as far as you can; proceed in the
Method prescribed with that diligence and care that becomes one that is
serious. And then, though your preparations be imperfect now, they may be more
complete against another season. If thou art sensible they have been so
defective, maintain and keep up that sense, and resolve upon it, to endeavor to
fit thy self better for another Sacrament, by renewing the same method, which
will be easier for thee in the progress than it was in the beginning.

As for the other sort, viz. II. Those that have advanced in the conquest of
their sins; They are to act over all the former particulars, that I have
advised to the bare Penitents: For being yet sinners, and imperfect, they have
need to use that Method: And there are these few other Directions to be briefly
added that do further concern them.

(1) Call your selves to a particular account concerning your sins, examining
what vices you are most addicted to; and what are the sins of your tempers, or
of your Profession and Calling: when you have found those, exercise particular
acts of Repentance upon them, and renew your resolutions against them.
Consider, that allowance of them is inconsistent with sincerity, and a state of
true regeneration; That it is necessary you should oppose and subdue them; and
that the holy Sacrament is to be used as a means for that blessed end.

(2) Examine what ground you have got upon your sins since the last Sacrament,
whether you are now more tender and fearful of offending God than you were
before; whether your inclination to any evil be more weakened and mortified? If
so, take encouragement hence to go on with more Christian vigor and resolution.
If not, humble your selves for your unfruitfulness; and endeavor to dispose
your souls to make a better use of the next opportunity.

(3) Inquire into the state of your souls as to your Graces; what Graces are
wanting, and what are weak? which are growing, and which at a stand? and when
you have found the condition of your souls as to these, then exercise your
meditations upon those particulars in the Life, Doctrine, and Precepts of your
Lord, whom you are to remember at his Table, that may be proper for your case;
Apply your thoughts, and cares, and resolutions that way. Design and resolve to
attend the holy Sacrament for the supply of those wants, and to endeavor to use
it so, that the needed graces may be obtained, and the weak ones may be
strengthened, that those that are at a stay may be put into motion forwards,
and those that are growing may be further improved. If you thus provide, and
employ your selves in the method before remembered, you will then be meet
partakers of the holy Mysteries, and may assure your selves of the blessings
and advantages which they convey.

THis Subject would have required larger discourse, but my present business was
principally with the careless and negligent, to whose condition I have mostly
applied my self. For the others, that are solicitous for their souls, and
desirous to be further informed about this great and important affair of
Preparation, I shall advise them to get, and carefully to read and digest two
excellent Books of the Sacrament: The former called Mensa Mystica, or a
Discourse concerning the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; by Dr. Simon Patrick;
and the latter, named the Christian Sacrifice, containing most excellent
Meditations and Prayers, both before and after the Sacrament.

In the first design of this little Discourse I intended to have added some
things of that sort for your use. But while I was thinking of it, my Pious,
Learned, and Excellent Friend the Author, sent me one of those his last Books,
the Devotion and Piety of which is extraordinary; and there is nothing, that I
know, fitter to prepare your affections, and to excite them to the noblest
height of desire and love than those heavenly Meditations: And you cannot use
more proper, judicious, or affectionate Prayers than those he has annexed. So
that I was exceeding glad when I saw this useful, much needed Work so
incomparably well done, that there was no occasion of my doing any more in it,
than earnestly to recommend that book to your perusal. And I entreat you to get
it into your Houses, and from time to time to endeavor to warm your souls by
it, when you are preparing for the Sacrament, and by it to fix you in your
resolutions of living according to your engagements there, when you have
attended on that blessed Ordinance.

And now, my Friends, I leave you to the blessing of God, and the consideration
of what I have said: Whatever judgment may be made of it, I have this
testimony, that I meant it sincerely. And I shall never cease to pray, that
both you and I may sincerely practice according to it.

Your Faithful Monitor and Servant, J. G.


