THE Goalers Extortion Exposed, OR THE Prisoners Grievances.
Most Humbly offered and Submitted to the Consideration and Regulation of both
Houses of PARLIAMENT.
Licensed

October. 8. 1690. J. F

WHereas diverse good and wholesome Laws have been made for the Regulation of
Prisons, which for several years last past have not been much regarded, but
buried so as never intended to be revived again, to the great encouragement and
increase of Extortion of Fees, Exaction of Chamber-Rent, and many other
outrageous practices improper to be Countenanced or Connived at in any good
Government: And as the Punishing of Vice is the Increase of Virtue, so the
Reviving and putting the Laws in due Execution is the Right Administration of
Justice, and if Irregularities, Extortions, and such like Lawless Practices
have crept in, and be admitted, or allowed, to be put in Execution in the
Prisons in and about London, in the hearing of the King and Queen, and within a
Call of the Four Courts of Justice; then, what must the Prisoners in the
Country Goals expect, but Ruin, where the Law is, like a Stream, the further
it flows from the Fountain Head, the more Corrupt, and the less pure it is.

THERE was an Act of Parliament made in the 22th. and 23th. of that Most
Serene, and never to be forgotten Prince, King Charles the Second, setting
forth, or prescribing a time for the two Lord Chief Justices, and Lord Chief
Barron to Establish a Table of Fees in General for all the Prisons in the
Kingdom, but that was Omitted, and the time Elapsed, which gave Goalers and
Prison-keepers the opportunity to exceed much their bounds, who by Ravishing
Exorbitant Sums from the distressed, and most unfortunate part of the Subjects,
or People of this Kingdom, have thereby advanced themselves into vast Fortunes
and Estates, not leaving any thing of Pride, Ambition, or Corruption behind
them, that can or may be thought of, in Order to build themselves upon the
Ruins of the distressed, so that whilst such Insolences pass without curbing,
no Justice can be expected at the hands of Goalers, in regard they are a sort
of People that bear no respect to the Laws of Nature, much less to the Laws of
the Land, and that Consider no Man's Quality, Capacity, or Poverty, but let what
Government soever be uppermost (provided that a Jailer has Liberty to Tyrannize
and Insult over his Fellow Creature) he is a Jailer still.

AS to the Fees of a Goal it is but a single groat by the Statute Law, and that
is called the Discharging Fees, and how any Jailer in England can demand more
is not resolved by any Act of Parliament in England; and how Gaoaler can detain
any Prisoner after obtaining a discharge for any more Fees then what is granted
by Act of Parliament is beyond any Man's reach to resolve, neither can all the
Judges of the Kingdom, without Violating the Rights of Parliament, Establish
Fees, except there be an Act of Parliament precedent to such an Establishment
to Empower them so to do.

AND whereas Goalers do demand and receive Commitment Fees, there has not been
any such Fees ever Established by Act of Parliament the Laws of England being
grounded upon Common Reason, and therefore it is against the Rules of Nature,
that a Man dreading a Prison should pay Fees for Imprisoning himself.

AS for Chamber-Rent, let us first Consider the Chambers, the number of Beds in
each Chamber, and the Furniture of the Rooms, and likewise consider the
Conditions, Misfortunes and Calamities that attend a Prisoner, and that it is
not the Wealth, nor over-abundance of Fortune that ushers a Man into a Prison,
and therefore is it reasonable that any Person under dismal Circumstances shall
be compelled to pay more in a Prison for Lodging then He or She were wont, or
able to pay when at Liberty? or is it reasonable that a pitiful dog-hole in a
Prison shall yield Ten, Twenty, or Thirty Shilling a week, that is to say, with
so many Beds in a Room, sometimes Two, Three, or Four, and two Persons in a
bed, and all the bedding, Bedcloaths and Furniture not worth Forty Shillings in
all, when a better Room may be had in any part of London or Westminster for Two
Shilling in the week? or is it Justice that a Go let must have his full
demands, without producing his Table of Fees, pursuant to the Laws of the Land?
or is it consistent with good Measures that a Pint and a half of nasty sower
Ale in a Prison shall pass for a full Quart, paying two pence for the same,
when a full Quart of good Drink may be daily had into the Prison for
three-half-pence, and likewise that a Pint of Brandy in a Prison should be
divided into Six Quarterns, and each Quartern sold for Threepence, when a full
P^nt of Brandy may, be had into the Prison for Seaven-pence. And
Notwithstanding the Statute of the 22th. and 23th. of King Charles the Second,
made for the Regulation of Prisons strictly charging and requiring all Goalers
to let Meat, Drink, and all other Conveniences at all Seasonable hours into
the Prison, the Prisoners paying for the same; Yet in Absolute Obstruction of
the said Act of Parliament Goalers daily deny the letting of Drink or Brandy
into the Prison, but Prisoners are forced to pay for the Liquors in the House
or Prison, at the rates aforesaid. If this be not Extortion, what is? and if it
be, name that Prison about London where it is not daily practiced? and where is
the Increase of any Man's Fortune by Imprisonment, that a Jailer should thus
put upon the Subjects or People of the Kingdom?

THE late Change of Government has taugho a great many of all sorts throughout
the Kingdom a great deal of Experience, that were Ignorant of a Prison before,
and perhaps would not believe what hardships others have undergone in Prisons
before them, 'till they came there to make Experiment themselves, therefore it
should be the Interest of every Individual Man to give his helping hand toward
the Regulation of Prisons, and the Correction of Goalers, for it is believed
that it never was the Intention of the Government to make the Subject's
unfortunate Circumstances the Property of Goalers. And to prevent such Future
Irregularities (not knowing whose turn a Prison may be next) the Following
Heads toward the Regulation of Prisons, are most humbly offered to both Houses
of Parliament.

Imprimis. THAT such Commissioners as have no dependence upon any of the Four
Courts at Westminster be Named and appointed by such a time as the direction of
both Houses shall think fit, as well for Enquity of the Extortions and
Exactions Committed since their Majesty's General Free Pardon in all the
Prisons in and about the Cities of London and Westminster, as also to inspect
into the Chambers, Cellars, Rooms, Measures, Liquors, Rules, Rates, and Fees of
every such Prison, or Prisons, and to report the same upon Oath as either or
both Houses of Parliament shall think meet.

Secondly, THAT all the Old Extortive Tables of Fees used in any or all of the
said Prisons, be brought into the House of Commons, and there Examined and
Ordered, as that Honorable House shall judge fit.

Thirdly, THAT that no Jailer shall presume, on the Forfeiture of his Place, to
Employ any Prisoner in any Calling, Employ or Vocation either by Day or by
Night in any Prison or Prisons whatsoever, but procure and Employ such as are
free and dread a Prison.

Fourthly, THAT no Man that ever has been a Thief, a Robber, a High-way-man, or
that was Convicted of any Treason, Felony, Perjury, or Forgery, be admitted
into any Employment or Place whatsoever in Prison or Prisons throughout the
Kingdom.

Fifthly, THAT a Table of Fees be set up in a Public Place in every and either
of the said Prisons, where every Prisoner shall have access thereto, and that
no Jailer shall presume, on the Forfeiture of his Place, as aforesaid, and to
be forthwith Prosecuted in such manner and Order as Both or either Houses of
Parliament shall direct, to demand any more Fees or Chamber-Rent then as
expressly mentioned in the Tables of Fees so to be put up in every Prison, and
that no Jailer on the Forfeiture aforesaid shall put any Person or Persons in
Irons that do not stand Charged with Treason, Burglary, or Felony.

Sixthly, THAT no Jailer shall presume to hinder Friends, Acquaintance, or
Relations from any Prisoner or Prisoners whatsoever, except there be an Order
of Council, a Warrant from the Secretary of State, or from the Judges, or
either of them to the Contrary, and that no Jailer shall refuse to let in at
all Seasonable hours, such Meat, Drink, and other necessaries for to support
Nature, as any Prisoner shall think fit, and that no Prisoner shall be
compelled to buy any thing within the Prison, and that the doors shall be
opened upon all occasions to let comers and goers in and out of Prison, at all
Seasonable hours.

Sevently, THAT no Prisoner shall be detained in the House or Prison after he
is discharged, whether Crown Prisoner, or Debtor, by any Keeper, or Jailer,
paying the Fees according to the rates in the said Table, and that after the
discharge is obtained or had by the Prisoner or Prisoners, that in the interval
'twixt the coming of the discharge and paying of the Fees, that no Action or
Actions whatsoever shall lie against the Prisoner at the Peril of the Jailer
and Forfeiture of his Place, as aforesaid, and where any Dispute, Quarrel, or
Contest arises 'twixt the Jailer and the Prisoner that it shall not be left to
the Jailer to be Judge in the Case, but that it shall be referred to two
Justices of the Peace, whereof one shall be named by the Prisoner.

London, Printed, and Published by Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall.


