A FURTHER DISCOVERY OF M. Stubbe, IN A BRIEF REPLY TO HIS LAST PAMPHLET
AGAINST JOS. GLANVILL.



LONDON, Printed for H. Eversden, and are to be sold at his Shop under the
Crown Tavern in Smithfield.

MDCLXXI.

TO THE READER.
I Writ the following Letter in a present warmth, upon reading of M. Stubbe's
last Pamphlet; but being called by my Occasions to Oxford, and London, I
perceived, that he is now known, and consequently, that my Work is at an end:
For he has proved, to the satisfaction of all sober Men, by his Talk, and by
his Writings, that the harshest things I said of him were just, and true, and
has so managed Matters, as if he had designed to save me further labor to
expose him: Upon this Consideration, I resolved once, to have laid by these
Papers, judging that it could not he expected that any Man in his w^ts should
have more to do with such an Adversary; especially since all he has said, or
is like to say for ever, is already answered in my former Account of his
Spirit, and Performances: But some Worthy Men (who yet have the Opinion of M.
S. that ^e deserves) advised, that since I had written, I should publish, and
give him this other Blow, that so while he was staggering under the former, he
might he laid flat by this. I have now complied with the Advice; but am
inclined, for the future, to let the Impertinent talk alone: For I think a Man
may with as much Reputation write against the Wits of Bedlam, as against this
cracked Fop of W^rwick. It Is like I shall scarce take so much notice of him
henceforth, as to read what he scribles further. I said indeed in my former
Book (and have mentioned the same Designs in this) that I would examine his
Quotations, and give another Account of the Ignorance and Impertinency of his
Reasonings: But I find all sober Men are well satisfied already; and when I
sat down to consider Matters closely, I saw, that though all he pretends were
granted to be true, yet the Design and Substance of my first Book is sa^; and
all I should have to do, would be to show how he perverts the Sense of Authors,
and how foolishly, and to no purpose he argues from them. Of both these I have
already given proof enough, so that those that consider, and read my Books
without prejudice, are convinced; and for those that do not, it would be to
little purpose (...) amuse my self with them.

For this Answer, it will not take up much of his time, that hat^ a mind to
peruse it; and those that have not the humor to read, need not be concerned; I
writ it by the intervals of three days, which I mention not to boast my
Expedition, but because I would not have it thought, I make dealing with this
Prate-rost any part of my Bu^ness. The Printing was deferred till now, upon the
account of my irresolution after I had written.

I have dealt somewhat plainly with him in some Places, to try whether
downright Chastisement will bring him to himself (if he be not most himself,
when he is most extravagant) What is Railing when it is unmerited, is Honesty
when '(...) deserved, and needed; and if in any Case in the World, sharp
Reproof is blameless, it ought to be allowed in this. It would be looked upon
as flatness, or fear, if I should d^l softly with such an Adversary, who, like
the other Enemy of Mankind, goes up and down, seeking whom he may devour: I
have therefore treated him with plainness of Reproof; and if any thing bite in
my Expressions, it is their Truth. Those that know the Merits of M. Stubbe, will
justify this way of proceeding with Him; And those that judge without knowing
the Cause, may conclude what they think fit.

London, Feb. 14.

J. GLANVILL.

A LETTER TO M. STUBBE.
M. STUBBE,
I Have received two Letters from you, since the coming forth of my Book; but I
gave them no Answer, because there was nothing in them to be answered, but the
old Virtues, Falsehood, Impudence, and Impertinence: And indeed I forbore for
this Reason also, because it is dangerous, for a Man to trust himself with such
a malicious Calumniator, in private: Since you make so little reckoning of
traducing Public Writings, what can be expected in your Accounts of
Transactions, that are without Witness?

This day, Jan. 12. I received your last Pamphlet in which I am concerned: How
long it has been abroad, I know not; it came to me by accident, out of the
Country; But by some things, I guess, it has been a pretty while extant. I
mention this, that you may not brag, according to your fashion, that I have
taken a great deal of time (forsooth) to answer you: Good Man! There needs no
study, but to consider, whether it is prudent to have any more to do with such
an hair-brained Impertinent, or not: And I must confess, I have been kept in
some irresolution between Solomon's seeming contradictory Advices, of not
answering, Prove. 26. 4. and answering, ver. 5. I determine now on the side
where Charity to you lies, whatever prejudice I may do my self, by wrestling
with one, whom a Man cannot touch without defilement.

When I writ my last Book, I foresaw what I must expect: If those Eminent
Persons that never descended to provoke you, are branded with such infamous
Scurrilities in your pestilent, inve^med Scribli^gs; What may I look for, that
have so little of their Worth to secure me; and have done so much to exasperate
your malice, and to provoke your most direful displeasure? If Dr. Wallis, Dr.
Spratt, M. Henshaw, M. Evelyn, Dr. Merrett, and now Dr. More, with the ROYAL
SOCIETY in Common, and all that dare to differ from your Opinion, are so often,
and v^hemently stigmatized by you, for gross (...), Illiterate Fools, Prattle
boxes, Liars, Contemptible Adversaries, Impostors, Catch*Potterels Fops,
Lories, Cheats, and poor Devils; And Cart-loads more of such Di^t, ^e heaped
upon THEM; what could I think would be my Portion, after I had so stung, and
exposed you by my Reflections? I assure you, I looked for the dregs of your
Venom, and all the Names, and Epithets of ^ility, and Reproach that are yet
behind in your Dunghil-fat Invention. Accordingly, you take care not to
disappoint my Expectations. By your foaming, and tearing, I perceive my Arrows
stick in your Sides, and I look for more raging yet: All this is but moribundi
animal^li indicium.

For your private Letters, I let them lie, because they were private; only I
admonish you, when you write again, to endeavor to write Sense; For both your
Letters abound with palpable Nonsense, and false English, though I had taken
notice, and admonished you of several of those ^lts in your Books. But I doubt
you think your self too Learned to stoop to Common Se^ce, and will despise this
Advice.

My present Business is with your last Preface against m^* And pray, M.
Praefacer, how many Praefaces do you intend? You quote a Praeface against
Glanvil, in your Censure of the History of the Royal Society: The
Animadversions on Plus Ultra area kind of Praeface, (though to no body ^nows
what) In your Letter to Dr. Merrett you threaten a Praeface again against
Glanvil, and the Rest, when that against him is published; And here is a
Praeface too. Prith^, Harry, which of the Praefaces is this? Distinguish them,
that we may know when we have all, and then tell us, where are the Houses, for
these large Gates.

YOU begin these ignorant, and foul Papers with a Charge against my Method of
dealing with you: And if you had Answered what I say to render such a Procedure
fit and necessary, in my PRAeFACE, your Complaint might have signified more;
but now it is idle, and precarious.

I^ did not, you say, beseem a Christian, much less a Divine of the Church of
England, [p. 34.] We have seen too much of the Genius of your Case-Divinity,
Good Sir, to believe you without Proof [see my Praeface] Why, I pray, was such
a Course misbecoming such Relations? If a Christian, and a Divine of the Church
of England, be assaulted with public Slanders and Reproaches, may he not
endeavor, in his ow^ defense, to weaken the Credit of the Slanderer, by
letting the World see, how foul a Mouth he has, and how little his Cal^ are to
be regarded? If such an infantous P^son set himself to rail at, and disgrace a
Great Body of Worthy and Ingenious Men, and so to beget enmity between Them,
and other Venerable, and Learned Societies, If he shall causelessly reproach
them with Designs destructive to the Government in Church and State, and of
fatal Tendency to the Famous Fountains of Learning, the Universitie^ of the
Kingdom; May not a Christian, and a Divine of the Church of England, endeavor
to prevent the mischief such bold Falsehoods may do, by representing, that those
Charges are malicious, and that the Libeller has been ever a spightful
Inveigher against all the most Sacred Interests, and has publicly, and
fiercely endeavored the destruction of all those Things, for which he now
pretends so zealous, and concerned a Kindness? If a Boutesew, or Common
Barreter attempt to set all where he comes together by the Ears, and to beget
hatred, and animosities between those, that were Friends, and at Peace; may not
one that knows his Practices, though a Christian, and a Divine of the Church of
England, warn his Neighbors to beware that they heed him not, and tell them
(to hinder the Storms that he might raise) what his Temper is, and what Pranks
he has played in other Places, and Times? If any of the Sheep should fawn upon
the Wolf in Sheeps clothing, and follow him where he leads; may not a good
Shepherd pluck of the Disguise, and show the Flock what he is? What think you,
M. Casuist, May a Christian, and Divine lawfully do thus, or not? If so, I am
justified; I have done no more; and I proceeded that way with you, for those
ends: But if you say not, produce your Proof.

But you intimate further, [ ib.] That I have viola^d the Act of Indemnity. If
you think so in earnest, the Law is open, take your Course. It is the Common
Method of the Enemies of the Government to clamor against those that mind them
of their Villainies, and the Miseries of the late Times (though with a pious
Design, to prevent the like for the future) as Violaters of the Act of
Indemnity. They would fain have all that is past, be forgotten, that they
^ight do the same Things, and promote the same Designs again. We must by no
means acquaint the growing Generation with the base Tricks, and barbarous
Actions of the Patrons of the Cause, that the Nation may forget how, and by
whose ^ans the Deluge of Ruin came upon us; and so may be induced to hearken
to the same Pretenses, and to be led into new Miseries by the same Spirit, and
Practices. It Is become an usual thing to upbraid Ministers with the breach of
the Act of Indemnity, when upon the* Thirtieth of January They warn the People
of the danger of Re^ellion, and those Pretenses that lead to it, by the Example
of the late Times, and the Villainies of the Projectors, and Maintainers of the
Horrid War: And just after this manner have I broken the Act of Indemnity. The
sense of what I have writ as to ^his matter, is, Hearken not to M. Stubbe's
Pretenses for Monarchy, the Church, Universities, and Learning; His Kindness is
to be suspected of Hypocrisy, and Falsehood: For see what he has done against
Them, in the Times of their Distress and Ruins!

For your other Pretenses against my way of dealing with you, they are equally
frivolous. It may (say you) raise discontents, and jealousy in others, whose
Crimes transcended yours. If you judge modestly, you need not fear that; It Is
to be hoped there are scarce any such on this side Charing Cross, Tyburn, and
Tower Hill: But if there be, and they have the impudence to promote turbulent
and seditious Designs, under a pretext of a great Zeal, and concern for the
King, and Church; 'Twill be fit that those, who are in danger of being abused
by them, should be made acquainted with their former good Inclinations, and
Practices, when their Pretenses were as specious, as now. For others that have
offended, and demean themselves modestly, as becomes Pe^tents, they have no
reason to apprehend any thing from such a Course taken with you, who are so
infinitely distant from modesty, and all things else, that beseem a Convert.

But 'twas strange, you say, to find as it were St. Paul upbraided with what he
did, at the death of St. Stephen [ib.] The just exposing you, is, as it were,
an upbraiding of St. Paul: Strange indeed! I am glad you have so good an
opinion of St. Paul, as to compare your self with him. Pray how long has the
Apostle been so much in your favor? Bu^ in earnest, Is what I have done like
upbraiding St. Paul? Have you such Evidences to show for your Conversion? Have
you given such proofs of it? or rather, Have you afforded any Demonstration of
your Repentance, besides the Repetition of your Crimes? Read my Pr^face, good
St. Harry, and be silent for ever after, as to this matter.

You proceed, [ To aggravate the malignity of my Temper, it is mad^ my fault
that I defend M. H. in some Grammatical Questions, against a Member of the
Royal Society, p. 35.] The malignity of your Temper is not inferred from your
Defense of M. H. but from your malicious, scurrilous opposition of so Learned a
Man as Dr. Wallis, and the vile Names of contempt you fasten on him, as is
evident, p. 31. and 32. of my Praefatory Answer, where some of the foul,
slanderous stuff is exposed to view: So that this Period is a gross ^alshood;
And it is impossible for you to make any show of Defense, bu^ by taking refuge
in Lying, and Impertinence. This you do again, in the immediate next words [ I
am reviled with opposing M. B. in his Holy Commonwealth, and Key for
Catholics.] This is an untruth also: It Is not the opposing M. B. that is the
thing objected; but your scurrilities toward him, are mentioned as another
Instance of your Civility. Look again into my Book, p. 33. and (if possible)
blush at this lying, and palpable impudence. But, as if you could not speak a
word without falsifying, you add [ And to show how bar^arous my demeanor was
toward him, after the Elogies of Reverend, Learned, and Ingenious, he is said
to be a Person worthy of great respect; and our Eccholius adds, that he can
scarce forbear affirming concerning him, as a Learned Doctor of our Church did,
That he was the only Man that spoke Sense in an Age of Nonsense.]

M. Stubbe, have you forsworn to speak Truth? and will you give your self the
trouble to prove further, what ^very one believes of you already? Did I, to
show the Bar^arousness of your Demeanor, give M. B. the Elogies of Lea^ned,
and Ingenious, and add the other Passage you mention, to that purpose? Pray
borrow a pair of double Spectacles from your Friend M. Cross, and look again
into my Book, where I represent your Demeanor; if you find those Elogies
there, or the other Passage, I Will be bound to believe you, yea even when you
Romance about Jamaica. What you cite, is in my PHILOSOPHIA PIA, which was
written before any thing against you, and when you were not at all in my
thoughts: How is it then, you have the impudence to publish, that those
Passages were to show the barbarousness of your demeanor to M. B? What an
obnoxious Falsifier are you?

In the next Period you say [ I shall not recriminate upon M. Glanvil; There is
Disloyalty which extends beyond Writing; It may be found in Praying, Preaching,
and Communicating with Rebellious Schismatics.] Do you mean to vent two or
three gross Untruths more in this place? or do you only write at your usual
rate of impertinence? If you mean, that I am guilty of any Disloyalty in
Preaching, Praying, and Communicating with Schisntaticks, or ever were, it is a
s^andalous, shameless Falsehood, as many hundreds can witness. How disloyal my
Preaching is, you may see, if you please, in my Sermon on the ^gs Murder,
printed two or three years ago; and how quite contrary the truth is, to what
you would maliciously insinuate, both in this, and the other Particulars, all
Men that ever knew me since I Preached, can attest. And I never was in a Pulpit
above four or five times till the Return of the King, though I was Master of
Arts some Years before. So silly a Romancer are you; or if you will not own it
here, you must confess that you meant nothing to the purpose by your Words.

In the following Sentence [ p. 37.] You fancy you may have the advantage of
the Excuse of Education, and being bred in ill Times, as well as I: But, my
Friend, There is di^rence between a Negative Loyalty, and Active Ui^lany,
between only living, and breathing in a bad Air, and endeavoring to spread the
infection of it further, and to make it more Pestilential, and Fatal. I say no
more; You understand me.

Well! Thus I aggravated the malignity of your Temper, and thus you have
Answered. But what is become of all the other Instances of your ridiculous
Boastings, abominable S^urrilities, Treasonable Invectives, impious Endeavors
to destroy Laws, Religion, and Learning? You think it is the best way to cover
them with Silence, and to insinuate to those that have not read my Book, that
when I talk of the malignity of your Temper, I mean only, That you writ a
Defense of M. H. in some Grammatical Questions, and opposed M. B. in his Holy
Commonwealth, and Key for Catholics. Cunning Shu^er! But when you mention
these Instances, why don't you add, what mighty things you boasted of your
self, and what vile Names you called Dr. W. in your Defense of M. H? And why
don't you tell your Reader, that when you opposed M. B. in his Holy
Commonwealth, and Key for Catholics, it was only in those things in which he
opposed Sir H. V. and the most extravagant Phantasticks? But this was not for
your purpose, and therefore Mum. You opposed M. B's Holy Commonwealth, you say;
and some, you fancy, may think, that you writ against the Errors of that
recanted Book: So that hereby you would in^uate a good Opinion of your self,
and a bad one of me, as making your writing against such a Discourse, an
Instance of the malignity of your Temper. You have no other way to defend your
self, but by either downright Falsehood, or such Tricks of Legerdemain, and
Cousenage.

To go on with you; You tell your Reader [ ib.] That I give no Reparation to
the Physician^ for my injurious words [ Plus Ultra, pa. 7. 8.] Had I spoken any
there about Physicians, or, did I think that any one Physician, that does not
want Physic himself, understands me to have as much as meant any thing to
their prejudice, I should give them what Reparation they can expect: But all
that you have objected about the Cut-Finger, and the Injury done your Faculty,
I have proved to be mere impertinent Malice, that longed to pick a Quarrel. And
I shall now give you a further Account of that whole Paragraph you have
transcribed, and raised such Clamours against.

If in Discoursing of it I can show, that the substance of those Periods, and
the most obnoxious Passage there, is to be found largely, and often insisted on
by so Great, Learned, and Wise a Man as my LORD BACON, I hope I may be excused
for having spoken after so profound, and celebrated a Philosopher, that was no
Enemy to Physicians, or any sort of Learned Men.

I repeat my Periods as you have cited them: [ The Modern Experimenters think
that the Philosophers of elder Times, though their Wits were excellent, yet the
Way they took was not like to bring much advantage to Knowledge, or any of the
Uses of Humane Life, being for the most part that of Notion and Dispute, which
still runs round in the Labyrinth of Talk, but advances nothing. Plus ult. p.
7.]

I say, the Experimenters think, and undertake to represent the Sense of some
of those Philosophers, as I apprehended it. My Thoughts were chiefly on my Lord
Bacon. Let us see now whether that Great Man has not declared what I say the
Experimenters think.

[ Antiquis Au^horibus suus constat honos, atque adeo omnibus; quia non
ingeniorum, aut Facultatum inducitur comparatio, sed viae, Nov. Organ. Aph.
32.] Again, Aph. 61. [ Nihil illis (sc. Antiquis) detrahitur, quum de via
omnino quaesti^ est.] Thus you see, without detracting from the Wits of the
Ancients, he questions the WAY they took, for the Advancement of Knowledge; and
that he thought it to be unfr^ful, appears further from almost his whole Book;
(...), from the Praef. p. 2. De utilitate dieendum est, sapientia^ istam, quam
a Grae^ po^issimum hausimus, PUERITIAM quandam scientiae vid^ri, atque habere
quod proprium est PUERORUM; ut ad garriendum prompta, ad generandum invalida,
and immatura ^it; controverst^rum ferax, operum eff^ta est:] And so he goes on
comparing that State o^ Learning to the Fable of Scylla. Again, Aph. 71.
Scientiae quas habem^ fere a Graecis fluxerunt, erat autem scientia Graecorum
professoria, and in disputationibus e^usa; quod genus inquisitioni veritatis
adversissimum est;] and he proceeds to the same purpose. Thus you see, that
that Famous Experimenter thought, that the WAY of the Ancients, was not like to
bring much advantage to Knowledge, being that of Notion, and Dispute.

And that This runs round in a Labyrinth of Talk, advancing nothing, The same
Great Author says, [ Si -- id minime eventurum fuisset, quod per Annos his
mill jam fieri videmus: Nempe, ut scientiae suis hereant vestigiis, and in
eodem fere statu maneant, neque augmentum aliquod memorabile sumpserunt; quin
potius, in primo Authore maxim floru^rint, and (...) declinaverint. Aph. 74.]
And Aph. 94. he encourages Philosophical Hope with this Consideration, That
the little progress that is made in Knowledge, is not from the difficulty of
the Thing, so much, as from the error of the Way. Thus that great Philosopher
justifies the former part of the recited Paragraph to a Tittle, and you see I
had reason, when I writ, that the Experimenters thought as I said.

But you quote me further: [ And the unfruitfulness of those Methods of
Science, which in so many Centuries, never ^ought the World so much practical
beneficial Knowledge ^ would help to cure a Cut Finger, is a palpable Argument,
that there were Fundamental Mistakes, and that the Way was not right.] My Lord
Bacon makes this the great sign of the Error of the Ancient WAYS, Aph. 74. and
in diverse other places; They produced DISPUTES, but not WORKS, Praef. p. 2.
Aph. 71. And he gives the reason of their (...); (...) enim (...) habem^s,
(...) al^d sunt qu^m (...) inventarum, non modi (...) de^gnationes (...)
operum, Aph. 8.] How much less is this, than what I said? And upon the
supposition of these things, I might well add,

[ If the Moderns cannot show more of the Works of their Philosophy in six
Years, than the Aristot^lians can produce of theirs, in thrice so many hundr^d,
let them ^e loaded with all the contempt, which is usually the reward of vai^;
and u^profitable Projectors.] It is apparent, and I have shown, that the WAY by
Experiments has produced Works; But my Lord ^acon, and the reason of the thing
say, the WAY of ^otion can produce none.

And now, M. Caviller, did you ever read my Lord ^acon, or did you not? If not,
for all your boasts of great reading, You are not acquainted with some of the
Authors of greatest note; And it is a shame for you to write against the
Experimental Philosophers, and not to have read the Founder and one of the
Chiefest Men of that Way. If you have read him, you know he said all this that
I write the Experimenters thought; and why did you pass it by in Him, who was
the Author; and insisted so largely upon it, and so malici^usly censure it in
me, that spoke after him in two, or three tran^ent Passages? If these Periods
in my Book were the oc^asion of the Quarrel, as you say, why was not the
Quarrel begun before? Are the Physicia^s more injured by my writing those
things, than by my Lord Baeon's? Is my saying what he thought, a greater
Affront to the Ancients, than his declaring to the World the same himself? No,
no, M. Stubbe, it is evident from hence, That this was not the reason of your
writing, but the occasion that you made; You knew that your cavilling could not
injure my Lord Bacon, but thought it might expose me, and other Friends of the
Experimental Way, to the displeasure of the ignorant, envious, and misinformed;
'Twas not any concern for the Honor of the Ancients, and your Faculty, that
engaged You; For then you would have end^avoured their Vindication against my
Lord Bacon, (if you had thought them so injured by those Sayings) But 'twas a
malevolent, envious humor against the Royal Society, and its Friends, was the
cause of your impudent Assaults.

And it is further apparent, that what you pretend was not the reason of your
beginning this War; For no Man alive, but you, can perceive any the least
Reflection upon the Physicians in those Periods. I speak of the Ancient Methods
of Philosophising in Physiology, and with the excellent Ver^lam, complain, that
they were notional, and unfruitful: So that I meant the particular Hypotheses,
and not the more general Principles, and Rules, of which you speak, which were
raised from Observation, and Experiment: These, no doubt, all the Ancient
Physicians used, and with happy success; and it is the very method of the Modern
Experimental Men; So that I could not be supposed to mean this. I spoke of the
Natural Philosophers, and their Methods, which were made up of Notion, and
ministered to everlasting Disputes.

But you pretend to have demonstrated, that even this way was much more
advantageous, than I allow it, [p. 38.] I wish you would tell us, where we
might find the Demonstrations against those Complaints of my Lord Bacon. You
talk of the Doctrine of the E;e, emts being the occasion of Plasters, of
Galen's regulating of Mixtures, and Discoveries by those Principles, [p. 38.
40.] and of Druggists explaining the Use of Medicaments according to this
Doctrine, [Animad. on Plus Ult. page 159.] These, forsooth, you have
demonstrated; That is to say, Physicians have chosen the Materials of their
Compositions, hot, or dry, cold, or moist, as they found them for their
purpose, according to this degree, or another; and have used these common Words
of Elements, Qualities, and Degrees, to express themselves by: Therefore the
Hypotheseis of naked Materia prima, Substantial ^orms, and Real Qualities is
not unprofitable: Who can choose but take such Arguments, for Demonstrations?
Well! The Conclusion follows [p. 39.] From whence it is Demonstrated, that
since not only Cut Fingers, but even all Diseases were cured by them, (viz.
Galenical Physicians) it is unjust, and intolerable for us to be upbraided with
the sterility of that Philosophy -- ] Who ever denied that Diseases were cured
by these Physicians using Reason, Experience, and General Rules? But when do
you prove, that the Doctrine of First Matter, and Forms did directly, and of it
self lead to any Discovery, by which they were assisted in their Cures? This, I
told you, was my meaning in the Words, which you force to the sense which best
fits your malicious purpose; And to what end then, do you keep such a
vapouring, and impertinent ad^ about the Peripateticks, that have been
Inventors, and the Galenists, to whom we have been obliged? But you have a mind
to find your self work, though it be but to pick Straws.

You recite my Answer to your clamorous, and impertinent Opposition of the
fore-quoted Paragraph; viz. that I ^oke not of the Methods of Physic, or
Surgery, or any Practical Arts; but of the way of Notion and Dispute, which,
I said, produced no practical, beneficial Knowledge, by its own proper, native
virtue; I said, I denied not, that the Peripatetical, and other Notional
Philosophers had Practical Knowledge, or were Discoverers; but that they learnt
their Knowledge, or made their Discoveries by the disputing Methods of
Physiology; These were the things I denied. I quot^ my Lord Bacon for my
Negative; and I have proved it from the nature of those Principles; in my
Answer to Dr. Mer. Causubon, and elsewhere: I now confirm it from the Authority
I cited; Thus then that Philosopher speaks [Nov. Organ. Aph. 8.] Opera quae jam
inventa sunt, casui debentur, and experientiae, magis quam Scientiis.] And if
that Illustrious Man be to be believed in what he says of the Aristotelian
Philosophy, No Works can be expected from it. Aristotelis Philosophia, postquam
caeteras Philosophias (more Ottomanorum erga ^res suos) pugnacibus
confutationihus contrucidasset; de singulis pronunciavit; and ipse rursus
quaestiones, ex ^bitrio suo subornat, deinde conficit, ut omnia certa sint and
de^ta. [Aph. 76.] and elsewhere, the speaks thus of Aristotle,: Philosophiam
Naturalem Dial^ctoca sua corrupit magis uhique sollicitus quomodo quis
respondendo se explicet, and aliquid reddatur in verbis positivum, qu^m de
in^erna rerum veri^e, [Aph. 63.] I suppose I need not spend time to show how
little fruit we can reasonably expect from a Philosophy so tempered: And when
you, M. Stubbe, have proved, that the Peripatetick Hypotheseis of Materia,
Forma, Privatio, etc. have any direct tendency toward the making useful
Discoveries, you may have leave to vapor, as much as you please, without
control.

But my Defense, you say, is false, and you endeavored to prove it by the same
impertinent Allegations, which I cited from you before. You add, It Is strange,
that I declare I spoke not of the Methods of Physic and Surgery, or any
Practical Art, since the Aristotelians and Galenists did not act as pure
Empericks, but as Men guided by a Series of Principles, and a Theory which they
deemed Scientifical [p. 41.] They proceeded, no doubt, by General Rules, drawn
from Observations in their Art, and therefore acted not as pure Empericks;
p^ricks that the Scientifical Theory they were directed by, was any Hy^eseis in
Philosophy, you must prove; Till then, I shall be unconcerned in your goodly
Demonstrations.

At the end of your long Impertinence about my affronting the Physicians, You
say, it is not possible for you to divine what I mean by Notion, [p. 42.] when I
speak of the way of Notion, and Dispute. Are you in earnest, M. Stubbe, and is
it impossible for you to Divine? I perceive then you are no C^rer: For I told
you as plainly, as I could speak, what I meant; and you recite my words [ p.
40.] in which I told it you. Have you been all this while disputing against wh^
I said, and y^ say at last, that you do not know what I m^? You demur, whether
it were Peripatetick Physiology, or Logical, or Metaphysical Disputes; after
you have recited my words, where I tell you I meant the disputing Methods of
Physiology, you dispute against this meaning, and when you have done, say, it is
impossible for you to divine. If you had looked but a Leaf back in your own
Book, you need not have been put to the trouble of d^ning: But your hot-head
has not the patience to consider any thing.

Thus have you endeavored to render me odi^ to Physici^, b^ with so little
sueces^, that I never heard of any P^ els^, that thought his Faculty concerned
in the P^agraph on which you fasten.

YOur next At^mpt is to confirm your Slander of my di^ction to the
UNIVERSITIES; than which, nothing is More unjust, and false. For what have I
ever said, or done that can be ground for such a C^? Did I ever endeavor to
expose the (...) to the ^ry of wild P^sticks in the days of their danger? Did I
ever write against THEM, Their Degrees, Habits, and L^arning, as Popi^, and
A^tichristian? Did I ever Print (...) for the overthrow of their A^ Con^s? If I
had done any of this (as you know who did) there had been some color for the
Imputation. But on the contrary, I always esteemed Them, as one of the greatest
Blessings our p^ous Ancestors had bequeathed to us; as the Lights of the
Kingdom, and the great Instruments of Some of the happiest Privileges we enjoy
above the ^arbarous Nations; I have always heartily prayed for their
Prosperity, and depre^ their Mu^es; I have expressed my Affections in public
Pr^ons, and in private good Wishes: Now what could I have done more to testify
my Respects, Duty, and G^titude to the Universities? And what have I done to
deserve so foul, and odious a Character, as that of an Enemy to those
Illustrious Nurseries of Knowledge? All that You, that is, Malice it self, do,
or can pretend, is, That I have writ against the Perip^cal Philosophy, and
given a d^ or two against affected, and insignificant Terms of Art; and that I
think meanly of those Notional Studies, in comparison of the Practical,
Experimental Philosophy: This is the sum of the Paragraph you quote out of my
Plus Ultra, In which I endeavor to secure the University-Establishments from
Diminution, and confess the usefulness even of those Studies to some purposes,
among the Acade^ick Youth. Hence you conclude, according to your usual Logic,
[p. 45.] That I take the Universities for Assemblies of an ignorant, and stupid
sort of Men, that were to be amused, and deceived by Equivocations. Why so, I
pray you? Because I profess an Esteem for the Venerable (...), [ibid.] You
fancy, I perceive, I meant the ^enches: A pre^ty Equi^ indeed* And I style them
Fountains of Learning, but tell not what those Words import; You ask me,
Whether it was not, because the New Philosophy was so much promoted, and the
Royal Society as it were (...) there? I thought there had not been need of my
explaining, what I meant by Learning, when I styled the Universities the
Fountains of it. For your satisfaction, Sor^pulous Sir, I tell you now, that I
meant Moral Philosophy, Anatomy, Mathematics, Languages, History, and
Divinity, of all which parts of Learning there are Public Professors there;
and all which are studied by many Worthy Members of those Venerable Bodies,
which from time to time ^e and do send abroad Men famous in those useful sorts
of Knowledge. These Studies I esteem as I ought, and honor the Universities
highly on the account of the Advantages they afford for the attainment of those
profitable and excellent kinds of Learning. As for the Natural Philosophy, and
Metaphysics that are taught the Junior Students, my thoughts of them, I
confess, are di^erent; but yet I say they are not to be thrown off, [Letter
con^. Arist. p. 2.] Because the Statutes require Exercises in them, and (...)
are dangerous. On this you comment, and intimate, that I make them useless as
to all other purposes; which is false, and injurious. In my Letter concerning
Arist. [p. 2.] I have acknowledged other Uses of those first Studies: I here
transcribe some of those Periods. [ I should never have been so disingenuous,
and undutiful as to form a Project so inconvenient, and hazardous in the event,
as to discourage young Students from a Method of Studies, the Constitutions of
the Place they live in, has enjoined them; which indeed, considering the
Circumstances wherein things stand, it is in (...) they should be verst in,
since that Philosophy is ^rought into the (...) Theology of Europe; which
therefore could not be comprehended, without an insight into those Hypo^eseis:
Nor can a Man make a reasonable choice of his ^rin-ciples: (...) he have some
knowledge of all that offer themselves Candida^ for his favor (...) and a
(...) Man's Belief i^ not Ch^nce, (...) Ele^on; besides which, it enlarges, and
e^nobles the Minds of Men, to furnish them with variety of Conception, and
takes them off from doting on the beloved Conclusions of their private and
narrow Principles. [Answ. to White, p. 18.] You see, M. Prater, that I have
declared my approbation of those pr^inary Studies as to other purposes, besides
compliance with Statutes; and therefore your Malice is toothless. I gave those
Studies their due, though I did not allow them useful, either for the giving an
account of Nature, or promoting any Works for the Uses of Life. And when I
considered, that these ought to be the Ends of the Real ^hilosophy, I diverted
from the Notional, about which my first thoughts had been employed.

This is the sum, and sense of these Passages you quote from me to render
odious, [p. 44.] You force from them several vile Consequences which you kindly
bestow on me, as if they justified those that discouraged Gentlemen from the
Universities, and intended to overthrow the ancient, and necessary Education of
this Island, [p. 47.] Which things, how well they follow, I leave to any Man to
consider, that will judge impartially of what I have said. Is there nothing
(think you) to be done at Oxford, or Cambridge, as you quaery, [p. 46.] if
Peripatetick Philosophy be useless as to Discoveries, and Inventions? Does it
signify nothing to capable, and ingenious Youth, to have their Minds exercised
in a way of Reasoning, though about things, that will not signify in the World
of Business? Is there naught else to be learnt in the Universities, besides the
niceties about (...), and Forma, and dependent Notions? Will it do young
Gentlemon any hurt to be instructed in Morality, History, Mathematics, and
other such useful matters? And are not these worth their going to Oxford, and
Cambridge, though they should not receive much benefit for their Purposes from
the Peripatetick Philosophy? For shame, M. Stubbe, leave this course of
malicious cavilling; and consider whether by such Suggestions, which speak as
if there was nothing to be learnt in the Universities, but a few Notions about
Ens, and Materia prima, you do Them not more disparagement, than you can prove
any Virtuoso ever did, or intended. And let me ask you, Whether you think in
earnest, that whoever judges the Peripatetick Principles Notional, and useless
in the sense I have declared, ought ipso facto to be reputed an Enemy to the
Universities, and their Learning? If so, what think you of my Lord Bacon?
Either acquit the Virtuost with him, or condemn him with the Virtuosi. The
things that follow under this Head are contemptible, and are either answered
already, or deserve no answer.

I have sufficiently shown in the beginning of my Praeface, that the Account I
gave of you out of your Writings was no Digression, as you term it, [p. 48.]
but most necessary to be done as an Introduction to an Answer: What becomes me
to do more, I have promised at my first convenient leisure. You might,
methinks, content your self with the morsel I have already given you; but the
rest shall follow. My Sallies against M. Cross, which you object to me [ib.]
were very requisite; For you are the Squire to that Knight of the Sp^acles.

You say it is a Year and half since I began to collect your Books. Perhaps so;
But I could not procure them all till after your Animadversions were extant. I
received that Book of yours against me in June, as I take it; and the Month
following my Answer was in the Press (though the Praeface and Postscript were
written after) It could not be finished before the end of the Term, and so it
slept all the long Vacation; and the beginning of next Term it had some stops
put to its finishing, by some extraordinary Occasions of my Printer. So that it
was not the Work of so much time, and labor as you pretend, M. Tell-troth: And
when you say, [ib.] That I omitted to Preach at Bath for many Weeks, excusing
my self by the pretext of writing against you. I reply, that I never omitted
Preaching twice a week, when I was at home, (besides very frequent occasional
Sermons) ever since I was a Public Minister, except when I have been sick, or
lent my Pulpit to a Friend: I never excused my self from preaching, by my
writing, or any other Business whatsoever; Nor did I ever decline it in (...)
own Parishes, when any accidental Occasion required my Labors in that kind.
It Is true, I did not preach at Bath during the time of my writing against you;
but 'twas because Bath was not then the Place of my residence, but my other
Pari^, and I divide my time between them: (...) was then in my Course at
Froome; but never omitted preaching: as many hundreds can witness. So that what
you say here, is either a downright falsehood, or a silly, impertinent
Equivocation. What hard fortune have I, to be sorced to deal with an Adversary,
whose whole strength is in cavilling, and lying*

But it follows, that after all, I understood not the State of the Question,
[ib.] I understood, Impertinent, that the first Q^estion between M. Cross, and
me, was, Whether the Moderns had not gr^atly advanced Knowledge, since the days
of Aristotle? I gave accounts in my Plus Ultra of Modern Improvem^nts; In a
C^llection of remarkable Instances. You fall foul upon that Book, but say
nothing to the Question; only you carp at Errors of the Press, and voluminously
oppose some accidental Passages, catching at a word here, and another there,
and fight against the Shadows of your own Imagination, the malicious
Interpretations which you make but my (...) will not afford; so that in the
whole menage, you have proved your self a pr^tling I^pertinent: This I have
shown by Instances in my Praefatory Answer. And whatever was the Question
between M. Cross, and my self (of that I have given Accounts elsewhere) The
Question between You and I is, Whether you are not Impertinent in all you have
said against Plus Ultra? This I affirm, and have beg^ the Proof: For the
particular things you mention, I engaged to give in my Accounts of them in due
time; But this I must tell you, Let them be determined, which way they will,
The first, and main Question about Modern Improvements, will not be concerned
in the Decision; For if Antiquity was not so shy of, and altogether
unacquainted with Anatomy; If the Graecians, and Followers of Aristotle did
know Chemistry; If the Ancient A^otelian Philosophy has advanced some
Practical Knowledge; If the Inventions attributed to the Virtuosi belong not to
them; If the Moderns cannot show ^ore Fruits of their Philosophy in a short
time, than the Aristotelians of theirs in so many hundred years, which you say
are the Questions, [p. 48, 49.] I say, If these fall as you would have them,
yet it follows not, that Anatomy, and Chemistry have not been much improved in
latter Ages; It follows not, that the Aristotelian Philosophy is as operative,
and useful as the Experimental; It follows not, that the Virtuosi have been no
Inventors, nor Improvers; In fine, it follows not, that Knowledge is not highly
advanced beyond its Ancient Stature; and so consequently, upon the whole, it
follows not, that M. Stubbe is not a Cavilling Impertinent; or that I am bound
to follow him in all his Wild-Goose Chases.

So that, Gentle Sir, I have not mistaken in my beginning with you, but stand
upon my old Ground, that That useful Knowledge is much advanced, in the
Instances I have produced, and by the Persons I have mentioned; and that we may
probably expect greater ^mprovements of it from the Royal Society, and other
Experimental Philosophers. Except you disprove me in these Particulars, my Main
Cause is safe, and you will show your self but a Caviller, though you write as
long as your Head is hot.

You say, All the Learning I flourish with, is but the Remains of a treacherous
Memory, which some Years ago studied something, [p. 49.] Though my Memory, M.
Stubbe, be not so good as yours, yet I am contented, since I have not so much
need of a good Memory, as you. And I had much rather have my Learning in my
Judgment, than in my Memory. Flourishing with Quotations, where they are not
necessary, I always looked upon as a piece of Pedantry, and vain Ostentation.

But you fall severely on two Passages in my new Book. The first is, my making
FUST, or GOTHENBERG to have found out Printing; whereas, you say, I might have
learned out of Hadrianus Junius, that it was found out by another at Harlem,
[p. 49.] But I am informed by Polydore Virgil, That the Author was Jo.
G^tenberg of Mentz, to whom Dr. Hackwell adds the Authorities of Palmerius,
Melchior Guilandrinus, Chasaneus, Veigni^r, Bibliander, Arnoldus, and Munster:
But Peter Ramus, and others ascribe it to JoFust of Mentz also; And why might
not I mention these as the Authors of Printing, after such Authorities? And why
must I be bound to believe Hadrianus Junius concerning the Man of Harlem,
before those other Famous Writers? This is one of your cavilling Tricks, when I
affirm any thing, though from never so good Authors, if you can find any one to
speak otherwise, His is presently made the infallible Authority, and I am
upbraided with Illiterateness, and want of Reading. By the same course I could
prove you as illiterate an (...), as ever spoild Paper.

The second Passage, from whence I am concluded very illiterate, is my
mentioning of Flavius Goia, as the Discoverer of the Compass. This is an Error
of the Press* It should have been Flavius, or Goia. I am confident it was so in
my Copy: For I was sensible of the mistake committed about it elsewhere. And
you confess some ascribe it to one, and some to the other.

Now you tell your Reader [p. 50.] that you have added (...) to satisfy all
men, that I am not at all acquainted with Books. Whether I am so, or no, I will
not dispute; but whether this ca^ be inferred from the Premises, let the Reader
judge. Illiterateness* and unacquaintance with Books, are the Imputations of
course against all, that you call the Virtuosi. You design, no doubt, by the
Charg^, to insinuate, that You are the only Man of Reading, and that no Man may
pretend to Learning, but your self. We must always premis^, when we speak
before such wise men ^s you, [A^ a Fool may say] This you say is for the
benefit of ordinary Conversation; and 'twould be equally beneficial, for you to
premise when you quote Authors, [ A^ I learned from such an Index] And when you
Reason, [A^ a Madman may discourse.]

But the great Exploit is behind, and you thus express your self, [p. 51.] That
I may give the World an Instance of that Impudence, with which M. Glanvil
demeans himself in this Effort of a desperate Ignorance, I shall set down what
he replies to me about the Deceitfulness of Telescopes.] You gave Instances
just now about the Authors of Printing, and the Compass, to satisfy all men of
my unacquaintance with Books: And now you intend to give a great one of my
Ignorance, and Impudence: But see to it, that i^ hold good, or else the
Instance will be an undeniable one of your own.

You said then, as you repeat here* That if M. Cross was in an Error, about the
deceitfulness of Telescopes, you were sure, M. Boil (...) in the same.

The Error that I object to M. Cross, as to this matter, which you attempt to
vindicate, is set down [p. 65. of my R^us Ultra] and it was* That Dioptrick
Glasser were all fal^* and deceitful, presenting us with Objects that were not*
Now if it can be inferred from M. Boyle's Discourse, that He aff^rmed All
Telescopes to be thus deceitful, you have reason for saying, he was in the same
Error with M. Cross: If this cannot be proved, you must seek another Instance
to show my Ignorance and Impudence, and to justify your own Modesty and
Knowledge.

Let us briefly examine the matter then: Your reason of M. Boyle's being in M.
Cross's Error, is in short this; He sought the Maculae and Faculae Solares, but
could not discover them in many months, though some other Astronomers that ^it
before him, did pr^nd to see them every day; and yet he wan^ed not excellent
Telescopes, nor omitted any requisite Circumstance. This is the sum of what you
repeat, [p. 52.]

Hence you would argue (if you intend sense) That All Telescopes are deceitful;
otherwise you cannot prove by it, that M. B. was in M. Cross's Error. To this I
reply [p. 176, 177. of my Pref. Answ.] to this purpose, M. Boil says nothing,
in the Place quoted by you, that tends to the proving the deceitfulness of
Telescopes; or that he believes them Fallacious (I spoke indefinitely, and
meant of all Telescopes) For that was the Error of M* C. which I mentioned [
Plus ^tra p. 65.] and which you undertook to justify. To prove this, I say,
That he imputes it not ^o the Glasses, that he could not see those Macul^ and
(...), but seems a little to blame those (...), that (...) so ^itten of them,
as to make their Readers presum^ that some of them are always to be seen (...).
But M. B. I said, (...) not (...) many months discover (...), (...) they
appeared so much seldomer then, it s^ems, ^han they did before. These are his
Words, [ Phys. E^ays, p. 103.] which is a ridiculous Argument to prove the
deceitfulness of Telesc^.

This is (...) sum of my (...)* which you repeat (...), to the (...), you tell
us, that the Solidi^y of yours ^ay appear. You cite M. Boyle's Words (...), to
the (...) ^tis to be supposed. I study brevity, and 'twould be too long to
recite it after you; In short, he says,

That even Mathematicians do sometimes deliver ^bservations that do not hold
(...), (...). when they are without the bounds of purely Mathematical
Discipline. And he suggests two Reasons of their failing, viz. the Nature of
the (...), Matter, and its Affections; and the necessary imper^ion of the
Instrument^ they use. Under the first Head he delivers the Instance of his
missing the (...) and Faculae in the Sun, as it is evident [p. 103.] Those
Objects (...) inconstant; They appeared, he says, It seems seldomer than they
did before; They were not there, at least in tha^ degree, the one sort of
lightsomness, the other of darkness, as when others had sought them: For this
Reason he (...) them; and not because his Glasses did deceive him, as I
answered before. And that he imputed this to the Objects, not the Instrument,
it is apparent: for he mentions the difference in Observations that arises from
Their imperfections, after he had done with this Instance, and evidently
supposes what he said of the Maculae, and Faculae to appertain to the first
Head, in these words,

And as the Nature of the Material Object wherewith the Mathematician is
conversant, may thus deceive the expectations grounded on what he delivers, so
may the like happen by the reason of the imperfection of the Instruments -- ib.]

It Is most apparent from hence, that my Answer to your Impertinency was solid,
and invincible. The reason M. Boil could not see those Spots and Brightnesses,
was because their appearance was inconstant; they were not in the Sun when he
looked after them, or not so considerable as to be visible; and not because his
Telescopes were d^ceitful.

So that, my Friend, you are i^verably lost; and what you add, [p. 55.] after
the Period repeated out of M. Boil, is lamentably impertinent.

It Is evident, you say, out of his Discourse, that he believes, that
Mathematicians, when they consider Matter with its Figure, Quantity, and other
Affections; are not so accurate, as in those other parts of pure Mathematics.
Here first you evidently misrepresent M. Boil; he says [p. 102.] that they
are not so accurate when they deliver Observations, concerning such things,
wherein it is not only Quantity, and Figure, but Matter, and its other
Affections, that must be considered: You say, it is evident M. Boil believes
the Mathematicians no^ so accurate, when they consider Matter with its Figure,
Quantity, and other Affections, [p. 55.]

But (2.) They are not so certain indeed when they deal in Matter, and its
Affections* for These are variable, and uncertain: And to this M. Boil refers
his Discourse of the Maculae and Faculae, as I have proved.

But you argue, that M. Boil confesses, that Observations taken by Telescopes
cannot but be subject to many Imperfections, upon the account of their being
made by Instruments, that ar^ framed by the Hands, and Tools of Men; And
therefore, he did not believe such a certainty in Telescopes, as exemp^s from
F^llacy, [ib.]

This is a New Argument, and not that you undertake to defend; and whatever is
like to become, of it, the other is (...), and de^perate. But to this also I
say, First, When I affirm Telescopes are not so deceitful as the
Spectacle-Philosopher phancled, I mean, that the ^est, and most perfect are
not* and I hope you will give me leave to use that Logical Rule (as your self
does elsewhere) Analogum pe^ se positum, stat pro famosiori ^gnificato. (2.)
When I said, that ^elescopes do not deceive, I meant, That they do not (...)
ably imp^se upon us in ^epresenting Objects which are not. This was the Error I
apprehended in M. Cross's Discourse, who would not allow the modern Discoveries
in the Heavens, upon the account of the pretended Deceitfulness of Telescopes.
And he seemed to suggest, that those Tubes show us things, that were no where,
but in the Glass, when they represent the new Phenomenon we talk of, such for
instance, as the Satellites of Jupiter, the Ring about Saturn, and the Spo^s in
the S^. And now will the Argument you bring from M. Boil, from the
Imperfection of material Instruments, in^er such a (...) in Telescopes, or
argue that that excellent Philosopher thought them so fallacious? If not, as
certainly even you have not the Impudence to affirm, Then you have not yet
proved, that M. Boil was in the same Err^r with M. Cross.

But you return again to the old Argument; M. Boil does not say, They, viz.
the Spots, and Brightnesses, were not there; but that he could not see them of
a long time. Indeed, M. Harry, either your Eyes are as defective, as you
pretend M. Boyle's Telescopes to have been; or you think it not fit to report
after Them: For M. Boil does say, They were not there; his Words are, as I
have often cited them, which have, during many months at least, appeared so
much sol^mer, than it seems they did before. When I read this Period, as it is
quoted by you, I was surprised; For you recite it thus, [ I could not detect
any of those Solar Spots which having dured many months at least, appeared so
much seldemer, than it seems they did before, [p. 53.] At the former part of
the Words, [which having dured many Months at least] I was startled; for they
had the appearance of something in your favor, which I had not observed, and I
could not imagine, how M. Boil should know they had dured for many Months, if
they did not appear. I turned therefore to the Passage in M. Boyle's own Book,
and there I found you had falsified his Words, and that the Saying which made
me wonder, was not his, but yours.

Was there now ever such a piece of Impudence as this, in quoting Authors? You
undertake to give the World an Instance of that Impudence with which, you say,
I demean my self in the effort of a Desperate Ignorance, and that the World may
see the Solidity of your Answer, as you brag; You cite my Words, and a long
Discourse from M. Boil, in which is the thing in controversy between us, [p.
52.] You say, It Is not your Intention to abuse the Reader with false Citations,
or amuse him with a great Confidence, grounded upon an Author that he has not
at hand, [p. 53.] Thus you Praeface to your Citations from M. Boil, and
conclude it thus, I have set down the Passage faithfully, without changing an
Expression, [p. 56.] And after all this, would not any one think, you do it
faithfully? Could it be supposed that You would misquote your Author's Words to
make him speak to your purpose, after your having called the World to observe
how you would order me here, and show my Ignorance, and Impudence; After such
Pretenses of fair dealing; After you had pr^fessed against false Citations, and
twitted your Adversaries for accusing you with such Dealing? Could it, I say,
be imagined that You should falsify so known an Author as M. Boil, and when
you cite a long Discourse from him, and have an Adversary concerned that is not
quite stupid? I protest, Though I know you, yet I did not imagine you could be
so frontless, and therefore pored upon the Passage in your Citation a good
while, before I could suspect you so much, as to turn to the Original. Well Let
this stand for a most remarkable Instance of your Faithfulness in quoting
Authors; And henceforth be not so imp^dent, as to pretend, that the Virtuosi
abuse you in the Charge of falsifying in Quotations.

But I return to your Arguments: You ask, to what purpose was the Discourse
about the deceivableness of Op^ioks, if M. Boil supposed his Glasses true, and
that the Spots were absent at that time, [p. 56.]

Here you again impose upon your Reader, and in^nuate another falsehood, viz.
that M. Boil was discoursing about the deceivableness of Optics, when it is
nothing so; This was not his design here, He is only showing that Math^aticians
may be deceived in their Observations about material Objects, upon the account
of the Nature of the Things, and the imperfection of the Instruments he uses;
as it is evident, [p. 102.] And the Instance under debate is produced to show
the former, as I have proved. Thus are you unfortunate in all your Attempts to
vindicate your self from the Charge of Impertinence.

And now let the Reader judge, whose Ignorance and Impudence you have
discovered, mine, or your own. Let this be an Instance, how you can reason, and
how well you are able to understand and use the Authors you cite. I see how I
am like to be An^wer'd, where I discover your other Imper^cies, and Fo^es. This
you pitched upon as a thing, wherein you could shame me, as you phancied: In
the other Instances you were not sure to make the matter so evident, and give
such clear proof of your advantages; and therefore this is chosen; with your
Performances here, You will stand, or fall.

And now, Go thy ways, prattling Impertinen^, and never pretend to Reason more;
Swagger on, and call Names, and boast great Performances, and quote seraps by
Indexes, and pervert Authors: But take care of coming to close arguing, or of
pretending any more to speak to purpose; These ar^ not suitable to the
abilities of whi^ing Scriblers, and Red-hot Heads.

The things you talk to have demonstrated about Telescopes [p. 56.] I have
demonstrated already to be Impertinent; and I am no ways concerned in Them: I
never denied, but that there was great difference in the Representations o^
Objects made by Telescopes, as they are longer, or shorter, of purer, or of
darker Metals, etc. And there is no doubt, but a great reason of the difference
between Astronomers about the celestial Phenomenon, arises from the difference
between the Telescopes they employ. I never said, that they were All perfect
and infallible in minute Particulars; But that all were not deceitful, and did
not present to us mere Fantastical Objects, that had nothing Real: So that in
all your Argumentations here, you have spent your Strength upon Shadows. Let
the Reader compare, as you would have him, and judge.

I Have done with your Argumentative part. That which follows is very pretty.
You desired me, you say, That I would not multiply Lies. Indeed! But don't you
remember, M. Stubbe, when I upbraided you to your face at Bath, in the presence
of Dr. C. with sundry gross Falsehoods you had Printed, of the Bishops
Reprimand; of the Uirtuost's contributing to my Book; and o^ Their, or some
other Correctors, sending it home to me blotted, and altered, etc. Do not you
remember how little you could say for your self, and how unable you were to
justify those Reports? Don't you remember the Guinny You paid me for one of
your Tales, which I disproved after a Wager? These things you know well, and
cannot defend your self; and therefore endeavor to divert Men's Eyes from your
own Faults, by impudently charging me with them. I never said any thing of you,
that I will not justify to a tittle; and I have enough behind unsaid, to shame
any Man in the World, but You.

But I Will consider a little, how you make good your charge: You have
demonstrated, you say, to the Royal Society, under a Notaries hand, That your
Head is not Red, though I say it. Did I so? I pray where? If I never said this,
as you relate it, Pray who is the Liar then? I said in my Praeface, that your
Head was Red hot; Is there no difference between Color, and Degree of Heat?
You writ me, that you had convicted me to my Lord Brounker for a Liar in this
Instance, and made your self ridiculous at Oxford, by plucking off your
Periwig, and showing your Head to every Freshman, to demonstrate your charge of
lying against me: But you were so much mistaken, that thereby you demonstrated
what I said true; For every one took it for an Evidence that your Head was
Red-hot. You conveyed (as I hear) Locks of ^lair into diverse Parts, to convince
the World by Experiment of the Lies of the Virtuosi; You sent it, You say, by a
Public Notary to the Royal Society. If any one else had told me this, but your
self, I should have thought he had abused you. Did ever a crackt-brain'd Noddy
do any thing more ridiculous than this? Have you not demonstrated, how fit you
are for Bedlam by it? Did you not perceive how every one laughed you to scorn
for your Demonstration? I protest, I pity you, and am afraid that some will
thin^, that I am not well in my Wits, because I seriously answer such a Lom of
Bedlam. And having said this, I must expect next to be branded for a Liar, for
the Expression; and you will, it is like, send the Royal Society a Certificate
from the Clerk of the Parish where you were Christened, that your Name is not
^om. This will be as necessary to clear you, as the Lock of Hair, with the Hand
of the Public Notary: And I can look for no less from such an Hair-brained
Impertinent. But, mischief on it, I Am fallen again under your Correction, and
must expect you should demonstrate to the next Coffee-house, that I told a Lie,
when I gave you the Epithet of Hairbrain'd, by showing your almost Bald Pate;
And what pity it is, that you cannot send your Head to the Royal Society by the
next Carrier, to convince them! They will at least expect a Certificate from
the Barbers of Warwick. But after all your Demonstrations, If I had said your
Head was Red, I had not been such a Liar neither; it was direct Carrot, last
time I saw it: but perhaps Jamaica, and a Periwig have metamorphos'd your
Noddle since. Well! This is one Instance of my Falsifying, which you triumph in
much, as a sensible Confutation of the Virtuosi.

Another Instance is, my abusing you for styling your self Physician for his
Majesty in the Island of Jamaica, [ib.] In a Letter to me you insist much on
this; You tell me what Stipend the King gave you; That you had his Majesti^s
Warrant; And that, my Lord This Body, and Sir That Body, knows; You write me,
you will Print the Warrant, and inform me where it is to be seen. Pray in the next
Letter tell me who gave you the License to sell Chocolate in Jamaica; and by
all means Print the Warrant: For without that, the World will never be
convinced that my Raillery [ Praef. p. 9.] is Lying.

Well! These are the great Instances to prove that neither my Duty to God, nor
regard to the Ministry could restrain me from the Exorbitances of Lying, [p.
57.] You have, you say, collected more Instances, though they are not such
great ones, it seems, as these; And call upon me vehemently in your last
Letter, to know where I will be convicted: You have one Lie you tell me
notorious to be proved; and you will cause Oath to be made, That you were never
entertained with dear Welcome at M. Cross' s House. Alas! That Is pity: You were
there, you say; and will any one swear that you were not welcome? I hope your
Friend told you, you were welcome; and will any swear the contrary? Take heed of
producing that Affidavit, Good Sir, for it will prove M. Cross a Liar, as well
as the Virtuoso.

But to return to your Praeface: One Lie, you say, you must take notice of
briefly, and it is this; That M. Cross did hire you to oppose Ecebolius, [p.
58.] What Ecebolius was that, who said so? I writ no such Words: I insinuated
what I thought, and had heard in other terms; and if I Lied, it was in
thinking, and hearing, and giving some hints of what was reported, and was
likely enough to be believed.

But you say, you never called him Old; and yet confess, you said you would in
part rescue the poor old man: How much different is this, pray, in substance
from my Report? I writ, that you said, M. Cross had been asleep these forty
years, and knew not what the World bad been doing: But you ^em to insinuate
that I spoke falsely here; for you said, He had been as it were asleep, or
buried for these thirty or forty years, -- and knew not the Transactions of the
Learned World, [p. 58.] What a strict Casuist are you? The altering of a Word
in the report of a Saying, though the Sense be retained, is a Lie. It Is to be
supposed you have another Case-Divinity for your self, and your Friends: But
remember, you confess you said M. Cross has been as it were asleep these
thirty or forty years: And was he not as it were asleep, when he neglected to
bid you Welcome at his House? If your Witness will swear that you took him
napping, it may signify something to prove that you were not entertained with
dear welcome. What follows in this Page is to inform the Reader, that M. Cross
gave you but Village-entertainment at his House, only a Bottle or two of Wine
at Bath; and did never make you a Present. I thought there was somewhat in it,
that you now publish him for a Seven Sleeper, that knows not the Transactions
of the Learned World, and one that needs you to res^ue him. However it falls
out, It Is like you thought he would be more grateful, when you began in his
Quarrel, and when the first kind Intercourse of Letters past between you.

But no more of this. You nibble at the sincerity of the Witne^es to my
Relation; They are both Scholars, Masters of Arts, and Persons whose Veracity
has never yet been called into question: So that you cannot prejudice the
Reputation of their Truth with those that know them. And if two capable, and
ingenuous Persons, who were attentive to a Conference, cannot tell, when the
main Particulars of it are recited to them, whether they were so, or not, their
Memories must be very bad: And if they shall attest known Falsehoods, their
Inclinations must be worse. But the Testimony needs no more Words to confirm it.

The Remainder of your Praeface is after your old rate of Impudence, and Folly,
and requires only to be laughed at; and indeed the whole needed not any other
Answer from

Froome, Jan. 16. Your Friend to chastise you, J. G.

POSTSCRIPT.
I Had almost forgot to take notice of your Kindness, in styling me Chaplain to
M. Rous, a Member of the Rump-Parliament.] To show the feebleness of your
Malice, I add a little concerning this.

Being not related to any Foundation in Oxford, but living there a Commoner, I
resolved, as soon as I had taken my Degree of Master of Arts, to remove to
London; Accordingly an opportunity was offered, and I was invited to live with
M. Francis Rous, as his Chaplain: I accepted the Offer: But knew, and had heard
no more of that Gentleman, but that he was a very grave and Learned Man, and
Pro^ost of Eaton-College. In his House I lived somewhat above half a Year, in a
private way of following my Studies, without being concerned in any Public
Matters. That my Patron was a Member of the Rump-Parliament, I never heard, but
from you, and do not know how true it is yet. He died a good while before the
Name of RumpP^rliament was started, and I believe was too honest and
intelligent to have any active hand with those Men, in their destructive
Projects. But in whatever he was concerned as to the Public, I was
unacquainted with those Affairs, and was so young, as that I did not then
understand the State of the Case between the King, and Parliament, and had been
hitherto bred under such invin^ible (...), that without being miraculously
enlightened, 'twas impossible I should know the Villainy of those, that had be^n
in Rule ever since I could well remember; For at the time of my being with M.
Rous, I was not above 22 Years of Age. And pray now, M. Rous, how am I
obnoxious for living with M. Rous? Was this like serving Sir H. Vane in a
Public, malicious, impious, and treasonable Opposition of Monarchy, Ministry,
Universities, Churches, and all things Civil, and Sacred? I tell you, M.
Stubbe, I never did any thing, and to my best remembrance never said any thing
in the late times, in which I was a Child, that could need any favor from an
Act of Indemnity; and I dare say, there is not a Man born since 1636. less
obnoxious to the Church and Government: And therefore, my Friend, you shall not
draw me into a Copartnership with you in your Guilt. And you might have spared
calling me Rene^ado Presbyter, as you do [p. 34, the first of your Praefaces,]
I never concerned my self about the Disputes of Church-Gouernment, till the
Year before the King's coming in, when, upon Inquiry into the matter, my
Judgment voted for Episcopacy, and accordingly I suddenly took Orders upon His
Majesty's Return, from the Bishop of Lincoln; but never was in any before: So
that you might with as much justice have called me Quaker (which another Huff
did) as Presbyterian. But now I remember, you are not to mind what truth, or
justice there is in the Imputations you bestow: If they signify Reproach, it is
sufficient for your purpose.

And that you regard nothing else in the Characters you bestow, it is further
evident from your styling me Ecebolius, who was a shuffling Apostate, and one
that I should say was like a Physician of Warwick, but that he repented. And
why Ecebolius, I pray? I never joined my self with any of the Sects; I never
frequented their Meetings; I never espoused their Principles; I never received
Sacrament, or Orders, or Preferment from them. On the contrary, I overcame the
Prejudices of Education even in those times; and as soon as ever I had
inquired, pleaded for the Constitutions of the Church of England, and declared
against the Practices and Opinions of the Prevailing Parties, though it were
against my Interest, and exposed me to the displeasure of those that could
prefer or ruin me. This I did, when there were no hopes of better Times: And
how come I then to be Ecebolius? But cry you mercy Sir, now I think on it, you
are not to be asked a Reason for any thing you say, or do; Reason is too cold a
thing for your temp^r of Head.

To show that your Stock of Scurrilities was not out, notwithstanding all your
vast Expenses in this kind, You fall anew upon the Virtuosi, with the Titles of
Lor^es, second sort of worthless Fanatics, Alumbradoes in Religion, and all
Sciences, [ Reply, p. 21.] In a Letter to me, You say all your Adversaries are
^enegadoes, and that the Royal Society understand neither History nor Sense.
You write in that Letter, that you will tell Foreigners of their Cheats, and
destroy their Repute; which is never to be saved but by timely submission --
You have made them, you say, to disclaim their History, [Reply, p. 21.] And
add, that you will make them, not only to disown the Book, but the Contents
thereof, [ib.] Don't you think that every Man that shall read this, will look
upon you as distracted? What do you mean to give me the advantage of so many
new Arguments of your Madness, when I have abundantly too many already?

It Is pretty to observe, how your wild rage vents it self against Dr. More. You
represented him as one that had deserted the Royal Society, and commended him
then: But when he disproved your falsehood in that, and other Particulars, you
recane your Commendations, and rail against him with all imaginable rancour,
and vehemence. You had said; He was a Member heretofore of the Royal Soci^ty,
but allows nothing to it now: And would not any one have interpreted the
meaning of these Wor^s to have been, That he was not of it now? What else does
Peretofore signify? This Dr. More disproved; and in his Letter to me, added
the other Sense of the latter part of your Words, on which you now insist, viz.
His allowing nothing to the Weekly Contributions; which indeed is a possible,
but I thought a ridiculous meaning. Dr. More called it a skue and crooked
Quibble, confessed it to be true, but did not think it meant; And I avow, I was
so far from believing this to be your Sense, that I thought it almost
ridiculous to suppose it; and therefore I le^t out the whole Passage. This I
answer to what you say to me for the omission, in one of your Letters.

M. Stubbe, I have almost done with you for the present; only give me leave to
ask you a few Questions between you, and me. Your great Pretenses are the
Interests of Monarchy, and Religion; Pray do you remember what a certain
Physician for His Majesty in Jamaica, advised Col. D. in that Island; and when
he was slighted by that Loyal Gentleman, what he counseled my Lord M. in the
same place? Do you remember who talked of several hundred Gospels that were of
old, and made those we have to owe their Credit to Chance, in a Discourse to me
and two others of Oxford? Can you call to mind who told me at Sir J. L's Table
at Bath, That being sick, he prepared himself for Death with Lucretius, and
Beregardus, and being asked, whether he had not the Bible to help prepare him,
made a pish of it, and said, That he had not seen a BIBLE in seven Years
before, and that it was good for nothing but to make Folks humorsom? Do you
remember who affirmed to me, in the Presence of Sir F. H. and other Gentlemen,
That there was no more reason to believe there is a God, than to believe there
is none; That he believed it, because he could not help it; and could not help
it, because he was carried by an unaccountable impulse; That the Arguments to
prove a Deity, drawn from that Wisdom, Beauty, Order, and Usefulness that is in
the Frame of the Creation, signify nothing, because We cannot tell what Is
Wisdom, Beauty, or Order? Do you not know the Gentleman that discoursed thus?
And have you not forgot the Letter that my Lord M. has of the same Person's,
and with what carnestness he beseech'd his Lordship not to let it be seen by
the Virtuosi, for fear of his being ruined by it? Are you not acquainted with
the Ecebolius that has done, and said these things si^ce his Conversion, and
Confirmation? If you are, advise him to talk no more for shame of his Zeal for
Monarchy, and Religion. You see what I could say. Put these Passages into your
Hint-box, or into your Snuff Box, if you think flt. I thought here to have left
you, but I must add a Paragraph or two more.

In the Praeface of my last Answer I say, that your Ap^logy of Serving a
Patron, would justify Faux, Ravillac, and the Stubbes that were hanged for
Treason in former Reigns: And you seem very angry in your Letters, that I thus
disgraced your Family, and challenge me to give an Instance of any Stubbes that
were hanged: I perceive by it, that you are not acquainted with your own
Pedigree; I Will therefore inform you, that you are not the first of the Name who
has deserved well of Monarchy. In M. Heath's Chronicle of the Civil Wars of
England, p. 856, 857. Edw. 2. you will find among diverse others convicted of a
Conspiracy against the King, Bishops, and Government, one Francis Stubbes, a
Cheesemonger, was executed with his Accomplices, and Quartered as a Traitor.
And another Namesake of yours, John Stubbes, had his Right Hand cut off on a
Scaffold erected in Palace-yard, for a Seditious Book, entitled Vorago, in
which he vented abominable Reproaches against the Queen, and for that was so
punished, as you may see in Cambden's Elizabeth. You may thank God, and a
Gracious King, that you have had a better Fate than those others of your Name:
I wish you may never meet with the Reward of your Deserts, as those other
Stubbes did; but may repent, and be wise on this side the Place, where many
Friends part.

FINIS.

