Some Philosophical CONSIDERATIONS Touching the Being of WITCHES AND
WITCHCRAFT. WRITTEN In a LETTER to the much Honored ROBERT HUNT Esquire

By I. G. a Member of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed by E. C. for James Collins at the King's Head in
Westminster Hall, 1667.

Some CONSIDERATIONS About WITCHCRAFT, In A Letter to Robert Hunt Esquire.
SIR,
THE frequent and late dealings you have had in the Examination of Witches, and
the Regards of one that has a very particular Honor for you, have brought you
the trouble of some Considerations on the subject, which though they are the
careless and hasty products of a sitting or two, may yet, I hope afford you
some not unreasonable accounts of the odd phenomenon of Witchcraft and
Fascination, and contribute to the Defense of the Truth and certainly of
Matters which you know by Experiments that could not deceive, in spite of the
little exceptions of those that are resolved to believe nothing in affairs of
this nature.

And if any thing were to be much admired in an Age of Wonders, not only of
Nature (which is a constant Prodigy) by of Men and Manners; it would be to me
matter of Astonishment, that Men, otherwise witty and ingenious, are fallen
into the conceit that there is no such thing as a Witch or Apparition, but that
these are the creatures of Melancholy and Superstition, fostered by ignorance
and design; which, comparing the confidence of their disbelief with the
evidence of the things denied, and the weakness of their grounds, would almost
suggest, that themselves are argument of what they deny: and that so confident
an Opinion could not be held upon such inducements, but by some kind of
Witchcraft and Fascination in the Fancy. And perhaps that evil Spirit, whose
influences they will not allow in Actions ascribed to such Causes, has a
greater hand and interest in their Proposition that they are aware of. For that
subtle Enemy of Mankind (since providence will not permit him to mischief us
without our own concurrence) attempts that by stratagem and artifice, which he
could never effect by open ways of acting; and the success of all wiles
depending upon their secrecy and concealment, his influence is never more
dangerous than when his agency is least suspected. In order therefore to the
carrying on the dark and hidden designs he manageth against our Happiness, and
our Souls, he cannot expect to advantage himself more, than by insinuating a
belief, That there is no such thing as himself, but that fear and fancy make
Devils now, as they did Gods of old. Nor can he ever draw the assent of men to
so dangerous an assertion, while the standing sensible evidences of his
existence in his practices by and upon his Instruments are not discredited and
removed.

It Is doubtless therefore the interest of this Agent of darkness to have the
world believe, that the notion they have of him is but a phantome and conceit;
and in order thereunto, That the stories of Witches, Apparitions, and indeed
every thing that brings tidings of another world, are but melancholic Dreams
and pious Romances, And when men are arrived thus far, to think there are no
diabolical contracts or apparitions, their belief that there are such Spirits,
rests only upon their Faith and Reverence to the Divine Oracles, which we have
little reason to apprehend so great in such assertors, as to command much from
their assent, especially in such things in which they have corrupt interests
against their evidence. So that he that thinks there is no Witch, believes a
Devil gratis, or at least upon such inducements which he is like to find
himself disposed to deny when he pleases. And when men are arrived to this
degree of diffidence and infidelity, we are beholden to them if they believe
either Angel or Spirit, Resurrection of the Body, or Immortality of Souls.
These things hang together in a Chain of connection, at least in these men's
Hypothesis; and it is but an happy chance if he that has lost one link hold
another. So that the vitals of Religion being so much interressed in this
subject, it will not be impertinent particularly to discourse it.

And in order to the proof that there have been, and are unlawful
confederacies with evil spirits, by virtue of which the hellish accomplices
perform things above their natural powers; I must premise, that this being
matter of Fact, is only capable of the evidence of authority and sense: And by
both these, the being of Witches and diabolical contracts, is most abundantly
confirmed. All Histories are full of the exploits of those Instruments of
darkness, and the tesimony of all Ages, not only of the rude and barbarous,
but of the most civilized and polished world, brings tidings of their strange
performances. We have the attestation of thousands of eye and ear-witnesses,
and those not of the easily deceivable vulgar only, but of wise and grave
discerners, and that when no interest could oblige them to agree together in a
common Lie: I say, we have the light of all these circumstances to confirm us
in the belief of things done by persons of despicable power and knowledge,
beyond the reach of Art and ordinary Nature; standing public Records have been
kept of these well attested Relations, and Epocha's made of those unwonted
events. Laws in many Nations have been enacted against those vile practices;
those among the Jews and our own are notorious; such cases have been often
determined near us, by wise and reverend Judges, upon clear and convictive
evidence: and thousands in our own Nation have suffered death for their vile
compacts with apostate spirits. All these I might largely prove in their
particular instances, but that it is not needful, since those that deny the
being of Witches, do it not out of ignorance of these Heads of Argument, of
which probably they have heard a thousand times, but from an apprehension that
such a belief is absurd, and the things impossible. And upon these presumptions
they contemn all demonstrations of this nature, and are hardened against
conviction. And I think, those that can believe all Histories are Romances that
all the wiser world have agreed together to juggle mankind into a common belief
of ungrounded fables, that the sound senses of multitudes together may deceive
them, and Laws are built upon Chymera's; that the gravest and wisest Judges
have been Murderers, and the sagest persons Fools, or designing Impostors: I
say, those that can believe this heap of absurdities, are either more credulous
than those whose credulity they reprehend, or else have some extraordinary
evidence of their persuasion, viz. That it is absurd and impossible there should
be a Witch or Apparition. And I am confident, were those little appearances
removed, which men have formed in their fancies against the belief of such
things, their evidence would make its way to their assent, without any more
arguments than what they know already to enforce it. There is nothing then
necessary to be done, in order to the establishing the belief I would reconcile
to men's minds, but to endeavor the removal of those prejudices they have
received against it, the chief of which I shall particularly deal with; and I
begin with that bold Assertion, That

(1) The notion of a Spirit is impossible and contradictious, and consequently
so is that of Witches, the belief of which is founded on that Doctrine.

To which Objection I answer, (1) If the notion of a Spirit be so absurd as is
pretended, that of a God, and a Soul, distinct from matter and immortal, is
likewise an absurdity. And then that the world was jumbled into this elegant
and orderly Fabric by chance; and that our Souls are only parts of Matter,
that came together we know not whence, nor how; and shall again shortly be
dissolved into those loose Atoms that compound them; That all our conceptions
are but the thrusting of one part of matter against another; and the Idea's of
our minds mere blind and casual motions; These and a thousand more the grossest
impossibilities and absurdities, consequents of this Proposition, That the
notion of a Spirit is absurd, will be sad certainties and demonstrations. And
with such Assertors I would cease to discourse about Witches and Apparitions,
and address my self to obtain their assent to truths infinitely more Sacred.

And yet (2) though it should be granted them, that a substance immaterial is
as much a contradiction as they can fancy; yet the Air and all the Regions
above us may have their invisible intellectual Agents, of nature like unto our
Souls, be that what it will; and some of them at least as much degenerate as
the vilest and most mischievous among Men. This, I say, may reasonably enough
be supposed, though, as I intimated above, the Atheist has another chain of
consequences. And this Hypothesis will be enough to secure the possibility of
Witches and Apparitions: and that all the upper Stories of the Universe are
furnished with Inhabitants, it is infinitely reasonable to conclude from the
analogy of Nature: Since we see there is nothing so contemptible and vile in
the world we reside in, but has its living creatures that dwell upon it; the
Earth, the Water, the inferior Air; the Bodies of Animals, the flesh, the
skin, the entrails; the leaves, the roots, the stalks of Vegetables; yea and
all kind of Minerals in the subterraneous Regions: I say, all these have their
proper Inhabitants; yea, I suppose this Rule may hold in all distinct kinds of
bodies in the world, That they have their peculiar Animals. The certainty of
which I believe the improvement of microscopical observation will discover.
From whence I infer, That since this little spot is so thickly peopled in every
Atom of it, it is weakness to think that all the vast spaces above, and hollows
under ground, are desert and uninhabited. And if both the superior and lower
Continents of the Universe have their inhabitants also, it is exceedingly
improbable, arguing from the same analogy, that they are all of the mere
sensible nature, but that there are at least some of the Rational and
Intellectual Orders. Which supposed, there is good foundation for the belief of
Witches and Apparitions, though the notion of a Spirit should prove absurd and
unphilosophical. And so this first Objection comes to nothing. I descend then
to the second Prejudice, which may be thus formed in behalf of the Objectors.

(2) There are Actions in most of those Relations ascribed to Witches, which
are ridiculous and impossible in the nature of things; such are (1) their
flying out of windows, after they have anointed themselves, to remote places.
(2) Their transformation into Cats, Hares, and other Creatures. (3) Their
feeling all the hurts in their own bodies which they have received in these.
(4) Their rasing Tempests, by muttering some nonsensical words, or performing
some little ridiculous ceremonies. And (5) their being sucked in a certain
private place of their bodies by a Familiar. These are presumed to be actions
inconsistent with the nature of Spirits, and above the powers of those poor and
miserable Agents. And therefore the Objection supposes them performed only by
the fancy; and that the whole mystery of Witchcraft is but an illusion of
crasie imagination.

But to this Objection I return, (1) in the general, The more absurd and
unaccountable these actions seem, the greater confirmations are they to me of
the truth of those Relations, and the reality of what the Objectors would
destroy. For these circumstances being exceeding unlikely, judging by the
measures of common belief, it is the greater probability they are not
fictitious; For the contrivers of Fictions use to form them as near as they can
conformably to the most unsuspected realities, endeavoring to make them look
as like truth as is possible in the main supposals, though withal they make
them strange in the circumstance. None but a fool or madman would relate with
a purpose of having it believed, that he saw in Ireland, Men with hoofs on
their heads, and eyes in their posteriors; or, if any should be so ridiculously
vain, as to be serious in such an incredible Romance, it cannot be supposed
that all Travelers that come into those parts after him should tell the same
story. There is large field in fiction; and if all those Relations were
arbitrary compositions, doubtless the first Romancers would have framed them
more agreeable to the common doctrine of Spirits; at least, after these
supposed absurdities had been a thousand times laughed at, people by this time
would have learned to correct those obnoxious extravagancies; and though they
have not yet more veracity than the Ages of Ignorance and Superstition, yet one
would expect they should have got more cunning. This supposed impossibility
then of these performances, seems to me a probable argument that they are not
wilful and designed forgeries. And if they are Phancyes, it is somewhat strange
that Imagination which is the most various thing in all the world, should
infinitely repeat he same conceit in all times and places.

But again (2) the strange Actions related of Witches, and presumed impossible,
are not ascribed to their own powers; but to the Agency of those wicked
Confederates they employ: And to affirm that those evil spirits cannot do that
which we conceit impossible, is boldly to stint the powers of Creatures, whose
natures and faculties we know not, and to measure the world of spirits by the
narrow rules of our own impotent beings. We see among our selves the
performances of some out-go the conceits and possibilities of others; and we
know many things may be done by the Mathematics, and Mechanic Artifice, which
common heads think impossible to be effected by the honest ways of Art and
Nature. And doubtless the subtilties and powers of those mischievous Fiends are
as much beyond the reach and activities of the most knowing Agents among us, as
theirs are beyond the wit and ability of the most rustic and illiterate; So
that the utmost that any man's reason in the world can amount to in this
particular, is only this, that he cannot conceive how such things can be
performed; which only argues the weakness and imperfection of our knowledge
and apprehensions, not the impossibility of those performances; and we can no
more from hence form an Argument against them, then against the most ordinary
effects in Nature. We cannot conceive how the Faetus is formed in the womb, nor
as much as how a Plant springs from the Earth we tread on; we know not how our
Souls move the Body, nor how these distant and extreme natures and united; And
if we are ignorant of the most obvious things about us, and the most
considerable within our selves, it is then no wonder that we know not the
constitution and powers of the Creatures, to whom we are such strangers.
Briefly then, matters of fact well proved ought not to be denied, because we
cannot conceive how they can be performed. Nor is it a reasonable method of
inference, first to presume the thing impossible, and thence to conclude that
the fact cannot be proved. On the contrary, we should judge of the action hy
the evidence, and not the evidence by the measures of our fancies about the
action. This is proudly to exalt our own opinions above the clearest
testimonies, and most sensible demonstrations of fact: and so to give the Lie
to all Mankind, rather then distrust the little conceits of our bold
imaginations. But yet further,

(3.) I think there is nothing in the instances mentioned, but what may as well
be accounted for the Rules of Reason and Philosophy as the ordinary affairs of
Nature. For in resolving natural Phenomenon, we can only assign the probable
causes, showing how things may be, not presuming how they are. And in the
particulars under our Examen, we may give an account how it is possible, and not
unlikely, that such things (though somewhat varying from the common rode of
Nature) may be acted. And if our narrow and contracted minds can furnish us
with apprehensions of the way and manner of such performances, though perhaps
not the true ones, it is an argument that such things may be effected by
creatures, whose powers and knowledge are so vastly exceeding ours. I shall
endeavor therefore briefly to suggest some things that may render the
possibility of these performances conceivable, in order to the removal of this
Objection, that they are contradictions and impossible.

For the First then, That the confederate Spirit should transport the Witch
through the Air to the place of general Rendezvous, there is no difficulty in
conceiving; and if that be true which great Philosophers affirm concerning the
real separability of the Soul from the Body without death, there is yet less;
for then it is easy to apprehend, that the Soul, having left its gross and
sluggish Body behind it, and being clothed only with its immediate vehicle of
Air, or more subtle matter, may be quickly conducted to any place it would be
at, by those officious Spirits that attend it. And though I adventure to affirm
nothing concerning the truth and certainty of this supposition, yet I must
needs say, it does not seem to me unreasonable. And our experience of
Apoplexies, Epilepsies, Ecstasies, and the strange things men report to have
seen during those deliquiums, look favorably upon this conjecture; which seems
to me to contradict no principle of Reason or Philosophy, since Death consists
not so much in the actual separation of Soul and Body, as in the indisposition
and unfitness of the Body for vital union, as an excellent Philosopher has
made good. On which Hypothesis, the Witches anointing her self before she
takes her flight, may perhaps serve to keep the Body tenantable and in fit
disposition to receive the Spirit at its return. These things, I say, we may
conceive, though I affirm nothing about them; and there is nothing in such
conceptions but what has been affirmed by men of worth and name, and may seem
fair and accountable enough to those who judge nor altogether by the measures
of the popular and customary opinion. And there is a saying of a great Apostle
that seems to countenance this Platonic opinion; what is the meaning else of
that expression, [ Whether in the body or out of the body I cannot tell] except
the Soul may be separated from the Body without death; which if it be granted
possible, it is sufficient for my purpose. And

(2) The Transformations of Witches into the shapes of other Animals, upon the
same supposal is very conceivable, since then it is easy enough to imagine, that
the power of imagination may form those passive and pliable vehicles into those
shapes, with more ease then the fancy of the Mother can the stubborn matter of
the Foetus in the womb, as we see it frequently does in the instances that
occur of Signatures and monstrous Singularities; And perhaps sometimes the
confederate Spirit puts tricks upon the senses of the spectators, and those
shapes are only illusions.

But then (3) when they feel the hurts in their gross bodies, that they receive
in their aerie vehicles, they must be supposed to have been really present, at
least in these latter; and it is no more difficult to apprehend how the hurts of
those should be translated upon their other bodies, then how diseases should be
inflicted by the imagination, or how the fancy of the Mother should wound the
Foetus, as several credible relations do attest.

And (4) for their raising storms and tempests, they do it not, be sure, by
their own, but by the power of the Prince of the Air, their friend and allie;
and the Ceremonies that are enjoined them, are doubtless nothing else but
entertainments for their imaginations, and are likely designed to persuade
them, that they do these strange things themselves.

And (lastly) for their being sucked by the Familiar, I say (1) we know so
little of the nature of Demons and Spirits, that it is no wonder we cannot
certainly divine the reason of so strange an action. And yet (2) we may
conjecture at some things that may render it less imporbable. For some have
thought that the Genii (whom both the Platonical and Christian Antiquity
thought embodied) are recreated by the reeks and vapors of humane blood and
the spirits that derive from them. Which supposal (if we grant them bodies) is
not unlikely, every thing being refreshed and nourished by its like. And that
they are not perfectly abstract from all body and matter, besides the reverence
we owe to the wisest antiquity, there are several considerable arguments I
could allege to render it exceeding probable. Which things supposed, the
Devil's sucking the Sorceress is no great wonder, nor difficult to be accounted
for. Or perhaps (3) this may be only a diabolical Sacrament and Ceremony to
confirm the hellish covenant. To which I add, (4) That which to me seems most
probable, viz. Tha the Familiar does not only suck the Witch, but in the
action infuseth some poisonous ferment into her, which gives her imagination
and spirits a magical tincture, whereby they become mischievously influential:
and the word venefica intimates some such matter. Now that the imagination has
a mighty power in operation, is seen in the just now mentioned Signatures and
Diseases that it causes; and that the fancy is modified by the qualities of th
blood and spirits, is too evident to need proof: which things supposed, it is
plain to conceive that the evil spirit having breathed some vile vapor into
the body of the Witch, it may taint her blood and spirits with a noxious
quality, by which her infected imagination, heightened by melancholy, and this
worse cause, may do much hurt upon bodies that are impressive by such
influences. And it is very likely that this ferment disposes the imagination of
the Sorceress to cause the mentioned (...), or separation of the soul from the
body, and may perhaps keep the body in fit temper for its re-entry; as also it
may facilitate transformation, which, it may be, could not be effected by
ordinary and unassisted imagination.

Thus we see it is not so desperate to form an apprehension of the manner of
these odd performances; and though they are not done the way I have described,
yet what I have said may help us to a conceit of the possibility, which
suffices for my purpose. And though the Hypothesis I have gone upon will seem
as unlikely to some, as the things they attempt to explain are to others, yet I
must desire their leave to suggest, that most things seem unlikely (especially
to the conceited and opinionative) at first proposal; and many great truths are
strange and improbable, till custom and acquaintance have reconciled them to
our fancies. And I Will presume to add on this occasion, (though I love not to
be confident in affirming) that there is none of the Platonical supposals I
have used, but what I could make appear to be fair and reasonable, to the
capable and unprejudiced.

But I come (3) to another prejudice against the being of Witches, which is,
That it is very improbable that the Devil who is a wise and mighty spirit,
should be at the beck of a poor Hag, and have so little to do as to attend the
errands of the impotent lusts of a silly old woman.

To which I might answer, (1) That it is much more improbable that all the world
should be deceived in matters of fact, and circumstances of the clearest
evidence and conviction, than that the Devil, who is wicked, should be also
unwise; and that he that persuades all his subjects and accomplices out of
their wits, should himself act like his own temptations and persuasions. In
brief, there is nothing more strange in this objection, than that wickedness is
baseness and servility, and that the Devil is at leisure to serve those he is
at leisure to tempt, and industrious to ruin. And again, (2) I see no necessity
to believe that the Devil is always the Witch's confederate; but perhaps it may
fitly be considered, whether the Familiar be not some departed humane spirit,
forsaken of God and goodness, and swallowed up by the unsatiable desire of
mischief and revenge, which possibly by the laws and capacity of its state it
cannot execute immediately. And why we should presume that the Devil should
have the liberty of wandering up and down the Earth and Air, when he is said to
be held in the chains of darkness; and yet that the separated souls of the
wicked, of whom no such thing is affirmed in any Sacred Record, should be
thought so imprisoned, that they cannot possibly wag from the place of their
confinement, I know no shadow of conjecture. This conceit I Am confident has
prejudiced many against the belief of Witches and Apparitions, they not being
able to conceive that the Devil should be so ludricous as appearing spirits are
sometimes reported to be in their frolicks; and they presume, that souls
departed never re-visit the free and open Regions; which confidence I know
nothing to justify: For since good men in their state of separation are said
to be (...), why the wicked may not be supposed to be (...) in the worst sense
of the word, I know nothing to help me to imagine. And if it be supposed that
the Imps of Witches are sometimes wicked spirits of our own kind and nature,
and possibly the same that have been Sorcerers and Witches in this life: This
supposal may give a fairer and more probable account of many of the actions of
Sorcery and Witchcraft, than the other Hypothesis, that they are always Devils.
And to this conjecture I Will adventure to subjoyn another, which also has its
probability, viz. (3) That it is not impossible but that the Familiars of
Witches are a servile kind of spirits, of a very inferior constitution and
nature, and none of those that were once of the highest Hierarchy, now
degenerated into the spirits we call Devils. And for my part I must confess,
that I think the common division of spirits much too general, conceiving it
likely there may be as great a variety of Intellectual creatures in the
invisible world, as there is of Animals in the visible: and that all the
superior, yea, and inferior Regions, have their several kinds of spirits,
differing in their natural perfections, as well as in the kinds and degrees of
their depravities; which being supposed, it is very probable that those of the
basest and meanest Orders are they, who submit to the mentioned servilities.
And thus the sagess and grandeur of the Prince of darkness need not be brought
into question.

But (4) the opinion of Witches seems to some to accuse Providence, and to
suggest that it has exposed Innocents to the fury and malice of revengeful
Fiends; yea, and supposes those most obnoxious, for whom we might most
reasonably expect a more special tutelary care and protection, most of the
cruel practices of those presumed Instruments of Hell being upon Children, who
as they least deserve to be deserted by that Providence that superintends all
things, so they most need its guardian influence.

To this so specious an Objection I have these things to answer. (1) Providence
is a Deep unfathomable; and if we should not believe the Phoenomena of our
senses, before we can reconcile them to our notions of Providence, we must be
groffer Scepticks than ever yet was extant. The miseries of the present life,
the unequal distributions of good and evil, the ignorance and barbarity of the
greatest part of mankind, the fatal disadvantages we are all under, and the
hazard we run of being eternally miserable and undone; these, I say, are things
that can hardly be made consistent with that Wisdom and Goodness that we are
sure has made, and mingled it self with all things. And yet we believe there
is a beauty and harmony, and goodness in that Providence, though we cannot
unriddle it in particular instances; nor, by reason of our ignorance and
imperfection, clear it from contradicting appearances; and consequently, we
ought not to deny the being of Witches and Apparitions, because they will
create us some difficulties in our notions of Providence. But to come more
close, (2) Those that believe that Infants are Heirs of Hell and Children of
the Devil as soon as they are disclosed to the world, cannot certainly offer
such an objection; for what is a little trifling pain of a moment, to those
eternal tortures, to which, if they die as soon as they are born, according to
the tenor of this Doctrine, they are everlastingly exposed? But however the
case stands as to that, it is certain, (3) That Providence has not secured them
from other violences they are obnoxious to from cruelty and accident; and yet
we accuse It not when a whole Townful of Innocents fall a Victim to the rage
and ferity of barbarous executioners in wars and Massacres. To which I add,
(4) That it is likely the mischief is not so often done by the evil spirit
immediately, but by the malignant influence of the Sorceress, whose power of
hurting consists in the forementioned ferment, which is infused into her by
the Familiar. So that I am apt to think there may be a power of real
fascination in the Witch's eyes and imagination, by which for the most part she
acts upon tender bodies. Nescio quis teneros oculus -- For the pestilential
spirits being darted by a sprightful and vigorous imagination from the eye, and
meeting with those that are weak and passive in the bodies which they enter,
will not fail to infect them with a noxious quality, that makes dangerous and
strange alterations in the person invaded by this poisonous influence: which
way of acting by subtle and invisible instruments is ordinary, and familiar in
all natural efficiencies. And it is now past question, that nature for the most
part acts by subtle streams and aporhaea's of minute particles, which pass from
one body to another. Or however that be, this kind of agency is as conceivable
as any of those qualities ignorance has called sympathy and antipathy, the
reality of which we doubt not, though the manner of action be unknown. Yea, the
thing I speak of is as easy to be apprehended, as how infection should pass in
certain tenuious streams through the air from one house to another; or, as how
the biting of a mad Dog should fill all the blood and spirits with a venomous
and malign ferment; the application of the virtue doing the same in our case,
as that of contract does in this. Yea, some kinds of fascination are performed
in this grosser and more sensible way, as by striking, giving Apples, and the
like, by which the contagious quality may be transmitted, as we see diseases
often are by the touch. Now in this way of conjecture, a good account may be
given why Witches are most powerful upon Children and timorous persons, viz.
because their spirits and imaginations being weak and passive, are not able to
resist the fatal invasion; whereas men of bold minds, who have plenty of strong
and vigorous spirits are secure from the contagion, as in pestilential Airs
clean bodies are not so liable to infection as are other tempers. Thus then we
see it is likely enough that very often the Sorceress her self does the
mischief; and we know, de facto, that Providence does not always secure us from
one another's injuries. And yet I must confess, that many times also the evil
spirit is the mischievous Agent; though this confession draw on me another
objection, which I next propose.

(5) Then it may be said, that if wicked spirits can hurt us by the direction,
and at the desire of a Witch, one would think they should have the same power
to do us injury without instigation or compact; and if this be granted, it is a
wonder that we are not always annoi'd and infested by them. To which

I return, (1) That the laws, liberties and restraints of the inhabitants of
the other world are to us utterly unknown; and this way we can only argue our
selves into confessions of our ignorance, which every man must acknowledge that
is not as immodest as ignorant. It must be granted by all that own the being,
power and malice of evil spirits, that the security we enjoy is wonderful,
whether they act by Witches or not; and by what Laws they are kept from making
us a prey, to speak like Philosophers, we cannot tell: yea, why they should be
permitted to tempt and ruin us in our Souls, and restrained from touching or
hurting us in our Bodies, is a mystery not easily accountable. But yet (2)
though we acknowledge their power to vex and torment us in our bodies also, yet
a reason may be given why they are less frequent in this kind of mischief, viz.
because their main designs are levelled against the interest and happiness of
our Souls, which they can best promote, when their actions are most sly and
secret; whereas did they ordinarily persecute men in their bodies, their agency
and wicked influence would be discovered, and make a mighty noise in the world,
whereby men would be awakened to a more suitable and vigorous opposition, by
the use of such means as would engage Providence to rescue them from their rage
and cruelties, and at last defeat them in their great purposes of undoing us
eternally. Thus we may conceive that the security we enjoy may well enough
consist with the power and malice of those evil spirits; and upon this account
we may suppose that Laws of their own may prohibit their unlicens'd injuries,
not from any goodness there is in their Constitutions, but in order to the more
successful carrying on the projects of the dark Kingdom; as Generals forbid
plunder, not out of love to their Enemies, but in order to their own success.
And hence (3) we may suppose a Law of permission to hurt us at the instance of
the Sorceress, may well stand with the polity of Hell, since by gratifying the
wicked person they encourage her in malice and revenge, and promote thereby the
main ends of their black confederacy, which are to propagate wickedness, and to
ruin us in our eternal interests. And yet (4) it is clear to those that believe
the History of the Gospel, that wicked spirits have vexed the bodies of men,
without any instigation that we read of; and at this day it is very likely that
many of the strange accidents and diseases that befall us, may be the
infliction of evil spirits, prompted to hurt us only by the delight they take
in mischief. So that we cannot argue the improbability of their hurting
Children and others by Witches, from our own security and freedom from the
effects of their malice, which perhaps we feel in more instances than we are
aware of.

But (6) another prejudice against the belief of Witches, is, a presumption
upon the enormous forces of melancholy and imagination, which without doubt can
do wonderful things, and beget strange persuasions; and to these causes some
ascribe the presumed effects of Sorcery and Witchraft. To which I reply
briefly, and yet I hope sufficiently;

(1) That to resolve all the clear circumstances of fact, which we find in well
attested and confirmed Relations of this kind, into the power of deceivable
imagination, is to make fancy the greater prodigy, and to suppose, that it can
do stranger feats than are believed of any other kind of fascination. And to
think that Pins and Nails, for instance, can, by the power of imagination be
conveyed within the skin, or that imagination, should deceive so many as have
been witnesses in objects of sense, in all the circumstances of discovery;
this, I say, is to be infinitely more credulous than the assertors of Sorcery
and Demoniack contracts. And by the same reason it may be believed, that all
the Battles and strange events of the world, which our selves have not seen,
are but dreams and fond imaginations, and like those that are fought in the
clouds, when the brains of the deluded spectators are the only Theater of
those fancied transactions. And (2) to deny evidence of fact, because their
imagination may deceive the Relators, when we have no reason to think so but a
bare presumption, that there is no such thing as is related, is quite to
destroy the credit of all humane testimony, and to make all men liars in a
larger sense than the Prophet concluded in his haste. For not only the
melancholic and the fanciful, but the grave and the sober, whose judgments we
have no reason to suspect to be tainted by their imaginations, have from their
own knowledge and experience made reports of this nature. But to this it will
possibly be rejoined, the Reply will be another prejudice against the belief I
contend for, viz.

(7) That it is a suspicious circumstance that Witchcraft is but a fancy, since
the persons that are accused are commonly poor and miserable old women, who are
overgrown with discontent and melancholy, which are very imaginative; and the
persons said to be bewitched are for the most part Children, or people very
weak, who are easily imposed upon, and are apt to receive strong impressions
from nothing: whereas were there any such thing really, it is not likely, but
that the more cunning and subtle desperado's, who might the more successfully
carry on the mischievous designs of the dark Kingdom, should be oftener engaged
in those black confederacies, and also one would expect effects of the hellish
combination upon others than the innocent and the ignorant.

To which Objection it might perhaps be enough to return (as has been above
suggested) that nothing can be concluded by this and such like arguings, but
that the policy and menages of the instruments of darkness are to us altogether
unknown, and as much in the dark as their natures, mankind being no more
acquainted with the reasons and methods of action in the other world, than poor
Cottagers and Mechanics are with the intriques of Government and reasons of
State. Yea peradventure (2) it is one of the great designs, as it is certainly
the interest, of those wicked Agents and Machinators, industriously to hide
from us their influences and ways of acting, and to work, as near as is
possible, incognito; upon which supposal it is easy to conceive a reason, why
they most commonly work by, and upon the weak and the ignorant, who can make no
cunning observations, or tell credible tales to detect their artifice. Besides
(3) it is likely a strong imagination, that cannot be weakened or disturbed by a
busy and subtle ratiocination, is a necessary requisite to those wicked
performances; and without doubt an heightened and obstinate fancy has a great
influence upon impressive spirits; yea, and as I have conjectured before, on
the more passive and susceptible bodies. And I am very apt to believe, that
there are as real communications and intercourses between our spirits, as there
are between material agents; which secret influences, though they are unknown
in their nature, and ways of acting, yet they are sufficiently felt in their
effects: for experience attests, that some by the very majesty and greatness of
their spirits, discovered by nothing but a certain noble air that accompanies
them, will bear down others less great and generous, and make them sneak before
them; and some, by I know not what stupifying virtue, will tie up the tongue,
and confine the spirits of those who are otherwise brisk and voluble. Which
thing supposed, the influences of a spirit possessed of an active and enormous
imagination, may be malign and fatal where they cannot be resisted, especially
when they are accompanied by those poisonous reaks that the evil spirit breaths
into the Sorceress, which likely are shot out, and applied by a fancy heightened
and prepared by melancholy and discontent. And thus we may conceive why the
melancholic and envious are used upon such occasions, and for the same reason
the ignorant, since knowledge checks and controls imagination; and those that
abound much in the imaginative faculties do not usually exceed in the rational.
And perhaps (4) the Demon himself uses the imagination of the Witch so
qualified for his purpose, even in those actions of mischief which are more
properly his; for it is most probable, that spirits act not upon bodies
immediately, and by their naked essence, but by means proportionate and
suitable in instruments that they use; upon which account likely it is so
strictly required, that the Sorceress should believe, that so her imagination
might be more at the devotion of the mischievous Agent. And for the same reason
also Ceremonies are used in Enchantments, viz. for the begetting this
diabolical faith, and heightning the fancy to a degree of strength and vigor
sufficient to make it a fit instrument for the designed performance. And these
I think are reasons of likelihood and probability, why the hellish confederates
are mostly the ignorant and the melancholic. To pass then to another prejudice.

(8) The frequent impostures that are met with in this kind, beget in some a
belief, that all such relations are forgeries and tales; and if we urge the
evidence of a story for the belief of Witches or Apparitions, they will produce
two as seemingly strong and plausible, which shall conclude in mistake or
design; inferring thence, that all others are of the same quality and credit.
But such arguers may please to consider,

(1) That a single relation for an Affirmative, sufficiently confirmed and
attested, is worth a thousand tales of forgery and imposture, from whence
cannot be concluded an universal negative. So that, though all the Objectors
stories be true, and an hundred times as many more such deceptions; yet one
relation, wherein no fallacy or fraud could be suspected for our Affirmative,
would spoil any Conclusion could be erected on them. And

(2) It seems to me a belief sufficiently bold and precarious, that all these
relations of forgery and mistake should be certain, and not one in millions of
those which attest the affirmative reality, with circumstances as good as could
be expected, or wished, should be true, but all fabulous and vain. And they
have no reason to object credulity to the assertors of Sorcery and Witchcraft,
that can swallow so large a morsel. And I desire such Objectors to consider,

(3) Whether it be fair to infer, that because there are some Cheats and
Impostures, that therefore there are no Realities. Indeed frequency of deceit
and fallacy will warrant a greater care and caution in examining, and
scrupulosity and shiness of assent to things wherein fraud has been practiced,
or may in the least degree be suspected. But, to conclude, because that an old
woman's fancy abused her, or some knavish fellows put tricks upon the ignorant
and the timorous, that therefore whole Assizes have been a thousand times
deceived in judgments upon matters of fact, and numbers of sober persons have
been forsworn in things wherein perjury could not advantage them; I say, such
inferences are as void of reason, as they are of charity and good manners.

But it may be suggested further, (9) That it cannot be imagined what design
the Devil should have in making those solemn compacts, since persons of such
debauched and irreclaimable dispositions as those with whom he is supposed to
confederate, are pretty securely his, antecedently to the bargain, and cannot
be more so by it, since they cannot put their souls out of possibility of the
Divine Grace but by the Sin that is unpardonable; or, if they could so dispose
and give away themselves, it will to some seem very unlikely, that a great and
mighty Spirit should oblige himself to such observances, and keep such a-do to
secure the soul of a silly body, which 'twere odds but it would be His though
He put himself to no further trouble than that of his ordinary temptations.

To which suggestions 'twere enough to say, that it is sufficient if the thing
be well proved, though the design be not known. And to argue negatively a fine,
is very unconclusive in such matters. The Laws and affairs of the other world
(as has been intimated) are vastly differing from those of our Regions, and
therefore it is no wonder we cannot judge of their designs, when we know nothing
of their menages, and so little of their natures. The ignorant looker-on cannot
imagine what the Limner means by those seemingly rude lines and scrawls which
he intends for the rudiments of a Picture; and the Figures of Mathematick
Operation are nonsense, and dashes at a venture to one uninstructed in
Mechanics. We are in the dark to one another's purposes and intendments; and
there are a thousand intrigues in our little matters, which will not presently
confess their design even to sagacious inquisitors. And therefore it is folly
and incogitancy to argue any thing one way or other from the designs of a sort
of Beings, with whom we so little communicate; and possibly we can take no more
aim or guess at their projects and designments, than the gazing Beasts can do
at ours, when they see the Traps and Gins that are laid for them, but
understand nothing what they mean. Thus in general.

But I attempt something more particularly, in order to which I must premise
that the Devil is a name for a Body Politic, in which there are very different
Orders and Degrees of Spirits, and perhaps in as much variety of place and
state, as among our selves; so that it is not one and the same person that makes
all the compacts with those abused and seduced Souls, but they are diverse, and
those it is like of the meanest and basest quality in the Kingdom of darkness;
which being supposed, I offer this account of the probable design of those
wicked Agents, viz. That having none to rule or tyrannize over within the
Circle of their own nature and government, they affect a proud Empire over us
(the desire of Dominion and Authority being largely spread through the whole
circumference of degenerated nature, especially among those, whose pride was
their original transgression) every one of these then desires to get him
Vassals to pay him homage, and to be employed like Slaves in the services of
his lusts and appetites; to gratify which desire, it is like enough to be
provided and allowed by the constitution of their State and Government, that
every wicked spirit shall have those Souls as his property, and particular
servants and attendants, whom he can catch in such compacts, as those wild
Beasts that we can take in hunting, are by the allowance of the Law our own;
and those Slaves that a man has purchased, are his peculiar goods, and the
vassals of his will. Or rather those deluding Fiends are like the seducing
fellows we call Spirits, who inveigle Children by their false and flattering
promises, and carry them away to the Plantations of America, to be servilly
employed there in the works of their own profit and advantage. And as those
base Agents will humor and flatter the simple unwary Youth, till they are on
Shipboard, and without the reach of those that might rescue them from their
hands: In like manner the more mischievous Tempter studies to gratify, please,
and accommodate to those he deals with in this kind, till death has lanch'd
them into the Deep, and they are past the danger of Prayers, Repentance, and
Endeavors; and then He uses them as pleases Him. This account I think is not
unreasonable, and 'twill fully answer the Objection. For though the matter be
not as I have conjectured, yet 'twill suggest a way how it may be conceived,
which nulls the pretense, That the Design is inconceiveable.

But then we are still liable to be questioned, (10) how it comes about, that
those proud and insolent Designers practice in this kind upon so few, when one
would expect, that they should be still trading this way, and everywhere be
driving on the project, which the vileness of men makes so feisable, and would
so much serve the interest of their lusts.

To which, among other things that might be suggested, I return, (1) That we
are never liable to be so betrayed and abused, till by our vile dispositions
and tendencies we have forfeited the tutelary care and oversight of the better
Spirits; which, though generally they are our guard and defense against the
malice and violence of evil Angels, yet it may well enough be thought that
sometimes they may take their leave of such as are swallowed up by malice,
envy, and desire of revenge, qualities most contrary to their Life and Nature,
and leave them exposed to the invasion and solicitations of those wicked
Spirits, to whom such hateful Attributes make them very suitable. And if there
be particular guardian Angels, as it is not absurd to fancy, it may then well be
supposed, that no man is obnoxious to those projects and attempts, but only
such whose vile and mischievous natures have driven from them their protecting
Genius. And against this dereliction to the power of evil spirits, it is likely
enough what some affirm, that the Royal Psalmist directs that Prayer, Psalm. 71.
9, 10. Cast me not off in the time of old age, forsake me not when my strength
fails. For -- They that keep my soul [(...), as the LXX and the Vulgar Latin,
Qui custodiunt animam meam] they take counsel together, saying, God has
forsaken him, persecute him and take him, for there is none to deliver him. But
I add, (2) That it is very probable, that the state wherein they are, will not
easily permit palpable intercourses between the bad Genii and our nature, since
it is like enough that their own Laws and Government do not allow their frequent
excursions into this world. Or, it may with as great probability be supposed,
that it is a very hard and painful thing for them, to force their thin and
tenuious bodies into a visible consistence, and such shapes as are necessary
for their designs in their correspondencies with Witches. For in this action
their bodies must needs be exceedingly compressed, which cannot be well
supposed without a painful sense. And this is perhaps a reason why there are so
few Apparitions, and why appearing spirits are commonly in such haste to be
gone, viz. that they may be delivered from the unnatural pressure of their
tender Vehicles, which I confess holds more in the apparitions of good than of
evil Spirits, most Relations of this kind, describing their discoveries of
themselves, as very transient, (though for those the Holy Scripture records,
there may be peculiar Reasons why they are not so) whereas the wicked ones are
not altogether so quick and hasty in their Visits: The reason of which probably
is, the great subtilty and tenuity of the bodies of the former, which will
require far greater degrees of compression, and consequently of pain, to make
them visible; whereas the latter, are more foeculent and gross, and so nearer
allied to palpable consistencies, and more easily reduceable to appearance and
visibility.

At this turn, Sir, you may perceive that I have again made use of the
Platonic Hypothesis, That Spirits are Embodyed, upon which indeed a great part
of my Discourse is grounded: And therefore I hold my self obliged to a short
account of that supposal. It seems then to me very probable from the Nature of
Sense, and Analogy of Nature For (1.) We perceive in our selves, that all
Sense is caused and excited by motion made in matter; And when those motions
which convey sensible impressions to the Brain, the Seat of Sense, are
intercepted, Sense is lost: So that, if we suppose Spirits perfectly to be
disjoined from all matter, it is not conceivable how they can have the sense of
any thing: For how material Objects should any way be perceived, or felt
without vital union with matter, it is not possible to imagine. Nor does it (2.)
seem suitable to the Analogy of Nature, which uses not to make precipitious
leaps from one thing to another, but usually proceeds by orderly steps and
gradations: whereas were there no order of Beings between us, who are so deeply
plunged into the grossest matter, and pure unbodied Spirits, 'twere a mighty
jump in Nature. Since then the greatest part of the World consists of the finer
portions of matter, and our own Souls are immediately united unto these, it is
infinitely probable to conjecture, that the nearer orders of Spirits are
vitally joined to such Bodies. And so Nature by Degrees ascending still by the
more refined and subtle matter, gets at last to the pure (...) or immaterial
minds, which the Platonists made the highest Order of created Beings. But of
this I have discoursed elsewhere, and have said thus much of it at present,
because it will enable me to add another Reason of the unfrequency of
Apparitions and Compacts, viz.

(3.) Because it is very likely, that these Regions are very unsuitable, and
disproportioned to the frame and temper of their Senses and Bodies; so that
perhaps, the Courser Spirits can no more bear the Air of our World, then Batts
and Owls can the brightest beams of Day. Nor can the Purer and Better any more
endure the noysom steams, and poisonous reeks of this Dunghill Earth, then the
Delicate can bear a confinement in nasty Dungeons, and the foul squallid
Caverns of uncomfortable Darkness So that it is no more wonder, that the better
Spirits no oftener appear, than that men are not more frequently in the Dark
Hollows under ground. Nor is it any more strange that evil Spirits so rarely
visit us, then that Fishes do not ordinarily fly in the Air, as it is said one
sort of them does; or that we see not the Batt daily fluttering in the beams of
the Sun. And now by the help of what I have spoken under this Head, I am
provided with some things wherewith to disable another Objection, which I thus
propose:

(XI.) If there be such an intercourse between Evil Spirits and the Wicked, how
comes it about that there is no correspondence between Good Spirits and the
Virtuous? since without doubt, these are as desirous to propagate the Spirit
and Designs of the upper and better World, as those are to promote the
Interest of the Kingdom of Darkness.

Which way of arguing is still from our Ignorance of the State and Government
of the other World, which must be confessed, and may, without prejudice to the
Proposition I defend. But particularly, I say, (1.) That we have ground enough
to believe, that Good Spirits do interpose in, yea, and govern our Affairs. For
that there is a Providence reaching from Heaven to Earth, is generally
acknowledged; but that this supposes all things to be ordered by the immediate
influence, and interposal of the Supreme Deity, is not very Philosophical to
suppose; since if we judge by the Analogy of the Natural World, all things we
see are carried on by the Ministry of Second Causes, and intermediate Agents.
And it does not seem so Magnificent and Becoming an apprehension of the Supreme
Numen, to fancy His immediate Hand in every trivial Management. But it is
exceeding likely to conjecture, that much of the Government of us, and our
Affairs, is committed to the better Spirits, with a due subordination and
subserviency to the Will of the chief Rector of the Universe. And it is not
absurd to believe, that there is a Government runs from Highest to Lowest, the
better and more perfect orders of Being, still ruling the inferior and less
perfect. So that some one would fancy that perhaps the Angels may manage us,
as we do the Creatures that God and Nature have placed under our Empire and
Dominion. But however that is, That God rules the lower World by the Ministry
of Angels, is very consonant to the sacred Oracles. Thus, Deuteronomy. XXXII. viii,
ix. When the Most High divided the Nations their inheritance, when he separated
the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the people, (...), according to the
number of the Angels of God, as the Septuagint renders it; the Authority of
which Translation, is abundantly credited and asserted, by its being quoted in
the New Testament, without notice of the Hebrew Text, even there where it
differs from it, as learned men have observed. We know also, that Angels were
very familiar with the Patriarchs of old; and Jacob's Ladder is a Mystery,
which imports their ministering in the affairs of the Lower World. Thus Origin
and others understand, that to be spoken by the Presidential Angels, Jer. LI.
ix. We would have healed BABYLON, but she is not healed, forsake her, and let
us go. Like the Voice heard in the Temple before the taking of Jerusalem by
Titus, (...). And before Nebuchadnezzar was sent to learn Wisdom and Religion
among the Beasts, He sees a Watcher, according to the 70. an Angel, and an holy
One come down from heaven, Dan. IV. xiii. who pronounces the sad Decree
against Him, and calls it the Decree of the Watchers, who very probably were
the Guardian Genii of Himself and his Kingdom. And that there are particular
Angels that have the special Rule and Government of particular Kingdoms,
Provinces, Cities, yea and of Persons, I know nothing that can make improbable:
The instance is notorious in Daniel, of the Angels of Persia and Graecia, that
hindered the other that was engaged for the concerns of Iudaea; yea, our Savior
Himself tells us, that Children have their Angels, and the Congregation of
Disciples supposed that St. Peter had his. Which things, if they be granted,
the good Spirits have not so little to do with us, and our matters, as is
generally believed. And perhaps it would not be absurd, if we referred many of
the strange thwarts, and unexpected events, the disappointments and lucky
coincidences that befall us, the unaccountable fortunes and successes that
attend some lucky men, and the unhappy fates that dog others that seem born to
be miserable; the Fame and Favor that still waits on some without any
conceivable motive to allure it, and the general neglect of others more
deserving, whose worth is not acknowledged; I say, these, and such like odd
things, may with the greatest probability be resolved into the Conduct and
Menages of those invisible Supervisors, that preside over, and govern our
affairs.

But if they so far concern themselves in our matters, how is it that they
appear not to maintain a visible and confessed correspondence with some of the
better Mortals, who are most fitted for their Communications and their
influence? To which I have said some things already, when I accounted for the
unfrequency of Apparitions; and I now add what I intend for another return to
the main Objection, viz.

(2.) That the apparition of good Spirits is not needful for the Designs of
the better World, whatever such may be for the interest of the other. For we
have had the Appearance and Cohabitation of the Son of God, we have Moses and
the Prophets, and the continued influence of the Spirit, the greatest Arguments
to strengthen Faith, the most powerful Motives to excite our Love, and the
Noblest Encouragements to quicken and raise our desires and hopes, any of which
are more than the apparition of an Angel; which would indeed be a great
gratification of the Animal Life, but 'twould render our Faith less noble and
less generous, were it frequently so assisted: Blessed are they that believe,
and yet have not seen. Besides which, the good Angels have no such ends to
prosecute, as the gaining any Vassals to serve them, they being ministering
Spirits for our good, and no self-designers for a proud and insolent Dominion
over us. And it may be perhaps not impertinently added, That they are not
always evil Spirits that appear, as is, I know not well upon what grounds,
generally imagined; but that the extraordinary detections of Murders, latent
Ireasures, falsified and unfulfill'd Bequests, which are sometimes made by
Apparitions, may be the courteous Discoveries of the better, and more benign
Genii. Yea, it is not unlikely, that those Warnings that the World sometimes
has of approaching Judgments and Calamities by Prodigies, and sundry odd
Phenomenon, are the kind Informations of some of the Inhabitants of the upper
World. Thus, was Jerusalem forewarned before its sacking by Antiochus, by those
Aerie Horsemen that were seen through all the City, for almost forty days
together, 2 Mac V. ii, iii. And the other Prodigious Portents that fore-ran its
Destruction by Titus: which I mention, because they are notorious instances.
And though, for mine own part, I scorn the ordinary Tales of Prodigies, which
proceed from superstitious fears, and unacquaintance with Nature, and have been
used to bad purposes by the Jealous and the Ignorant; Yet I think that the
Arguments that are brought by a late very ingenious Author, to conclude against
such Warnings and Predictions in the whole kind, are short and inconsequent,
and built upon too narrow Hypothesis. For if it be supposed, that there is a
sort of Spirits over us, and about us, who can give a probable guess at the
more remarkable futurities, I know not why it may not be conjectured, that the
kindness they have for us, and the appetite of foretelling strange things, and
the putting the World upon expectation, which we find is very grateful to our
own Natures, may not incline them also to give us some general notice of those
uncommon Events which they foresee. And I yet perceive no reason we have to
fancy, that whatever is done in this kind, must needs be either immediately
from Heaven, or from the Angels by extraordinary commission and appointment.
But it seems to me not unreasonable to believe, that those officious Spirits,
that oversee our affairs, perceiving some mighty and sad alterations at hand,
in which their Charge is much concerned, cannot choose, by reason of their
affection to us, but give us some seasonable hints of those approaching
Calamities; to which also their natural desire to foretell strange things to
come, may contribute to incline them. And by this Hypothesis, the fairest
probabilities, and strongest ratiotinations against Prodigies, may be made
unserviceable. But this only by the way. I proceed to the next Objection,
which may be made to speak thus:

(XII.) The belief of Witches, and the wonderful things they are said to
perform by the help of the Confederate Demon, weakens our Faith, and exposes
the World to lnfidelity in the great matters of our Religion. For if They by
Diabolical assistance, can inflict and cure Diseases, and do things so much
beyond the comprehension of our Philosophy, and activity of common Nature; What
assurance can we have, that the Miracles that confirm our Gospel were not the
effects of a Compact of like nature, and that Devils were not cast out by
Beelzebub? If evil Spirits can assume Bodies, and render themselves visible in
humane likeness; What security can we have of the reality of the Resurrection
of Christ? And if, by their help, Witches can enter Chambers invisibly through
Key-holes, and little unperceived Cranneys, and transform themselves at
pleasure; What Arguments of Divinity are there in our Savior's showing himself
in the midst of his Disciples, when the Doors were shut, and his
Transfiguration in the Mount? Miracles are the great inducements of Belief, and
How shall we distinguish a Miracle from a Lying Wonder; a Testimony from
Heaven, from a Trick of the Angels of Hell; if they can perform things that
astonish and confound our Reasons, and are beyond all the Possibilities of
Humane Nature? This Objection is spiteful and mischievous, but I thus endeavor
to dispatch it.

(1.) The Wonders done by Confederacy with wicked Spirits, cannot derive a
suspicion upon the undoubted Miracles that were wrought by the Author and
Promulgers of our Religion, as if they were performed by Diabolical Compact,
since their Spirit, Endeavors and Designs were notoriously contrary to all
the Tendencies, Aims and Interests of the Kingdom of Darkness. For, as to the
Life and Temper of the Blessed and Adorable JESUS, we know there was an
incomparable sweetness in his Nature, Humility in his Manners, Calmness in his
Temper, Compassion in his Miracles, Modesty in his Expressions, Holiness in all
his Actions, Hatred of Vice and Baseness, and Love to all the World; all which
are essentially contrary to the Nature and Constistitution of Apostate Spirits,
who abound in Pride and Rancour, Insolence and Rudeness, Tyranny and Baseness,
universal Malice, and Hatred of Men. And their Designs are as opposite, as
their Spirit and their Genius. And now, Can the Sun borrow its Light from the
bottomless Abyss? Can Heat and Warmth flow in upon the World from the Regions
of Snow and Ice? Can Fire freeze, and Water burn? Can Natures, so infinitely
contrary, communicate, and jump in projects, that are destructive to each
others known Interests? Is there any Balsome in the Cockatrice's Egg? or, Can
the Spirit of Life flow from the Venom of the Asp? Will the Prince of Darkness
strengthen the Arm that is stretched out to pluck his Usurped Scepter, and his
Spoils from him? And will he lend his Legions, to assist the Armies of his
Enemy against him? No, these are impossible Supposals; No intelligent Being
will industriously and knowingly contribute to the Contradiction of its own
Principles, the Defeature of its Purposes, and the Ruin of its own dearest
Interests. There is no fear then, that our Faith should receive prejudice from
the acknowledgment of the Being of Witches, and power of evil Spirits, since
it is not the doing wonderful things that is the only Evidence that the Holy
JESUS was from God, and his Doctrine true; but the conjunction of other
circumstances, the holiness of his Life, the reasonableness of his Religion,
and the excellency of his Designs, added credit to his Works, and strengthened
the great Conclusion, That he could be no other than the Son of God, and
Savior of the World. But besides, I say,

(2.) That since infinite Wisdom and Goodness rules the World, it cannot be
conceived, that they should give up the greatest part of men to unavoidable
deception. And if evil Angels, by their Confederates, are permitted to perform
such astonishing things, as seem so evidently to carry God's Seal and Power
with them, for the confirmation of Falsehoods, and gaining credit to Impostors,
without any counter-evidence to disabuse the World; Mankind is exposed to sad
and fatal delusion. And to say that Providence will suffer us to be deceived in
things of the greatest concernment, when we use the best of our care and
endeavors to prevent it, is to speak hard things of God; and in effect to
affirm, That He has nothing to do in the Government of the World, or does not
concern Himself in the affairs of poor forlorn Men. And if the Providence and
Goodness of God be not a security unto us against such Deceptions, we cannot be
assured, but that we are always abused by those mischievous Agents, in the
Objects of plain sense, and in all the matters of our daily Converses. If ONE
that pretends he is immediately sent from God, to overthrow the ancient Fabric
of Established Worship, and to erect a New Religion in His Name; shall be born
of a Virgin, and honored by a miraculous Star; proclaimed by a Song of seeming
Angels of Light, and Worshipped by the wise Sages of the World; Revered by
those of the greatest austerity, and admired by all for a miraculous Wisdom,
beyond his Education and his Years: If He shall feed Multitudes with almost
nothing, and fast himself beyond all the possibilities of Nature: If He shall
be transformed into the appearance of extraordinary Glory, and converse with
departed Prophets in their visible Forms: If He shall Cure all Diseases without
Physic or Endeavor, and raise the Dead to Life after they have stunk in their
Graves: If He shall be honored by Voices from Heaven, and attract the
universal Wonder of Princes and People: If he shall allay Tempests with a Beck,
and cast out Devils with a Word: If He shall foretell his own Death
particularly, with its Tragical Circumstances, and his Resurrection after it:
If the Veil of the most Famous Temple in the World shall be rent, and the Sun
darkened at his Funeral: If He shall, within the time foretold, break the bonds
of Death, and lift up his Head out of the Grave: If Multitudes of other
departed Souls shall arise with Him, to attend at the Solemnity of His
Resurrection: If He shall after Death, visibly converse with, eat and drink
with, diverse persons, who could not be deceived in a matter of clear sense, and
ascend in Glory in the presence of an astonished and admiring Multitude: I say,
if such a One as this should prove a Diabolical Impostor, and Providence should
permit him to be so credited and acknowledged; What possibility were there then
for us to be assured, that we are not always deceived? yea, that our very
Faculties were not given us only to delude and abuse us? And if so, the next
Conclusion is, That there is no God that judges in the Earth; and the best,
and most likely Hypothesis will be, That the World is given up to the
Government of the Devils. But if there be a Providence that superviseth us, (as
nothing is more certain) doubtless, it will never suffer poor helpless
Creatures to be inevitably deceived, by the craft and subtilty of their
mischievous Enemy, to their undoing; but will without question take such care,
that the works wrought by Divine Power for the Confirmation of Divine Truth,
shall have such visible Marks and Signatures, if not in their Nature, yet in
their Circumstances, Ends and Designs, as shall discover whence they are, and
sufficiently distinguish them from all Impostures and Delusions. And though
wicked Spirits may perform some strange things that may excite wonder for a
while, yet He has, and will so provide, that they shall be baffled and
discredited; as we know it was in the case of Moses and the Egyptian Magicians.

Now, besides what I have directly said to the Objection, I have this to add
to the Objectors, That I could wish they would take care of such Suggestions;
which, if they overthrow not the Opinion they oppose, will dangerously affront
the Religion they would seem to acknowledge. For he that says, That if there
are WITCHES, there is no way to prove that Christ Jesus was not a Magician, and
Diabolical Impostor; puts a deadly Weapon into the hands of the Infidel, and is
himself next door to the SIN AGAINST THE HOLY GHOST: of which, in order to the
persuading greater tenderness and caution in such matters, I give this short
account.

The Sin against the Holy Ghost is said to be Unpardonable; by which sad
Attribute, and the Discourse of our Savior, Mat. XII. from the xxii. to the
xxxiii ver. we may understand its Nature: In order to which we consider, That
since the Mercies of God, and the Merits of his Son, are infinite, there is
nothing can make a Sin unpardonable, but what makes it incurable; and there is
no Sin but what is curable by a strong Faith, and a vigorus Endeavor: For all
things are possible to him that believes. So that, that which makes a Sin
incurable, must be somewhat that makes Faith impossible, and obstructs all
means of Conviction. In order to the finding which, we must consider the ways
and methods the Divine Goodness has taken for the begetting Faith, and cure of
Infidelity: which it attempted, first, by the Prophets, and holy men of ancient
times; who, by the excellency of their Doctrine, the greatness of their
Miracles, and the holiness of their Lives, endeavored the conviction and
reformation of a stubborn and unbelieving World. But though Few believed their
report, and men would not be prevailed on by what they did, or what they said,
yet their Infidelity was not hitherto incurable, because further means were
provided in the Ministry of John the Baptist, whose Life was more severe, whose
Doctrines were more plain, pressing and particular; and therefore 'twas
possible that He might have succeeded. Yea, and where He failed, and could not
open men's hearts and their eyes, the Effect was still in possibility, and it
might be expected from Him that came after, to whom the Prophets and John were
but the Twilight and the Dawn. And though His miraculous Birth, the Song of
Angels, the Journey of the Wise Men of the East, and the correspondence of
Prophesies, with the Circumstances of the first appearance of the Wonderful
Infant: I say, though these had not been taken notice of, yet was there a
further provision made for the cure of Infidelity, in his astonishing Wisdom,
and most excellent Doctrines; For, He spoke as never Man did. And when These
were despised and neglected, yet there were other means toward Conviction, and
Cure of Unbelief, in those mighty Works that bore Testimony of Him, and ware
the evident marks of Divine Power in their foreheads. But when after all, these
clear and unquestionable Miracles which were wrought by the Spirit of God, and
had eminently his Superscription on them, shall be ascribed to the Agency of
evil Spirits, and Diabolical Compact, as they were by the malicious and
spightful Pharisees in the periods abovementioned; when those great and last
Testimonies against Infidelity, shall be said to be but the Tricks of Sorcery,
and Complotment with Hellish Confederates, This is Blasphemy in the highest,
against the Power and Spirit of God, and such as cuts off all means of
Conviction, and puts the Unbeliever beyond all possibilities of Cure. For
Miracles are God's Seal, and the great and last evidence of the truth of any
Doctrine. And though, while these are only disbelieved as to the Fact, there
remains a possibility of persuasion; yet, when the Fact shall be acknowledged,
but the Power blasphemed, and the effects of the adorable Spirit maliciously
imputed to the Devils; such a Blasphemy, such an Infidelity is incurable, and
consequently unpardonable. I say, in sum, the Sin against the Holy Ghost seems
to be a malicious imputation of the Miracles wrought by the Spirit of God in
our Savior to Satanical Confederacy, and the power of Apostate Spirits; Than
which, nothing is more blasphemous, and nothing is more like to provoke the
Holy Spirit that is so abused to an Eternal Dereliction of so Vile and so
Incurable an Unbeliever.

This account, as it is clear and reasonable in it self, so it is plainly lodged
in the mentioned Discourse of our Savior. And those that speak other things
about it, seem to me to talk at random, and perfectly without book. But to
leave them to the fondness of their own conceits, I think it now time to draw
up to a Conclusion of the whole.

Therefore briefly, Sir, I have endeavored in these Papers, which my respect
and your concernment in the subject have made yours, to remove the main
prejudices I could think of, against the existence of Witches and Apparitions;
and I Am sure I have suggested much more against what I defend, than ever I
heard or saw in any that opposed it; whose Discourses, for the most part, have
seemed to me inspired by a lofty scorn of common belief, and some trivial
Notions of Vulgar Philosophy. And in despising the Common Faith about matters
of Fact, and fondly adhering to it in things of Speculation, they very grossly
and absurdly mistake: For in things of Fact, the People are as much to be
believed as the most subtle Philosophers and Speculators; since here, Sense is
the Judge. But in matters of Notions and Iheory, They are not at all to be
heeded, because Reason is to be Judge of these, and this they know not how to
use. And yet thus it is with those wise Philosophers, that will deny the plain
evidence of the Senses of Mankind, because they cannot reconcile appearances
with the fond Crotchets of a Philosophy which they lighted on in the Highway
by chance, and will adhere to at adventure. So that I profess, for mine own
part, I never yet heard any of the confident Declaimers against Witchcraft and
Apparitions, speak any thing that might move a mind, in any degree instructed
in the generous kinds of Philosophy, and Nature of things. And for the
Objections I have recited, they are such as rise out of mine own thoughts,
which I obliged to consider what was possible to be said upon this cccasion,
For though I have examined Scot's Discovery, phancying that there I should find
the strong reasons of men's dis-belief in this matter; yet I profess I met not
with the least suggestion in all that Farrago, but what it had been ridiculous
for me to have gone about to answer: For the Author does little but tell odd
Tales, and silly Legends, which he confutes and laughs at, and pretends this to
be a Confutation of the Being of Witches and Apparitions: In all which, His
Reasonings are trifling and Childish; and when He ventures at Philosophy, He is
little better than absurd: So that 'twill be a Wonder to me, if any but Boys
and Buffoons imbibe any Prejudices against a Belief so infinitely Confirmed,
from the Loose and Impotent Suggestions of so weak a Discourser.

And now, Sir, it is fit that I relieve your patience; and I shall do so, when I
have said, that You can abundantly prove, what I have but attempted to defend:
And that among the many Obligations your Country has to you, for the Wisdom
and Diligence of your Endeavors in its service; your Ingenious Industry for
the Detecting of those Vile Practicers, is not the least considerable. To which
I will add no more, but the Confession who it is that has given you all this
trouble; which I know you are ready to pardon, to the respect and good
Intentions of

SIR, Your Affectionate and Obliged Honourer and Servant, J. G.

Advertisements of some Books printed for and sold by James Collins at his Shop
in Westminster Hall, 1667.
FLora Ceres and Pomona, or a Complete Florilege furnished with all requisites
belonging to a Florist, by John Rea, Gent. fol.

Bentivolio and Uranica, wrote by N. Ingelo, D. D. fol.

Forty Sermons preached by the late learned and famous Anthony Farrindon, B. D.
fol.

Bishop Hall's Works in three Volumes, fol.

The Complete Angler, showing the whole Art of Fishing in our English Rivers,
etc. 8o

Mercurius Centralis, a Discourse of Subterraneal Treasure, 12.

A Sermon preached before the Peers in the Abbey. Church at Westminster, upon
the 10th of October, 1666. being a Fast ordered by His Majesty, in
Consideration of the late Dreadful Fire, that consumed the greater part of the
City of London, by Seth Lord Bishop of Exon. in 4o.


