Imprimatur,

Rob. Grove, R. P. Domino Episc. Land. a Sac. Dom.
Jan. 19. 1669-70.
A DISCOURSE Setting forth the UNHAPPY CONDITION OF THE PRACTICE of PHYSIC IN
LONDON, And Offering Some means to put it into a better; for the Interest of
Patients, no less, or rather much more, then of PHYSICIANS.

By JONATHAN GODDARD Dr of Physic, Fellow of the College of Physicians, and of
the Royal Society; and Professor of Physic in Gresham-College.

LONDON, Printed by John Martyn and James Allestry, Printers to the Royal
Society. MDCLXX.

ERRATA.
THE Reader is entreated to take notice of these more considerable faults in
printing. Page 10. Line 17. for their read other. p. 13. l. 14. for withal r.
with all. p. 16. l 12. leave out him. p. 41. l. 11. for known r. unknown. p.
49. l. 11. for peculiar r. particular.

A Discourse setting forth the unhappy Condition of the Practice of Physic in
London, and offering some means to put it into a better; for the Interest of
Patients, no less, or rather much more, then of Physicians.
THE Art of Physic has had in common with other Arts and Professions, the
infelicity to be abused by the Professors thereof; who, either out of
insatiable avarice to make the utmost advantage of gain to themselves thereby,
or out of Pride and State, or Humor, have given just occasion to the World to
judge, that they had not that care and consideration of the Lives and Healths
of Persons with whom they had to do, as, in Humanity, Reason and Conscience,
they ought to have had. Admitting this to be inexcusable, as to the Persons
guilty of it, yet it may be said, as to the present Professors thereof, having
the Legal Right to practice in the City of London; and undertaken on their
behalf, that there was never in any Age, less greivance or cause of complaint
upon any such account. However, that distinction between the Vices of Persons,
and of Arts or Professions, is so clear and obvious, that whosoever transfers
those of the one upon the other, must needs appear deficient in the use of his
Reason, or else partial and injurious.

As to the Art it self, though it cannot be denied, that it is, as all Humane
Knowledge in other kinds, imperfect and defective; yet, that it should be an
imposture (as ignorance in conjunction with confidence may surmise or charge
upon it) the World does so much abound with Persons learned and judicious, and
(though not professed Physicians) competent to judge thereof, as to render it
superfluous to go about to vindicate it from such an imputation. Neither is the
imperfection and defect of knowledge in things relating to, or comprehended in
the Art, so great, as to render it an empty or mere notional Speculation; but
though it, as all other Arts and Sciences (the Mathematics excepted) has too
much abounded with Notions and Speculations wanting foundation in Nature and
Experience; Yet it may Vye with any other for number of real Truths and
Discoveries, sufficient to employ and take up the best intellectual abilities
and studies of any person addicted to it, for his whole life: and especially in
this Age, after great improvement lately made therein, by many happy
discoveries in Nature, of great advantage and concern thereto.

According to the grand importance of this Art, employed in the conservation of
the Life and Health of Mankind, it has been the wisdom of Princes and States,
to provide for the Encouragement of the Professors thereof, by liberal
Maintenance, Privileges and Powers, honorary and advantageous for the exercise
thereof, whereby Persons of eminent Learning, Education and Abilities, might be
induced to betake themselves to an Art standing in need of such
Accomplishments; without which, in an inferior way of Education, persons could
not attain to any such improved judgment, as is requisite to the understanding
and comprehension of the vast variety and exquisite Subtilty of the things
constituting the Subject of that Art, or relating thereto.

Accordingly, it has been no less the wisdom of the Princes and Parliaments of
this Kingdom, to provide for the Encouragement and good Regulation of the
Profession of Physic therein, especially in London: insomuch that by Law and
Custom, it has had as great advantages in the kinds beforementioned, with us,
as in any Country in the World. And therefore it is the more to be taken notice
of, that at this time it should be reduced, probably, to the worst condition
that it is in, any where; more then probably, to such a condition as cuts off
all hopes of honorable or free maintenance of the Professors thereof, or the
most part of them, and of improvement in the Art it self, for the future; as
may in some measure appear by what follows.

The dividing and separating of that part of the Art of Physic, which concerns
the Preparation and Composition of Medicaments, from the body of it, so as to
put the practice of it into other hands, was never heard of in the Ages of
Hippocrates, Galen, and other ancient Physicians; and has been judged by some
of the chief Authors in Physic, to be of unhappy consequence to it, upon
several accounts. Hence many Physicians, while there was a good understanding
between them and the Apothecaries (these keeping within their own bounds)
thinking it became them, in civil respect, to leave all to these, that belonged
to their Art, and so not concerning themselves to be judicious and versed
therein, became strangers to the Materials and Preparations of Medicines; and
by consequence, less able to prescribe the making of them, to the best
advantage. And this the Aporhecaries have not been wanting to make their
Advantage of, to the disparagement of the Physicians: So that it is justly to
be accounted an error and neglect in such Physicians; who if they had given
their minds to it, might have been as conversant in, and as well acquainted
with the materials of Remedies, whether Vegetables, Animals, or Minerals, and
all the more considerable ways of preparations thereof, as many other
Physicians, or any Apothecaries; by frequent Viewing, Inspection and
Observation, and chiefly by experimenting and exercising themselves in
preparations more accurate and of greater importance, Chemical, or other: which
are the ways that enable a Physician authentically to prescribe.

And yet, notwithstanding such an error and neglect of some Physicians
occasioned by it, the distinct Practice and Exercise of that part by
Apothecaries, as it has been used in London, had its advantage; and was looked
upon as a great ease and happiness to the Practice of Physic. For by this
means Physicians were freed from some troublesome and inferior employment; and
they had the advantage of giving account, and making appear, upon occasion, all
that was done on their part, by their prescriptions extant in writing, in case
of any ill success, (which might happen by error upon other account) or
suspicion of hurt done to a Patient by any thing advised by them.

But these are really, and upon the whole account, advantages to the Profession
of Physic, only upon this supposition, that Apothecaries keep within the
limits of their Work and Trade, not meddling with the Practice of Physic
themselves; the Prescriptions of Physicians being faithfully and safely lodged
with them, to the use of their Patients, and the benefit of the Apothecaries in
their Trade. Otherwise, neither the Advantages before mentioned, nor any other,
can ever compensate the disadvantage and detriment, not only to the Profession
and Professors of Physic, but to the Public: in consideration whereof, it
were to be accounted a small inconvenience, for Physicians to put themselves to
the Drudgery of making all the Medicaments they have use of in their Practice,
if need were; and to depend upon their own single reputation and credit with
their Friends and Patients, for their Vindication, as the Case should require.

In comparison to Physicians, it may easily be made out, what advantages
Apothecaries taking upon them to practice, may have in London, upon their
particular communication of all their Remedies, to them, to get the whole, or
so much of the Practice from the Physicians, as shall not leave a competency for
them to subsist upon. For the Apothecaries being bred up all the time of their
Youth as Apprentices in London, (while Physicians are studying at the
Universities) and having so much the more advantage to get a numerous
acquaintance (besides that by keeping open Shops, more general notice may be
taken of them) when they shall be able to pretend to, and make ostentation of
being Masters of, or knowing all the Secrets and Practice of all the Physicians
in London; it is obvious, how much this must take with the Vulgar, and with all
such persons, as being not bred up to Learning themselves, cannot be sensible
of the advantage of a generous Education in all kinds of Learning, for
improving the Mind and Understanding, and enabling of it to exercise such a
piercing Judgment and large Comprehension of so subtle and numerous natures
and things, as the knowledge whereof is requisite to the Art of Physic. And
therefore though there be not so much danger of such ostentation prevailing
among the Nobility, Gentry, and Persons of Learning and Parts in the City; yet
how far it may, amongst others, who are the great number and bulk, is not hard
to conceive by what has been experienced.

For, allowing a Physician, in his youth, to have had the reason, parts and
ordinary capacity of another of his age; and then to have been bred up in
learning of Languages, to render him Master of the Knowledge contained in Books
written in those Languages; then, in Arts, some whereof minister Advantages to
the understanding of the nature and causes of things; all do improve the Mind
and Understanding, by Exercise at least, to discern and judge of things: then
supposing him to apply his study to Natural Philosophy, such as is more real
and solid in this Age, by many happy Experimental Discoveries in Nature: and
lastly to the Art of Physic, and the knowledge of the Body of Man, withal the
parts of it, by Anatomical Administrations, Experiments and Observations; of
the Actions and Uses of the same; the Diseases to which they are obnoxious;
with the Remedies thereof: and admitting a Physician to make it his continual
Work, to improve in the knowledge of all these (which his interest must incline
him to do) by the Study, Practice and Experience of twenty years or more: now
supposing all this, in the common reason of mankind, he must have a manifold
advantage to the understanding of the Nature, Cause, and Cure of a Disease,
above another, whose education has rendered him incapable of any of the
accomplishments before mentioned, or of any considerable share thereof: and yet
many times it is found, that one that is illiterate and can speak no reason of
any thing, but only make ostentation with a few canting terms; yea sometimes a
Nurse, or such kind of Woman, by a confidence arising out of ignorance, shall
arrogate more knowledge or ability to themselves, and shall be better thought
of among the unlearned and incompetent to judge, than such a Physician as has
been described before: and how much more may an Apothecary, upon the
pretensions before mentioned, carry a reputation with such people, above such a
Physician?

And if the Art of Physic, or one half of it, were the knowledge of Receipts
or Forms of Medicines to cure Diseases, Apothecaries might have more pretense
to vye with Physicians; but, to be sure, that is far the least part of it; and
a manifold greater proportion of Judgment and Skill is requisite to discover
the Disease, than to apply the Remedy; and without such discovery, abundant and
frequent mischief may be done, even to the destruction of life, by applying
Medicines in themselves safe, and (according to the vulgar term) wholesome: and
not only so, but by the omission of the proper Remedies in their seasons,
through the same want of judgment; which mischiefs by omissions, as well as
otherwise, whoever pretends to the Practice of Physic, has to answer for. In
such cases, how can that be a sufficient plea (which passes for current
generally) That nothing was done, but only some Cordial given, or what was very
safe? (though at best nothing to the purpose) whereas in the beginning of many
Diseases, while the opportunities of applying the Great Remedies, and doing to
the purpose, are either only, or to the best advantage to be taken, that doing
nothing but etc. is the undoing of the Patient, if loss of life be so to be
accounted; there being so much difficulty and danger in many Diseases, that
carry the least appearance of either, as to require the first and earliest
opportunities for a Physician to act toward their Cure.

This communication of Medicines by Physicians to Apothecaries (whereby they
come to be so great Masters of Receipts) is in the plain reason and nature of
the thing, a Trust, whereof they are free to make the advantage or profit that
belongs to their Trade, by selling such Medicines at valuable rates, according
to their costliness or elaborateness in their preparation: but the advantage of
directing and prescribing their use in all cases, belongs to the Physician: and
the hindering him herein, to the impairing him of his Practice, is a breach of
Trust, and unworthy, as well as injurious dealing by him, as may farther appear
by the following Consideration.

All Laws of Nature and Nations, all Justice, Equity, and Reason of Mankind, do
allow to every person the benefit of his own Invention; which, if it be of that
Nature, that the bringing of it into use and practice, does necessarily import
the discovery of it, according to our Laws, Patents for terms of years are
granted: but if an Invention be of such a nature, that it may be concealed in
the use and practice, no limitation for private advantage or profit thereby, is
set by Law; it is only Honesty, Ingenuity or Interest, that can restrain from
making unreasonable or unconscionable advantages in such case. Now any
Medicines or Receipts for Cure of Diseases, invented by Physicians, or coming
to their private knowledge only; or any new use or virtue of an old known
Medicine, discovered by any Physician; in relation to those Physicians by whom
they have been invented or discovered (as far as they are of any consideration
or value) are of this Nature, that is, Inventions that may be kept secret by
them; and whereof nothing hinders them from making the advantage; the Laws of
the Land (as well as in other Countries) allowing and authorizing Physicians to
practice their Art in all its parts and members, and so by consequence to make
any Medicines, themselves. The case being thus, how unreasonable and unequal is
it, that when a Physician has by his Industry found out, or by some Felicity
lighted upon a Discovery that has proved remarkably successful in some
particular disease or case; upon his communication of it to an Apothecary, he
shall have only an inconsiderable matter? (not worth the owning many times) in
case the Patient come or send to him; or at most an ordinary Fee in case of
Visiting the Patient; whereas the Apothecary being one that takes upon him to
practice, shall not only repeat the same Medicine many times over, to the same
Patient, but also give into any other Patients, whose case he judges to be the
same, or of affinity to it; and drive a Trade with it all his life time; and so
gain (as it is well known, and has been upon occasion, by some confessed or
boasted of) by one Receipt, an hundred times as much as the Physicians Reward
or Fee for prescribing it: so that he only cures the Patient once for an
ordinary Fee at most, and teaches the Apothecary, when the same case occurrs,
to do it ever after.

The consequence of this to Physicians, must be the impoverishment of many;
who, in regard of the charges of their Education, and the use and consequence
of their Profession, deserve to get as great Estates, as are gotten in any
Profession or way of Trading, and yet shall scarce be able to subsist, though
as Learned and able in their Profession, as their Predecessors, who thirty or
forty years ago, got great Estates, when the Apothecaries kept within their own
bounds, or inconsiderably incroached upon the Physicians. For now a Physician
will be of use only amongst great persons, or persons of learning and parts to
value him: whereas others that are of ability enough for Estates, and would be
ready to entertain him, are so amused by Apothecaries, their ostentations and
pretensions before mentioned, their canting upon the common notions and terms
of Humors, Fumes, Obstructions, etc. (which an empty illiterate pretender,
having confidence enough, may so manage, as to make a more graceful sound, than
the most solid and able Physician) that they are generally entertained in the
beginning of sicknesses, and made Judges whether or no, and when any, and what
Physician shall be sent for: (being accounted a check upon the Physician by
such a sort of People) who for the most part, is not called, till the other is
willing to go no farther, because it is not his interest, that the person
should die under his Cure; and then he says it is work for a Doctor; who shall
have nothing to do amongst these people but in desperate cases: whereas (as
has been hinted already) in difficult cases, the best Physician may stand in
need of all advantages, especially timely opportunities to apply proper and
effectual Remedies for Cure.

And where the Apothecary has the nomination of the Physician, it is easily
judged, what one he is like to be, that is one between whom and him a design is
driven of mutual furtherance, or one that he knows will comply with him, that
is content to succeed him, and approve of what he has done before; or one that
is noted in general to prescribe most for the Apothecary's profit. Upon such
accounts some Physicians are cried up, and others decryed (if not traduced) of
no less, or of much more and longer approved ability, worth, and honesty. To be
sure no Physician taken notice of to have and give any Medicine of his own
preparation, shall be called in, if the Apothecary can hinder it. Persons may
if they please be undeceived upon this account, and understand how little
reason they have, and how little it may be their interest to be ruled by
Apothecaries in their choice of Physicians.

And if Patients understood their interest, they would take no such
satisfaction, as they seem to do, in the Visits of Apothecaries; but rather
wish them in their Shops to make, or oversee the making of their Medicines
prescribed by Physicians, which are left to their Servants, many times raw and
slovenly Apprentices, while the Masters spend their time abroad,
Physician-like, in Visiting.

Another consequence must be utter discouragement to study, or endeavor after,
or to make use of, by prescribing to Apothecaries, any more excellent or
effectual Medicaments; since the advantage will be so inconsiderable to the
Physicians themselves, in comparison of what it may be to others, who have so
little right thereto, and deserve so little from them. So that all
encouragement to, and hope of improvement of the Art it self, by the present
Physicians is cut off: and for a succession, if the present state and condition
of the Profession continue, how can it reasonably be expected or supposed, that
persons of considerable learning parts, or abilities, will ever apply
themselves to the study of Physic? and what the consequence of all may be to
the Public, is submitted to their estimation, who are most competent to judge
of the great concerns thereof.

The profession of Physic being under so hard a condition, and not to be
exercised in the ordinary way, but upon the disadvantages before set forth; the
Remedies of the same, and the means to reduce it to a better state, must needs
deserve serious consideration, being of importance, not only to the Physicians,
but also to the Public good and safety, as the lives and healths of persons
are considerable thereto. These may be several and of different kinds; some
relating to the higher Powers, as provision of good Laws in this behalf, etc.
And indeed in this Kingdom, the Wisdom of Princes and Parliaments has not been
wanting, in providing for the Regulation of the Profession; according to which,
no person not legally authorized, can practice without breaking the Laws in
that behalf, or incurring the penalties of them; which, according to the times
wherein they were set, were very high; but in these times, they are easier to
be born, rendering the adventure so much less, which is a great imboldening of
persons having no legal right to practice, to run the hazard of those
Penalties: besides, the difficulty of Discovery and Proof, the tediousness in
Processes, and prosecution of the advantages by those Laws against Delinquents,
not without uncertainty in the issue, as in other cases never so just, do much
more encourage such persons; till there may come a time and opportunity for
supplying any defects in the Laws already made.

But if there be any advantage in the power of Physicians themselves, which
they may lawfully, honestly, and fairly make use of, to put themselves into a
better condition for the exercise of their profession, it may be of good
consequence to consider thereof. Since all Law, Equity, and Reason allows them
as well as others (as was touched before) to make advantage of their own
Inventions, and since they are of such nature, as they may keep them secret to
themselves, in the use and practice of them, they being not bound to discover
them to Apothecaries or any others, but free to prepare them themselves, as
has been made appear: whether may not this Course set upon, though attended
with some trouble and inconvenience, be an effectual means, at least in
reasonable time, very considerably to advantage and better the condition of
Physicians in their Practice?

In this undertaking it is not at all necessary, that any Physician should be
put to the drudgery or trouble of making, or overseeing the making of every
Medicine, that he may have occasion to use; or to have a Magazine furnished
with all common things, as Distilled Waters, Syrups, Conserves, etc. for the
Practice of Physic, may easily by able and judicious Physicians be managed
with the tenth part of the things commonly in use, and the Remedies reduced
accordingly, and this reduction so far from being a detriment, that it may be a
great improvement of the Art.

The College of Physicians of London, in compiling their Dispensatory,
following the Example of other Societies of Physicians abroad, have set down
the ancient Forms and Compositions of Galen and the old Greek Physicians, of
Mesue and the Arabians, with some other of later Authors; in consideration of
the reverence due to the antiquity of some, with the approved use and
experience of all. And it may vye with any public Dispensatories in Foreign
parts, as to choice and usefulness of the Prescriptions it contains, being as
little redundant in Superfluities, and deficient in Necessaries, as they: but
it was never intended or pretended that it should contain all Medicines
necessary to Practice, or the best of them; and therefore the Invention and Use
of others was ever allowed to able Physicians; considering withal, at what
uncertainty the Translators and Interpreters of those Authors, especially of
the Arabians, are concerning some words and the Ingredients thereby signified;
and at what disadvantage we must have and use the Medicaments produced in their
Countries, upon transportation so far, or production in colder Climates; all
which must render those Compositions less certain and efficacious: wherefore
they did not think themselves concerned to make that Book so much their own, as
that there might be no impertinencies, irrational prescriptions, or (perhaps)
errors therein: whence it is no wonder, that such a foul- mouthed impudent
scribler as the Translator of it (for want of better employment to relieve him
in his necessitous condition) should take occasion to make such work as he has
done about it; and the more, through his ignorance and confidence, calumniating
falsely in diverse particulars.

This being the condition of that Book, the Physicians of the College have no
such cause as the common People may think, to envy them the Translation of it;
nor have they any such Treasure of it, as they may suppose themselves: nor is
it the translating of all Physick-Books extant into the Vulgar Language, that
will edify much, or enable Persons of other employments to be their own
Physicians (whatever may be thought otherwise) or the reading of them in their
own Language by Apothecaries, who have Latin enough so to do, that will make
them Physicians, since there are innumerable particular Cases, that fall out
every day, requiring answerable remedies, to be discovered and made out upon an
Habit, and Principles, enabling to Judge and Discern, not to be found in
Book-cases, all which put together do not reach or comprise them. And the
Dispensatory before mentioned, or any other, is far short of prescribing
Remedies for them all. And as to the Forms or Receipts of which it is made up;
it was never judged otherwise by able Physicians, but that there are in them
many Ingredients impertinent, and some contrary to the main intentions for
which they are in use: besides irrational proportions and quantities, though
upon the whole, they have been Successful; and that such Physicians are far
from being tied to them in their Practice, as being able to invent better, more
easy to be prepared, more grateful and convenient for use. For a multitude of
Ingredients (wherein many of those ancient Receipts are luxuriant, upon a
design to bring in every good thing into our Medicine is so far from bringing a
Comparison, that it is, at the best and for the most part, an Alloy to it, and
renders it less effectual; whereas a judicious choice of a few ingredients, is
the greatest advantage to the virtue and use of it.

Whoever with judgment peruseth the London Dispensatory, may soon estimate, to
what an Epitome it may be reduced, how many Compositions may be spared, how
many Ingredients, almost in every Composition: and whoever with the like
judgment considers and casts up the main Intentions and Indications that occur
in Practice, it will not be hard for him to state the Remedies adequate and
proper to such intentions as are of greatest importance; and by consequence to
be stored with Preparations and Compositions ready made of the choicest
materials, to the best advantage for Use and Practice, more grateful and
effectual, and every way more considerable than the Shop-Medicines; as Purges,
Cordials, Antidotes, etc. which by judgment and Chemical Art, as the case may
require, may be so prepared as to last long without impairing the virtue by
keeping, and therefore to be always ready; to be of such form as is convenient
to be given, either alone, or with some Vehicle, which may easily be had, or
prepared by the Patient, or any about him.

And if Patients knew all, they would not be best satisfied in the greatest
number and variety of the Medicines administered, and the most frequent plying
of them therewith: for this may be (as was hinted before) of design in some
Physicians, to render themselves the more acceptable to Apothecaries in
general, as using to prescribe much Physic; or upon some combination between
the Physician and Apothecary mutually to advantage each other; or an intention
in the Physician to oblige some Apothecary in hope of some answerable return:
as on the contrary it has been the complaint of the Apothecary sometimes, that
the Physician, of ill will, has prescribed little, and chargeable things; both
which are great disadvantages to their Bills: whereas when they are made up of
numerous particulars of things less chargeable, how much soever is gained
thereby, they appear more reasonable to the Patients. Now though in some cases,
there may be need of more Medicaments, in greater variety and more frequently
plied: yet in most other cases, a rational and judicious choice of one, or a
very few Medicines, may signify much more to the good of the Patient, than a
luxuriant variety.

And it will not be hard for a Physician, making use only of a Servant or
Servants (who shall be no ways capable of discovering his Secrets, but only fit
to kindle Fires, tend a Still or Furnace, beat at a Mortar, etc.) to oversee
and with his own hands prepare and compound what is necessary for himself to
do; and by this means, though he be in full Practice, at the expense of a few
spare hours, to store himself sufficiently for all his occasions, of such great
Remedies and Secrets of importance: and for other Medicines of less value and
consequence, they may be had at the Apothecaries, or taught the Patients or
those about them (as was said of Vehicles) without any considerable prejudice
to the Practice of Physic. To be sure, it were far better to teach Patients
any Medicines, then practicing Apothecaries; for those, if they have any
ingenuity, will be sensible of the benefit, and at most, but use it again for
themselves, some friend, or the poor for charity; whereas these will not only
use it toties quoties to the same Patient, but make a trade of it to all
others, whom they have to do with, and judge in the like condition.

Nor can it be any dishonor to a Physician, thus to employ himself between
whiles, in the making of such choice and important Medicines; as it is upon
record and clearly appears, that Hippocrates and his Sons, Galen, and other
ancient Physicians, did the like: nor is there the least appearance that they
had any Apothecaries, or ever wrote Bills to any. And to be sure, in our times,
we see, how worthy Ladies and Gentlewomen of quality, do employ themselves in
making Confections, and Medicines internal and external: and it is known, what
Countesses and great persons of both Sexes have done the like; (whence some
Medicines have their names) to none of which it was ever reputed a dishonor:
and how then can it be to Physicians? whose employment in this kind need not be
more troublesome or laborious, and in respect of the near relation of it to
their Profession, must be to the greater advantage, and more general
concernment of the life and health of mankind.

If it be thought, that this Expedient of Physicians making their own
Medicaments, comes now too late for the securing of the Practice of Physic to
themselves; the Apothecaries being already so stocked with innumerable Receipts
for all Cases, upon the communication of the Practice of Physicians for so many
years, or some Ages, that they need no more: It is to be considered what great
variety of new Cases do daily emerge, what Diseases, and new faces and
conditions of Diseases, every year almost produces, not to be found described
in all Physic Books extant; for which they may not have one proper Receipt in
all their store, or if there be any such, it may be long enough before they
find it: nor is there any other way but by Principles and Habit of judging and
discerning in a Physician to come to the knowledge of such Diseases and Cases,
their Nature, Causes, and Cure; so that, without father communication to
Apothecaries, they must come to be at a loss, for all their great stock and
store of old Receipts.

And it is farther to be considered, that the consequence of Physicians
exercising themselves in the preparation of Medicines will be the Invention of
such as shall be more effectual, pleasant and convenient for use than the
Shop-Medicines, and shall among those that have experienced them, beget a
nauseating of and aversation to the other, and beat them quite out of use or
esteem.

And considering how Apothecaries may and do censure the whole Practice of some
Physicians, and of those in the fullest employment, to be upon a few ordinary
or inconsiderable Prescriptions; and pretend their own to be upon rare Secrets
or choice Prescriptions of some most eminent ancient Physicians, and such as
have proved most successful: it is high time for Physicians to go out of the
road, and do something extraordinary to secure themselves from such imputation.

If upon the consideration of the great variety of Diseases and Cases, it be
questioned how a Physician will be able to apply proper Remedies, out of a few
choice and effectual Medicaments of his own preparation; it is answered, by
Composition, and by addition of others, in some cases, though of less
importance of themselves (easily to be directed to Apothecaries, or any about
the Patient, if the Physicians do it not himself) sufficient variety of
Medicaments, accommodated to the particular Diseases and Cases, may be
produced; as we see what infinite variety of articulate Sounds are, by various
compounding or placing the twenty four Letters of the Alphabet. And to be sure
one may be at a greater loss, by confusion amongst a multitude of superfluous,
impertinent, luxuriant and inconsiderable Medicaments, than amongst a small
number of Choice and Effectual ones: with which a small Closet furnished, may
afford more to answer all Intentions, than many of the greatest shops of
Apothecaries, as they stand now furnished, put together; and may better enable
Physicians to make good that Distich, Et quoniam variant Morbi, variabimus
Arts; Mill mali species, mill salutis erunt. Besides the securing of the
Practice of Physic to Physicians, and the preventing its falling into other
hands, which is a more necessary advantage; there is another of happy
consequence and more honorable, which, by this course of Physicians making
their own Medicaments, may be attained; that is, a great improvement in the Art
it self, hinted before. For when judicious Physicians come to be more
familiarly acquainted with the materials of Medicaments, and also to experiment
and observe Operations and Processes upon them; especially the more Accurate
and Artificial, as in Chemical Preparations; they will discover the most
advantageous ways of Preparation, and the most rational proportions in order to
Composition; and come to contrive and invent new Medicaments, exceeding others
in their kinds, and improve, beyond what they can imagine of themselves, before
they have entered this way, and what they can ever otherwise attain; as some
learned and ingenious Physicians have done. Nor can it be denied, that in this
course, some Empiricks have stumbled upon very considerable and effectual
Medicaments, wherewith in some particular cases, they have outdone learned
Physicians: and by the advantage of making their own Medicaments, they bear up,
and will do, till they be outdone in the same kind by such Physicians.

Nor has a Physician any way of vying upon equal terms, with an Empirick, but
by giving his own Medicines, as well as he; and by concealment, securing them
from Censure or Undervaluing, as the other does: and much less can he vye with
a practicing Apothecary, when called in to a Case, after he has undertaken and
administered according to his skill: for in this case, it is not his interest,
that a Physician should have better success than himself: and therefore, how
faithfully and accurately the Physician's Prescriptions will be prepared, may
be a doubt: but to be sure, nothing is more obvious, than for the Apothecary to
undervalue them, and to say, that the same, as good, or better have been given
already; which suggestions, how false soever, cannot but raise a diffidence or
prejudice in the Patient to disadvantage of the success.

There is one farther advantage of great importance, by the Physician's giving
his own Preparations; that is, the certainty he shall be at in all his
Medicaments, as to their efficacy, strength and operation; much beyond what can
be in the way of writing Bills to Apothecaries. It is sufficiently known, and
most frequently experienced, that, let a Physician write the same Bill to
several Shops, the Medicine shall be very different in the sensible qualities,
scent, taste, color, strength, pleasantness, etc. according to the goodness of
the Ingredients, or the cleanly and accurate making; which may cause great
difference, and in reason cannot but cause some in the Operation, while in the
mean time the Physician must answer for all, and all reflects upon him: whereas
a Physician using always the same Preparation or Composition, will be at a
certainty of the effect, on the part of the Medicine; and any difference must
be, in the disposition of the body on which it operates.

But how can it be honorable for a Physician to sell Medicaments, may be a
question: to which may be answered, that for a Physician to drive such a trade
for its own sake, or merely for profit that might accrue to him thereby, could
not be of credit; but in order to so necessary an end, as the securing of his
Practice, and the benefit of his own Industry to himself; and to so good an end
as the improvement of his Art to the benefit of others, it can be no more
dishonorable to him to sell Physic, than to persons of Honor, and great
Estates to sell their Corn, Cattle, Wool; or foreign Princes their Wines. But
another question may hereupon arise, how it may appear to satisfaction, that he
deals reasonably and honestly in the prices and rates of his Medicines; it may
be answered, that in the ordinary dealing of Apothecaries with their Customers
(whom they call their Patients, but very improperly, except when they take upon
them to be their Physicians) by their Bills and the names of the particulars
therein, it does not at all appear, how reasonable their rates are; all the
satisfaction is in the good opinion of their honesty, and in their assertions
and protestations concerning the reasonableness of their prices; which indeed
are arbitrary, and can hardly be other, because of the endless variety of
Medicines prescribed, not being of the cognizance of others (except Physicians
and Apothecaries, upon perusal of the Receipts) as are the Wares and
Commodities wherein other Tradesmen deal. And if Physicians have the happiness
to be thought honest men, amongst their Friends and Patients, they may give
them as good satisfaction concerning their usage of them in this kind.

To be sure, the Apothecaries, upon this account, that the Medicines prepared
and vended by them, are not of the cognizance of the Patients, or, however, are
concealed from them, may make several advantages to themselves, not only of
unreasonable profit to the burdening of the Patient, but also of undue
reputation among the injudicious, to the injury of the Physician. That they may
set unreasonable rates on their Medicines is obvious to conceive, and that they
have done, is not unknown, upon discovery whereof, they justify all, by
alleging their expense of time, and attendance; and this clearly infers, that
they may in effect, by such means arbitrarily set unreasonable value upon their
time and attendance, and such as may amount to more than the Physicians fees
come to, all put together, when he has been entertained and daily attended
from the beginning of the Disease to the end: and if, when by occasion of
Complaints of Patients to Physicians, notice has been taken of such prices set
upon some Medicines prescribed by them (requiring no great time or trouble to
prepare) as may make the Apothecary a gainer at the rate of ninety in the
hundred; with as good reason when they are sole Physicians, may they set yet
higher prices on their Medicines, in consideration of their advice into the
bargain, if they be not allowed distinctly for it. Whence it is the less
wonder, how so many young Apothecaries as set up anew, and open Shops in every
corner almost of the City, should subsist: for it requires no great sum to
purchase fine painted and gilded Pots, Boxes, and Glasses; and a little stock
is improveable to a manifold proportion of what it is capable of in other
Trades. And it is as little wonder, if many Apothecaries in any considerable
time grow rich; and more great Estates be gotten among them, in proportion to
their number, than among Physicians (upon such advantages beyond them, and
encroachments upon their rights) contrary to what was ever known of old.

And they may take upon them to censure or pretend against the prescriptions of
Physicians (as it is easy to carp or find fault with what is most perfect or
innocent, and most obvious, out of ignorance or self-conceit so to do) and by
this means puzzle and dis-satisfie the injudicious (while no opportunity is
afforded to the Physician to give satisfaction, or vindicate himself) and by
raising prejudice, hinder the good effect of the Medicine, or divert the
Patient from the use of it.

And they may (and whether they have done so, is not known) vary from the
prescription of the Physician, to impose upon him; and so, if the Medicine have
a good success, they can tell the Patient, that it was not as the Physician
prescribed it, but as they have altered it for the better, knowing his
constitution, etc. or in plain English, none of his, but theirs; if it prove
not successful, they can be silent; and by this means arrogate to themselves
all good successes, and leave the other to rest upon the Physician, which
latter, by such a practice they may be the Authors of: so that at this rate,
all the reputation and success of the Physician may be in their power and at
their mercy. Such most injurious and intolerable abuses, there is reason to
expect from practifing Apothecaries, who are Emulators of Physicians, and
indeed no better than Enemies unto and a Party against them; as some
sufficiently discovered themselves in public when time served, by their
vilifying and disparaging the Physicians before a Committee of the House of
Commons. Now how much it concerns Physicians, and what reason they have to take
any course, rather than so to be imposed upon by them, let the World judge.

They that can vary from the Physicians prescript upon such an account, may
with less dishonesty do it for saving, by leaving out in whole or in part, some
chargeable Ingredients, which in many Compositions cannot be missed to sense,
though in reason they cannot be abated, pretending, if it be discovered, that
the Medicines may be more proper for the Patient, without them. And as to the
goodness of their Drugs (on which the due estimation of their Rates depends)
which does no more appear to others, than the unreasonableness of the Rates,
they may (whether they do or not) put off such as are defective, decayed,
impure, etc. and in such respect, of little value: for, as has been said, all
failure of success, or ill success, is imputed to the Physician, whence it
clearly may be inferred, how much better satisfaction and security against
defectiveness in Medicaments, there may be in dealing with the Physician, than
the Apothecary; since the perfection of any Medicine, is of such concernment to
the success, which is the great interest of the Physician (and the more, while
he acts alone) unless he be supposed so wicked, as to be corrupted to do
mischief to the Patient: and in such case the Apothecary being corrupted, not
only when he practices himself, but when employed under a Physician, by adding
to, or altering what is prescribed, or giving one thing for another, may easily
do the like mischief, undiscovered, with the great advantage of imputation to,
or reflection upon the Physician.

For it often falls out in Practice, that Medicaments in themselves safe and
gentle, have rough and violent operations upon the body, meeting with some
cause thereof within; and much more may stronger and churlish Physic have the
like, which a Physician may sometimes be necessitated to prescribe, except he
will merely trifle with the Patient and let him dye: now a little alteration of
such a Medicine by the Apothecary may be the death of a Patient; wherein he
cannot be detected, and therefore it must rest upon the Physician.

For avoiding suspicion, where the Physician may gain by the death of a
Patient, as of a Parent, Wife, or Relation to whom he may be Heir, or any other
by whose death some apparent advantage may accrue to him, it has been the
prudence of Physicians to decline acting alone, though no jealousy or caution
on the part of the Patient has given occasion thereof: and by this course it
is in the power of Physicians to secure themselves from the suspicion, and of
Patients, from the practice of any such wicked design against them, whereby
those may become accessory to their death. In other cases, upon consideration
it may clearly appear how much more the life and recovery of a Patient is the
interest of a Physician, than of an Apothecary who only prepares the Physic
for the Patient by the Physicians prescription. The Apothecary may lose a
Customer and Friend, by whom in time to come he might have made good advantage;
the Physician answerably may lose a Patient and Friend, who, in reason, might
have been at least as beneficial to him. But this may be the least part of his
loss, for, besides this consideration, upon the death of a person, especially
of note, esteem, or interest in the world, all near relations, friends, and
dependants take notice of, or are inquisitive after the Physician, and (though
he be of eminent general repute, yet except he have the happiness to be well
thought of among them, or the advantage to give them a satisfactory account)
are ready to suspect some want of ability or judgment in him to discern the
Disease or apply proper Remedies, or some want of care, consideration, or
diligence requisite to the case; and thereupon to censure either the doing, or
the omission of something as dangerous or fatal. Hereupon they have an
aversation unto, or prejudice against that Physician for the future, so as to
be inclined to make use of any other rather than of him; which consequence upon
the death of a Patient may much more impair the Physicians practice, than all
he can be supposed to lose by such a particular Patient. Now there is no such
consideration or suspicion concerning the Apothecary (except any thing
notorious be discovered against the goodness of his Medicines) whence it is
seen amongst passionately affectionate persons, upon the loss of Children, near
Relations, or dear Friends, that they are averse to the sight of the Physician
that took care of them (though there has not been the least ground or cause in
reason so to be) and yet the Apothecary is in as good esteem with them as ever.
Hence it is rational to infer, that whoever engages a Physician in an action
so much against his interest, as the being instrumental to procure the death of
any person, must bid very high for it: and since his opportunity is only while
persons are sick or taking Physic; and since it is so feasible toward persons
in sickness or health, by the ways and artifices of Poison to dispatch them
(wherein others are more versed than the Physicians of England were ever known
to be, and which are usually managed and dispensed in Diet, toward which a
Cook, Butler, other Servants, or any that may be frequently about the person,
have more opportunity than a Physician, and in reason may be corrupted at
easier rates) it may be presumed a Physician will not be made use of to such a
purpose; according as there is little extant in History, and little reported of
Physicians employed in such work, which others may so easily do, and have so
frequently done.

As to the Rates of Medicines, if the Physicians did to all Patients, that do
not undervalue them in their fees (though giving but according to the ordinary
and accustomed rates time out of mind in England) give all the Medicines of
their own preparation they should need to use; the condition of the Profession
must be better, than by communicating to Apothecaries to give them such
advantages against themselves as have been set forth: whence it is clear to
infer, at how much cheaper rates a Physician may afford Medicaments, than an
Apothecary; and therefore in all reason, supposing them to be men of honesty,
or understanding their own interest, they will do so. And no doubt the event
will show it, upon dealing with Physicians that take this course, when the
difference shall appear, by comparing the charges, upon entertaining such a
Physician alone, with what has been usual, upon making use of a Physician and
Apothecary both together, in like cases; or upon making use of an Apothecary
alone, whereby many cannot but think that great matters must be saved; whereas
if the Medicines brought in by him amount to ten shillings, he may get little
short of a Physicians fee; but how much they multiply, and ply the Patient with
Medicines, in such cases, is ordinarily seen; and a Physician that has no end
in favor of the Apothecary, may do the work with that which amounts to far the
least part of what is usually obtruded in such cases; and though he receive
some fees, yet may be less chargeable to the Patient, than an Apothecary
entertained, as well as more satisfactory all such as allow more ability to a
Physician in his profession, than to an Apothecary.

It may be an objection against the course of Physicians preparing Medicines
for their own peculiar use, that it will cut off all free communication between
Physicians, and render Consultations insignificant. To this may be answered,
that those Physicians engaged in this work, between whom there was a good
understanding and a free communication formerly, may as freely communicate upon
their peculiar preparations; or at least such account of them may be given, as
shall be sufficient for judgment, whether they be proper in the peculiar case
before them, or not. But it is not to be expected that all the considerable
Physicians should engage in this Course, some being in full practice in
combination or conjunction with Apothecaries, from whom it is not to be
expected they should trouble themselves about preparing Medicines; and some
depending upon Apothecaries to bring them into notice and acquaintance; who
must therefore comply with them not only in writing Bills to their best
advantage, but also, as occasion serves, enter on their leavings of Practice,
and perhaps consult with them. In such cases indeed it is not reasonable to
expect that any Physician should communicate a peculiar preparation of his own
to another, that can make no use of it but by divulging it to an Apothecary.
But as to consultation it may be said, that any such Physicians meeting may
proceed upon the Shop-Medicines to as good advantage as formerly; neither is
any Physician that prepares his own Medicines the less able (to be sure) to
write Bills to Apothecaries, but rather the more, in that respect, as far as he
is free thereto.

There remains one grand Objection, that this course of Physicians making their
own Medicines, must ruin the Apothecaries, who are numerous, and a Company of
the City of London, incorporated by Charter: to this it may be answered, that
the Apothecaries are become so numerous in the City of London, very probably,
upon encouragement by the advantages taken against Physicians, to practice
themselves; and against Patients or Customers to set as high prices as they
please: and it is easily granted, that without such courses a great part of
them cannot subsist: whereas it may be said of all the Physicians in London,
having any legal right to practice; that they might live well on their
Practice, in the old course of writing Bills to Apothecaries, were it not for
the practicing Apothecaries and other Empiricks: However, the numerousness of
Apothecaries, does not justify illegal and injurious advantages taken against
Physicians, (no more than the numerousness of necessitous persons does their
indirect and unwarrantable courses of living) during which the present course
of writing all in Bills to Apothecaries, must ruin the Physicians, whose
Education does cost a good Estate or Stock, and a great part of the time of
their lives, before they can arrive to get any thing; and who in London are a
Society incorporated by Charter, having that Charter and other Privileges
established by Acts of Parliament, as the Authority or Privilege of them and
others to practice elsewhere depends upon the Charters and Privileges of the
Universities, which are also established by Acts of Parliament: so that for a
legal Establishment, the Apothecaries can no ways vye with the Physicians. And
as to the merits of the Cause, and Equity, let it be considered, that the
Physicians did part with, and freely allow one part of their Profession to be
exercised by others, yet never quitting the right of exercising that also
themselves; whence, as elsewhere, so in England, it has been always free (and
the Law expressly allows it, and there is an express Reserve in the Apothecaries
Charter to that effect) for Physicians to exercise their Art in all its parts:
that upon this, advantage is taken by Apothecaries to invade the whole, by
giving advice as well as making and selling Medicines; and so by consequence,
if the Physicians should not resume the other, they themselves must be ruined,
upon the abuses and advantages taken against them before set forth: and it will
soon appear, whether it be not more equal, that the Physicians should preserve
themselves by recovery of their own, than the other by invading theirs, and
getting all from them; to which the former have all the right, and the latter
none at all.

But supposing such a course universally taken up, of Physicians making their
own Medicines of importance, for their use in Practice; a ruining of
Apothecaries would not necessarily follow; they would yet practice upon the
meaner sort, and perhaps many others, whom for want of judgment, they would by
their canting and ostentation, and by raising prejudice against Physicians,
draw into a better opinion of themselves; beside the trade of their Shops: but
because such Practice of theirs must be gained by false suggestions upon the
ignorance and credulity of the people, and is illegal, and may do more mischief
than good in the Kingdom; this answer is not to be accounted satisfactory,
therefore, it is to be taken notice of, that though the making of all Medicines
for his own use in his Practice do of right belong to a Physician; yet no such
thing has been here absolutely propounded or intended; but only of some choice
ones of great importance and efficacy, and so many as may secure the Practice
of Physic to the Physicians, which may be far the least part of what there
will be occasion to use in the whole practice of a Physician: and so (besides
the sale of Shop-Medicines not only by retail, but wholesale, whereby it is
known many have gotten great Estates, without dispensing Physicians Bills) all
other Medicines directed by Physicians may be had of Apothecaries; who
according as they approve themselves fair and faithful to Physicians, will have
the more furtherance in this kind from them. For what was said before of
teaching Medicines and Vehicles to Patients, was intended to show, how a
Physician, if he were put to it, might go through in a Cure, without an
Apothecary, notwithstanding which, it is free for him to prescribe all such
Medicines to any Apothecary that he is satisfied in. And it is far from the
intention hereof to brand all Apothecaries; many of whom are allowed to be
honest and conscientious, as well as eminently able and skilful in their
profession, and such as may be trusted by Physicians, any of whom, as they
appear to be such, for all that has been said, may have as much to do in their
own proper Work and Trade as formerly, or within a small proportion, while
Physicians engage no farther in giving any thing of their own preparation, than
the practice of Apothecaries has necessitated them unto. And even as to those
Medicaments to be prepared by Physicians, they also may be lodged with such
Apothecaries, to be used by the Physicians prescription, or allowance, and not
otherwise (for preventing mis-application by such as are ignorant of them, and
ill success or fail of success thereupon, to the detriment of the Patients, and
undue defamation of the Medicines) and vended at such rates, as may make him a
saver (which ought to satisfy him since Concealment in his design) and the
Apothecary a reasonable gainer, and yet not be burdensome to the Patient: by
which means, when there is a good understanding between the Physician and the
Apothecary, and no cause or provocation given, there need be no notice taken to
the Patient of any such Medicine of the Physician's preparation administered,
but all things may be supposed prepared by the Apothecary. And this Transaction
between such Physicians and Apothecaries as shall agree upon it, will bring
this whole affair into as good a condition for the benefit of the latter, as to
their own Work and Trade, as ever it was heretofore when they kept within their
own bounds, and as of right it ought to be: and therefore should seem very
desirable and readily to be embraced by them, for avoiding greater
inconveniences and disadvantages, which by transcending their bounds, and
undertaking above their capacities, while they injuriously invade the rights of
the Physicians, they may most justly bring upon themselves.

A Postscript.
THIS Discourse was written above five years since, not in any haste to be made
public, but to give vent to and discharge the mind of the Author, of some
working thoughts, wherewith it was frequently occupied, by occasion of what he
had long observed, and could not but take notice of, tending to the ruin of
the Profession of Physic, by the Practice and designs of the Apothecaries, if
they should hold on the course they have used these many years, and nothing
should be done to undeceive the world concerning them and their actings to the
disadvantage of Physicians. It was some satisfaction of mind to make out in any
rational deduction and coherence of things, what had so much exercised and
taken up his thoughts, though it were but to lie by, or be communicated to
private Friends at most: and there being at first little thought or inclination
to publish what was so conceived in writing, the Plague and the Fire did
successively for a long time after divert from any such thoughts. If an account
be demanded, why this Discourse comes forth in public at this time; there
shall no necessity of it be pleaded, as the manner is with some Authors to make
the World believe them upon some account or other necessitated to publish their
works: neither shall importunity of Friends be insisted upon, though something
in that kind might be alleged. And, if the Author may be believed, it was no
design of private advantage by gaining profit or credit, that induced him to
the publishing hereof. They have been far different ways (and especially
compliance with Apothecaries) that have been in use hitherto, to improve a
Physician's practice: and therefore this, in reason, may be a course to ruin
it; except he be one that has the advantage of some reputation for approved
ability and honesty, attended with some considerable success. All that the
Author alleges for this publication, is, that the causes exciting and
provoking him to exercise his thoughts this way, and to put the same in
writing, continuing and increasing (that is the invasion of the Practice of
Physic by Apothecaries, and their actings to the prejudice of Physicians)
begat a presumption in his weak judgment, that such a Discourse as this might
do some right to the Profession of Physic, and might give occasion to
Physicians of acting somewhat toward the securing of it from utter ruin
(especially while it might be coincident with the honor of the Art) by
improvement of that part which concerns the preparation of Medicines; without
prostituting or exposing what they may attain thereby, to those that have no
right to make such advantage thereof, as hitherto they have done against
Physicians, upon their communications to them on the behalf of Patients.
Another presumption was, that it might undeceive the people in reference to the
supposed advantages of good received, or charges saved, by making use of such
Apothecaries in place of Physicians, as take upon them to practice Physic.

It has been far from the intention of the Discourse to hinder Apothecaries,
much less to ruin them (if that were possible) in the Trade that they have any
right to exercise, that is the making and sale of Medicines; or to advantage
the Practice of Physic, by the sale of any, of the Physicians own preparation:
but (according to what was before expressed) to give occasion to Physicians to
consider how much it concerns them in this age to endeavor the invention of
better than the Shop-Medicines (toword which their own exercise and experience
in the preparation will give great advantage and reserve them to themselves,
that they may have something more than any Apothecaries can pretend to be
Masters of, in order to improve the Art, as well as secure the practice to
themselves; which by this means it is both lawful and fair for them to do. And
though it be free for them to be so furnished as to be able to go through with
any Cure without employing an Apothecary (as the Apothecaries do, without
Physicians) yet this is not insisted upon, except in case of just provocation
or necessitating thereto: otherwise, the hinderance of the Apothecaries in the
Trade that of right belongs unto them, may be inconsiderable or in a small
proportion, according to what is offered in the conclusion of the precedent
Discourse; and that it should be any at all, is but what they have deservedly
brought upon themselves.

As to Empiricks swarming so numerously in the City of London, and all parts of
the Kingdom, it has not been the work of the Discourse to animadvert upon
them; because though many of them may be less fit to be tolerated in the
practice of Physic than some Apothecaries, yet their practice is more obvious
to public notice, and they having no such relation to Physicians as
Apothecaries have, are in no such capacity of betraying any trust committed
unto them by Physicians (which the communication of their practice to
Apothecaries, in the nature of it, is) or of fighting against Physicians with
their own weapons.

In the Discourse there has been no affectation of style or language, only an
endeavor after expressions adequate to the things intended: neither has there
been any strict observation of method; whence some things or passages, in
effect the same, are more than once, upon several occasions, brought in; but
all in this kind amounts not to so much, as to carry an appearance of a
designed enlargement. If the main intention thereof prove grounded, and of any
good importance to be publicly taken notice of; the defects or faults are
presumed not to be more or greater than a candid Reader, may connive at, or
pardon.

FINIS.

