ESSAYS ON SEVERAL Important Subjects IN PHILOSOPHY AND RELIGION.

By JOSEPH GLANVILL, Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty, and Fellow of the R.
S.

Imprimatur, Martii 27.1675. Thomas Tomkins.

LONDON, Printed by J. D. for John Baker, at the Three Pigeons, and Henry
Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1676.

ESSAYS. VIZ.
I. Against CONFIDENCE in PHILOSOPHY. II. Of SKEPTICISM, and CERTAINTY. III.
MODERN IMPROVEMENTS of Knowledge. IV. The USEFULNESS of PHILOSOPHY to THEOLOGY.
V. The Agreement of REASON, and RELIGION. VI. Against SADDUCISM in the matter
of WITCHCRAFT. VII. ANTIFANATICK Theology, and FREE Philosophy.
To the most Honorable HENRY Lord Marquess, and Earl of Worcester, Earl of
Glamorgan; Lord HERBERT Of Chepstow, Ragland, and Goure, Lord President of
Wales, Lord Lieutenant of the Counties of Gloucester, Hereford, Monmouth, and
Bristol; Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, And one of the Lords of
His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
MY LORD,
ALthough perhaps in strictness of judging there is somewhat of Impertinency in
such Addresses, yet Custom has obtained license for us Writers thus to
express our acknowledgments of favors, and to give public testimonies to the
Deserts of excellent Persons: Your Lordship affords me plenty of subject for
both these, and I humbly crave your leave to use the Liberty that is granted
without ^ensure ^n such occasions, to declare part of my resentments of them.

There is nothing more substantial, or valuable in Greatness, than the power it
gives to oblige; for by doing benefits we in some measure are like to Him, who
is the Lover of Men, and causes his Sun to shine upon the good, and upon the
evil: Nor does God Himself glory in the absoluteness of his Power, and
uncontroulableness of his Sovereign Will, as he does in the displays of his
Goodness: This, my Lord, is the right, and honorable use of that Greatness he
is pleased to vouchsafe unto Men; and this is that which makes it amiable, and
truly illustrious: Your Lordship knows this, and are as much by Nature as by
Judgment, formed to live according to such measures: And I think there was
never Person of your Lordship's rank, whose genera^ fashion, and converfation
was more suited to the sweetest and most obliging Rules of living: For besides
that your natural Genius has nothing ^aughty, or rough in it, nothing but what
is modest, gentle, and agreeable, your Lordships whole deportment is so
affable, and condescending, that the benignity of your temper seems to strive
for superiority over the greatness of your quality, which yet it no way
lessens, but illustrates. This is that which highly deserves, and commands the
love, and venerations of all that have the honor, and happiness to know you:
And you may justly challenge their devotion, and highest esteem upon all other
accounts that can give a great. Person any title to them. For your immediate
descent is from a long masculine line of great Nobles, and you are a Remainder
of the illustrious Blood of the PLANTAGENETS. What your Family has deserved
from the Crown, the vast supplies afforded his late Majesty by that Loyal
M^quess, your Grandfather, and the sufferings of your House for Him, do
sufficiently declare to the World: But your Lordship has no need that
Arguments of Honor, and respect should be fet^ht from your Progenitors; the
highest are due to your personal Virtues; and that way o^ living whereby you
give example to Men of quality, and show, how Honor, and Interest is to be
upheld. For you spend not your time, and Estate in the ^anities and Vices of
the Town, but live to your Country, and in it, after a sp^d, and most
honorable Fashion, observing ^he Mag^ence and Char^ty of the ancient Nobility,
with all the Decency, and Impr^ements of (...) Times. And perhaps your L^ ^ay
is one of the best P^ns the A^ yie^ of a Regular greatness, (...) which gr^ is
without vanity; and Nobleness without Luxury, or Intemperance: Where we see a
vast Family without noise, or confusion; and the greatest ^lenty, and freedom,
without provocations to any Debauchery, or Disorder. So that your Lordship's
cares, and thoughts are not taken up with the little designs that usually
entertain idle, or vainly employed Men, but in the Service of your King, and
Country, and conduct of your Affairs, with prudence and generosity; in which
you not only serve the present Age, but provide for the future. And, my Lord,
among the acknowledgments that are due to your Virtues, I cannot but observe
the care you the for the constant, daily Worship of God in your Family,
according to the Protestant Religion, professed by the Church of England, and the
example your Lordship gives by your own attendance on it. This is the f^rest
Foundation of greatness, yea it is the Crown, and luster of it: And when all
other magnificence is in the dust, and is shrivel'd into nothing, or at the
best, into a cold, and faint remembrance, the effects of this will stay by us,
and be our happiness for ever; And all other splendors, in comparison, are but
like the shining of ^ten wood to the Glorys of the Sun, and Stars. This also is
the best fence and security to our present comforts and enjoyments, both in
respect of that temperance and so^ety it produccth, and chiefly on the account
of the blessing of the Supreme Donor, who has made it the promises of this
Life, as well as of that which is to come: And therefore the wickedness of
those that take Liberty from their Riches and worldly greatness, to defy God,
and despise Religion, is as foolish and improvident, as it is monstrous and
unreasonable: and those brutish Men do not render themselves more hateful for
their impiety, than they are despicable for their folly. But I need not say
this to your Lordship, who are sensible of the absurdities, and malignity of
this vice, and give not the least countenance, or encouragement to it by your
practice; being cautious to abstain from all expressions, that grate on the
Honor of God, as you are free from any that can give just offense unto Men:
For your Lordship is none of those that shoot the arrows of bitter words, and
set their mouths against the Heavens; but your discourse and conversation is
adorned with that modesty and decency that becomes a great Nobleman, and a good
Christian.

My Lord, I have not given you (...) (...) (...) just acknowledgments, with
design to ^fie or please your Lordship, I know I need your pardon for the
trouble your modesty receives from them; but I have done it for the sake of
others, because we live in an Age wherein there is scarcity of such examples. I
know it is ufually indecent to commend Persons to themselves; but the custom of
Dedications will excuse this, which even severity and ill nature cannot impeach
of flattery, or extravagance.

And as I owe this Testimony to the merits whereby you serve and oblige the
Age, so I should acknowledge the Obligations your Lordship has conferred on my
self: but this will be a great duty, and business of my Life; for such empty
expressions as these verbal ones, are very unsuitable returns for real and
great favors; and if ever better acknowledgments are in my power, I shall
still remember what I owe your Lordship.

I now most humbly present you with a Collection of some Essays upon subjects
of importance. The design of them is to lay a foundation for a good habit of
thoughts, both in Philosophy, and Theology. They were some of them written
several years ago, and had trial of the World in diverse Editions: Now they come
abroad together (with some things that are new) reduced to such an Order, as is
most agreeable to my present judgment. I could have added much upon such
fertile, and useful Arguments; but I am willing to believe, I have said enough
for the capable and ingenious, and I doubt too much for others. If your
Lordship shall pardon their imperfections, and accept of the devotion
wherewith they are offered you, it will be the greatest honor, and
satisfaction to,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble, Most obliged, and most entirely devoted
Servant, JOSEPH GLANVILL.

The PREFACE.
I Shall not trouble the R^ with much formality, or (...) of Prefacing, but
only give a brief account of the following Discourses. I know it will be no
pl^usible excuse for any of their Imper^ctions to alledg, that some of them
were written when I w^ very young; since they came abroad again in an Age
wherein more maturity of judgment is expected. But the truth is, I am not grown
so much wiser yet, as to have altered any thing in the main of those
conceptions. If I had thought it worth the while, I might have been more exact
in new modelling, and could perhaps have given them a turn that would have been
more agreeable to some phancies, but my Laziness, or my Judgment made me think
there was no need of that trouble.

The FIRST Essay against Confidence in Philosophy, is quite changed in the way
of Writing, and in the Order. Methought I was somewhat fettered and tied in
doing it, and could not express my self with that case, freedom, and fullness
which possibly I might have commanded amid fresh thoughts: Yet it is so al^'d as
to be in a manner new.

The SECOND of Skepticism, and Certainty, was written when I was warm in the
Consideration of those matters, for the satisfaction of a particular Friend;
what I say was enough for his use, though the Subject is capable of much more;
and I had enlarged on it, but that I am lo^h to engage further in Philosophical
Arguments. I have annexed some of the things I said to Mr. White, but the main
of this Ess^y was never extant before.

The THIRD of Mod^rn Improvements, was first a Controversy: I have here given
it another shape. As I never begun a Quarrel, so I never will continue any,
when I can fairly let it fall. The Discourse was written violently against by
one, who was wholly unconcerned. The interest be pretended, was the defense of
his Faculty against a Passage, wherein he would have me say, That the ancient
Physicians could not cure a C^t-finger; which I never affirmed, or thought. But
that Person it now so well known, that I need say no more of him, or of that
C^est. His long studied, and triumphant Animadversions have given me no reason,
or occasion to alter any thing in the Treatise, except some few Errors of the
Press, over which he most ^d. He has writt^ diverse things against (...) (...),
(...), I have kept the promise I publicly made, and have never read them.

Besides this Antagonist, the learned Dr. Meric Casaubon, writ Reflections on
this Essay in a Letter to Dr. Peter Du Mo^n, who it seems had presented it to
him. They were Printed in ^e year 1669, and my Answers soon after ready; But
consider^g that the Doctor allowed all that which was my main design, ^d only
opposed his own mistakes, and suspicious, I thought fit to suppress my Reply;
and was the rather silent because not willing to appear in a Controversy with
a Person of Fame and Learning, who had treated me with so much Civility, and in
a way so different from that of my other Ass^ants.

I have further to advertise concerning this Essay, That whereas I mention
several Discourses of Mr. Boyl's, as intended for the Public, it is likely that
some of them by this may be extant, though my privacy and retirement has not
afforded me the notice of their publication.

The FOURTH Essay of the Usefulness of Philosophy to Theology, was Printed
under the Title of Philosophia Pia^ I was commanded to reprint it by a Person
of Honor, and great Fame, for whose Learning and universal Accomplishments I
have high and just venerations. This put into my thoughts the design of
revising of some of my other Writings, and bringing them together into a small
Collection, which I have here done.

The FIFTH of the Agreement of Reason and Religion, was at first a Visitation
Sermon, twice Printed before; I have now only cast it into the form of a
Discourse. It contains the substance of many thoughts and anxieties about that
important matter, in a little compass. My chief care was to state, and
represent the whole affair clearly; which I think I have done. The subject ^b
been written on by diverse since, who some of them have perplexed the matter
again; others have added no one thought. They have written a great deal, I wish
I could say, to purpose. I know this freedom is capable of a wrong
interpretation, but I am urged to it by a little vexa^on that the pr^enders to
such a subject should afford me no advantage for the improving my conceptions
on it.

The SIXTH Essay was one of the first written, and printed four times already.
It stands in this place because it (...) a p^rticular service Philosophy does,
in securing one of the outworks of Religion. The Demon of Tedworth that was
annexed, is ready to be Printed by it self, with a further Confirmation of that
certain^ though much oppos^d Relation. Since the publishing of these
Considerations there has a thing been put out, of the Question of Wi^choraft,
denying there are Witches, upon some of the weakest pretenses I have urged, and
disabled. Who ever reads this Essay will see that that Writer was answered
before he gave himself the trouble to be an Author on that Subject.

The SEVENTH is entirely new. It Is a description of such a Genius in Theology
and Philosophy, as I confess I my self like and I believe some others may. But
I blame no Man's differen^ sentiment, who allows the liberty of judging that
himself takes. I have borrowed the countenance, and color of my Lord Bacons
story; of which I have given the brief contents. The Essay is a mixture of an
Idaea, and a disguised History.

Reader, I have done now: But I make thee no promise that I will not write
again; for I perceive that those promises are hardly kept. To appear often in
the Press I know is censured; but I see not why that should be a fault, whilst
the Books themselves have not greater. If a Man write well, he may deserve
excuse at least; if otherwise, by use he may mend; or if there be no hopes of
that, his writing often is not worth objecting. Nor has any one need to
complain, since no one is concerned about what another Prints, further than
himself pleases: And since Men have the liberty to read our Books, or not:
Methinks they might give us leave to write, or forbear. This I say, because I
know this ill-natured humor, puts restraint upon the Pens of some great Men;
and tempts others to make promises, and excuses, which I think do not become
them. For my part I have as little leisure to write Books as other Men, for I
have that to do which may be reckoned an Employment; but every Man has some
va^ancies, and I love now and then in this manner to employ mine. It Is an
innocent way of entertaining a Man's self, to paint the image of his thoughts,
and no better a Writer than my self may happen to divert, if not to instruct,
some others by it.

ERRATA.
The Reader is desired to take notice of the following Errors of the Press,
some of which are so near, in sound, (...) the words of the Author, that they
may easily be mistaken for his.

ESSAY. I.
For. Read. Page. Line. BEst compact^ess Fo^st compactness, 13 2 The herb, and
the flower Herb, and flower, 16 2 Before us, our discoveries Before us, our
discoveries, 25 34 All opinions All their opinions, 26 21 Old Law, Old Saw, 28
29 Heavens above, etc. Heavens above it, 28 32 Other opinions Opinions, 30 11
His saying His sayings 31 24

ESSAY. II.
Revile against Rail against. 43 4 Boasts of; Boasts; 47 16 Isell^s Psellus 53
19 Are certain Contain, and are 62 13

ESSAY. III.
I take 'twas I take it 'twas, 4 10 Virulam Verulam 34 14 Self-absurd
Self-assur'd 52 12

ESSAY. IV.
Since then Since them 17 16 Difference Deference 26 25 Jumblings,
intermixtures Jumblings and intermixtures 32 13, 14 Flighted Slighted 34 7

ESSAY. V.
Their own interest Their interests 28 8

ESSAY. VI.
For Read. Page. Line. Streams Steams 14 22 F^m whatever What ever 56 17 She
apprending She apprehended 56 22

ESSAY. VII.
To them, All To them, All 6 13, 14 From the World From your World 6 37 Such of
them that Such of them as 7 1 They that made That they made 11 6 Main works
Main marks 30 33 ((...).) (2.) 43 31

Note, that the Sum of my Lord Bacons Atlantis, being the brief contents of his
Story, printed in the beginning of the 7th Essay, was intended as a Preface to
it, and should have been in the Italick Character; but the Printer has not
done that; nor made a sufficient Break to distinguish my Lord Bacons Contents
(ending Page 2. Line 12.) from the Authors Story.

Essay I. Against Confidence in Philosophy, And Matters of Speculation.
ONE of the first things to be done in order to the enlargement, and increase
of Knowledge, is to make Men sen^ible, how imperfect their Understandings are in
the present state, and how liable to deception: For hereby we are disposed to
more wari^ess in our Enquiries, and taken off from ^old and peremptory
Conclusions, which are some of the gre^test hind^rances of Intellect^al
improvement^ in the World. Therefore, by way of Intr^duction to Philosophy and
grounded Science, we must endeavor first to destroy the confidence of
Assertions, and to establish a prudent reservd^ss and modesty in Opinions. In
order to this, I shall here set down some thoughts I have had on this Subject.
And in doing it, I shall

1. Offer some considerable Instan^ of Humane Ignorance and Deficiency, even in
the main, and most usual things in Nature. 2. I shall enquire into the Ca^ses
of our imperfection in Knowledge, which will afford further evidence and proof
of it: and 3. Add some Strict^es against Dogmatizing in Philosophy, and all
matters of uncertain Speculation.

My Instances shall be drawn, 1. From the Nature of our Souls; and 2. from the
Constitution of our own, and other Bodies.

Ab^ (...) former I consider, That if Certainty were any where to be expected,
one would think it should be had in the Notices of our Souls, which are our
true selves, and whose Sentiments we most in wardly know: In things without us,
our shallowness and ignorance need not be matter of much wonder, since we
cannot pry into the hidden things of Nature, ^or obs^rue the first Springs and
Wheels that set the rest in motion. We see but little parcels of the Works of
God, and want Phenomenon to make entire and secure Hypotheses: But if that
whereby we know other things, know not it self; If our Souls are strangers to
things within them, which they have more advantage to understand than they have
in matters of external Nature; I think then, that this first will be a
considerable Instance of the scantness and imperfection of our Knowledge.

(1.) I take notice therefore, That the Learned have ever been at great odds
and uncertainty about the Nature of the Soul; concerning which every
Philosopher (almost) had a distinc^ Opinion: The Chald^ans held it a Virtue
without f^n; Xenocrates, and the Egyptians, a moving N^ber; Par^ider, a
compound of Light and Darkness; Hes^od and An^minder, a consistence of Earth
and Water: Th^les called in a Nature without rest; Heraclides supposed it to be
Light; Empedocles to be Blood; Zeno, the Quintessence of the Elements. G^len
would have it to be an hot Complexion; Hippocrates, a Spirit diffused through
the Body; Plato, a self-moving Substance; Aristotle, an Entelechy, or no body
knows w^; and Var^o, an heated and dispersed Air.

Thus have some of the greatest Men of ^ntient times differed in one of the
first Theories of Humane Nature, which may well be reckoned an Argument of
uncertain^y and ^perfection: And yet I account not the difficulties about this,
to be so hopeless, as they are in les^ noted Mysteries. The great occasion of
this diversity, and these mistakes, is, That Men would form some Image of the
Soul in their Fancies, as they do in the contemplation of corporeal Objects;
But this is a wrong way of speculating Immaterials, which may be see^ in their
effects and attributes, by way of reflection; but if, like children we run
behind the Glass to look for them, we shall m^ nothing there but disappointment.

2. There has been as much trouble and diversity in enqui^ing into the Origin
of the Soul, as in se^hing into the nature of it: In the opinion of some
learned M^, It was from the beginning of the World, created with the Heavens
and Light: others have thought it an extract from the Universal Soul: Some
fancied, it descended from the Moon; others from the Stars, or vast spaces of
the Ether above the Planets, some teach, That God is the immediate Author of
it; some that it was made by Angels; and some by the Parents. Whether it be
Created or Traduced, has been the great Ball of contention to the latter Ages,
and after all the stir about it, it is still as much a question as ever, and
perhaps may so continue till the great Day, that will put an end to all
Differences and Disputes. The Patrons of Traduction accuse their Adversaries of
affronting the Attributes of God; and the Assertors of Immediate Creation
impeach them of violence to the nature of things: And while each of the
Opinions strongly opposes the other, and feebly defends it self, some take
occasion thence to say, That both are right in their Oppositions, but both
mistaken in their Assertions. I shall not stir in the Waters that have been
troubled with so much contention: The Famous St. Austin, and others of the
celebrated Ancients, have been content to sit down here in a professed
Neutrality, and I will not endeavor to urge Confessions in things that will be
acknowledged; but shall note some Difficulties, that are not so usually
observed; which perhaps have more darkness in them, than these so much
controverted Doctrines.

1. I begin with the Union of the Soul and Body: In the Unions that we
understand, there is still, either some suitableness and likeness of Nature in
the things united, or some middle, participating Being by which they are
joined; but in this there is neither. The natures of Soul and Body, are at the
most extreme distance; and their essential Attributes most opposite: To be
impenetrable, discerpible and unactive, is the nature of all Body and Matter,
as such: And the properties of a Spirit are the direct contrary, to be
penetrable, indiscerpible, and self-motive: Yea, so different they are in all
things, that they seem to have nothing but Being, and the Transcendental
Attributes of that, in common: Nor is there any appearance of likeness between
them: For what has Rarefaction, Condensation, Division, and the other
properties and modes of Matter, to do with Apprehension, Judgment, and
Discourse, which are the proper acts of a Spiritual Being? We cannot then
perceive any congruity, by which they are united: Nor can there be any middle
sort of Nature that partakes of each, (as it is in some Unions) their Attributes
being such extremes: or, if there is any such Being, or any such possible, we
know nothing of it, and it is utterly unconceivable. So that, what the Cement
should be that unites Heaven and Earth, Light and Darkness, viz. Natures of so
diverse a make, and such disagreeing Attributes, is beyond the reach of any of
our Faculties: We can as easily conceive how a thought should be united to a
Statue, or a Sunbeam to a piece of Clay: how words should be frozen in the
Air, (as some say they are in the remote North) or how Light should be kept in
a Box; as we can apprehend the manner of this strange Union.

2. And we can give no better account how the Soul moves the Body. For whether
we conceive it under the notion of a Pure Mind, and Knowledge, with Sir K.
Digby; or of a Thinking Substance, with Descartes; or of a penetrable,
indiscerpible, self-motive Being, with the Platonists; It will in all these
ways be unconceivable how it gives motion to unactive matter: For how that
should move a Body, whose nature it is to pass through all Bodies without the
least jog or obstruction, would require something more than we know, to help us
to conceive. Nor will it avail to say, that it moves the Body by its vehicle of
corporeal Spirits; for still the difficulty will be the same, viz. How it moves
them?

3. We know as little, How the Soul so regularly directs the Animal Spirits,
and Instruments of Motion which are in the Body; as to stir any we have a will
to move: For the passages through which the S^rits are conveyed, being so
numerous, and there being so many others that cross and branch from each of
them, it is wonderful they should not lose their way in such a Wilderness: and I
think the wit of Man cannot yet tell how they are directed. That they are
conducted by some knowing Guide, is evident from the steadiness and regularity
of their motion: But what that should be, and how it does it, we are yet to
seek: That all the motions within us are not directed by the mere mechanic
frame of our Bodies, is clear from experience, by which we are assured, that
those we call Sp^taneous ones, a^e under the Government of the Will: at least
the determination of the Spirits into such or such passages, is from the Soul,
whatever we hold of the con^eyances after; and these, I think, all the
Philosophy in the World cannot make out to be purely mechanical. But though
this be gained, that the Soul is the principle of Direction, yet the difficulty
is no less than it was before: For unless we allow it a kind of inward sight of
every Vein, Muscle, Artery, and other Passage of its own Body; of the exact
site and position of them, with their several Windings, and secret Channels, it
will still be as unconceivable, how it should direct such intricate Motions, as
that one that was born blind should manage a Game at Chess, or marshal an Army:
And if the Soul have any such knowledge, we are not aware of it; nor do our
minds attend it: Yea, we are so far from this, That many times we observe not
any method in the outward performance, even in the greatest variety of
interchangable motions, in which a steady Direction is difficult, and a
Miscarriage easy: As we see an Artist will play on an Instrument of Music
without minding it; and the Tongue will nimbly run divisions in a Tune without
missing, when the Thoughts are engaged elsewhere: which effects are to be
ascribed to some secret Art of the Soul (if that direct) to which we are
altogether strangers.

4. But besides the Difficulties that lie more deep; we are at a loss even in
the knowledge of our Senses, that seem the most plain and obvious of our
Faculties. Our eyes that see other things, see not themselves; and the
Instruments of Knowledge are unknown. That the Soul is the percipient, which
alone has animadversion and sense, properly so called; and that the Body is
only the receiver, and conveyer of corporeal Motions, is as certain as
Philosophy can make it. Aristotle himself teaches it in that Maxim, (...): And
Plato affirms, That the Soul has life and sense; but that the Body in
strictness of speaking, has neither the one nor other: Upon which position all
the Philosophy of Descartes stands: And it is so clear, and so acknowledged a
Truth, among all considering Men, that I need not stay to prove it: But yet,
what are the Instruments of sensitive Perception, and particular convers of
outward Motions to the seat of Sense, is difficult to find; and how the pure
Mind can receive information from things that are not like it self, nor the
objects they represent, is, I think, not to be explained. Whether Sensation be
made by corporeal Emissions, and material Images; or by Motions that are
conveyed to the common sense, I shall not dispute: the latter having so
generally obtained among the Philosophers: But, How the Soul by mutation, and
motion in matter, a substance of an other kind, should be excited to action;
and how these should concern it, that is of so diverse a nature, is hardly to be
conceived. For Body cannot act on any thing, but by Motion; Motion cannot be
received but by Matter, the Soul is altogether immaterial; and therefore, how
shall we apprehend it to be subject to such Impressions? and yet Pain, and the
unavoidableness of our Sensations evidently prove, That it is subject to them.

Besides, How is it, and by what Art does the Soul read, That such an Image, or
Motion in matter, (whether that of her Vehicle, or of the Brain, the case is
the same) signifies such an Object? If there be any such Art, we conceive it
not: and it is strange we should have a Knowledge that we do not know. That by
diversity of Motions we should spell out Figures, Distances, Magnitudes,
Colors; things not resembled by them, we must ascribe to some implicit
inference, and deduction; but what it should be; and by what Mediums that
Knowledge is advanced, is altogether unintelligible. For though the Soul may
perceive Motions and Images by simple sense, yet it seems unconceivable it
should apprehend what they signify, and represent, but by some secret Art and
way of inference: An illiterate Person may see the Letters, as well as the most
Learned, but he knows not what they mean; and an Infant hears the sounds, and
sees the motion of the Lips, but has no conception conveyed to him, for want
of knowing the signification of them: such would be our case, not-withstanding
all the motions and impressions made by external things, if the Soul had not
some unknown way of learning by them the quality of the Objects. For instance,
Images and Motions have but very small room in the Brain, where they are
received, and yet they represent the gr^st Magni^; The Image, Figure, (or
what-ev^ else (...) may be called) of an Hemisphere of the Heavens, cannot have
a Subject larger than the pulp of a Walnut; and how can such petty Impressions,
make known a Body of so vast a wideness, without some kind of Mathematics in
the Soul: And except this be supposed, I cannot apprehend how Distances should
be perceived; but all Objects would appear in a cluster. Nor will the
Philosophy of Descartes help us here; For the moving diverse Filaments in the
Brain, cannot make us perceive such modes as Distances are, unless some such
Art and Inference be allowed, of which we understand nothing.

5. The Memory is a Faculty in us as obscure, and perhaps as un^ccountable as
any thing in Nature. It seems to be an Organical Power, because Diseases do
often blot out its Ideas, and cause Oblivion: But what the marks and
impr^ssions are by which the Soul r^members, is a question that has not yet
been very well res^'d. There are four principal Hypotheses by which an account
has been attempted; The Peripatetick, the Cartesian, the Digbaean, and the
Hobbian.

1. According to the Peripatetick Schools, Objects are conserved in the memory
by certain Intentional Species (as they call them) a sort of Beings, that have
a necessary dependence upon their Subjects; but are not material in their
formal Constitution and Nature. I need not say much against these arbitrary
precarious Creatures, that have no foundation in any of our Faculties: Or be
that how it will, They are utterly unintelligible; neither bodily, nor
spiritual; neither produced out of any thing, as the matter of their
production; nor out of nothing, which were Creation, and not to be allowed to
be in the power of every, or any finite Being. And though there were no such
contradictious contrivance in the framing these Species, yet they could not
serve any purpose, as to the Memory, since it is against the nature of ^native
Effects, such as these are, to subsist but by the continual influence of their
Causes; and so, if this were the true Solution, we could remember nothing
longer than the Object was in presence.

2. The account of Descartes is to this purpose; The Spirits are sent about
the Brain, to find the tracks of the Object^ we would call to mind; which
Tracks consist in this, viz, That the Pores through which the Spi^ts that came
from the Objects past, are more easily opened, and afford a more ready passage
to those others that seek to enter; whence arises a special motion in the
Glandule, which signifies this to be that we would remember.

But if our Remembrance arise from the easy motion of the Spirits through the
opened passages (according to this Hypothesis)? How then do we so distinctly
remember such a variety of Objects, whose Images pass the same way? And how the
Distances of Bodies that lie in a Line? Why should not the impelled Spirits
find other open passages, besides those made by the thing we would remember?
When there are such continual motions through the Brain from numerous other
Objects? Yea, in such a pervious substance as that is, why should not those
subtle Bodies meet, every where an easy passage? It seems to me that one
might conceive as well, how every Grain of Corn in a Sieve should be often
shaken through the same holes, as how the Spirits in the repeated acts of
Memory should still go through the same Pores: Nor can I well apprehend but
that those supposed opened passages, would in a short time be stopped up, either
by the natural gravity of the parts, or the making new ones near those; or
other alterations in the Brain.

3. The Hypothesis of Sir Kenelm Digby, is next, viz. That things are preserved
in the Memory by material Images that flow from them, which having imping'd on
the common sense, rebound thence into some vacant Cells of the Brain, where
they keep their ranks, and postures, as they entered, till again they are
stirred, and then they appear to the Fancy as they were first presented.

But how is it conceiveable, That those active Particles which have nothing to
unite them, or to keep them in any order, yea which are continually justled by
the occursion of other minute Bodies, (of which there must needs be great store
in this Repository) should so long remain in the same state and posture? And
how is it that when we turn over those Idaea's that are in our memory, to look
for any thing we would call to mind, we do not put all the Images into a
disorderly floating, and so make a Chaos of confusion there, where the exactest
Order is required: And indeed according to this account, I cannot see but that
our Memories would be more confused than our Dreams: and I can as easily
conceive how an heap of Ants can be kept to regular and uniform Motions.

4. Mr. Hobbs attempts another way; there is nothing in us, according to this
Philosopher, but Matter and Motion: All Sense is Reaction in Matter [ Leviath.
Chap. 1.] the decay of that Motion, and Reaction, is Imagination; [Chap. 2.]
And Memory is the same thing, expressing that decay. [ Ib.] So that according
to M. H. all our Perceptions are Motions, and so is Memory: Concerning which, I
observe but two things;

1. Neither the Brain, nor Spirits, nor any other material Substance within the
Head, can for any considerable time conserve Motion. The Brain is such a clammy
Consistence, that it can no more retain it than a Quagmire; The Spirits are
more liquid than the Air, which receives every Motion, and loses it as soon:
And if there were any other corporeal part in us, as fitly tempered to keep
Motion as could be wished; yet (2.) the Motions made in it would be quickly
deadned by Counter-Motions; and so we should never remember any thing, longer
than till the next Impression: and it is utterly impossible that so many
Motions should orderly succeed one another, as things do in our Memories; For
they must needs, ever and anon, thwart, interfere, and obstruct one another,
and so there would be nothing in our Memories, but Confusion and Discord.

Upon the whole we see, that this seemingly plain Faculty, the Memory, is a
Riddle also which we have not yet found the way to resolve.

I might now add many other difficulties, concerning the Understanding, Fancy,
Will, and Affections: But the Controversies that concern these, are so hotly
managed by the divided Sohools, and so voluminously handled by disputing Men,
that I shall not need insist on them: The only Difficulties about the Will, its
nature and manner of following the Understanding, etc. have confounded those
that have enquired into it; and shown us little else, but that our Minds are as
blind, as that Faculty is said to be by most Philosophers. These Controversies,
like some Rivers, the further they run, the more they are hid: And perhaps
after all our Speculations and Disputes, we conceive less of them now, than did
the more plain, and simple Understandings of former times. But whether we
comprehend or not, is not my present business to enquire, since I have confined
my self to an Account of some great Mysteries, that do not make such a noise in
the World: And having spoken of some that relate to our Souls; I come now to
some others that concern

II. BODIES: I begin with our Own; which though we see, and feel, and have them
nearest to us, yet their inward Constitution and Frame, is hitherto an
undiscovered Region: And the saying of the Kingly Prophet, that we are
wonderfully made, may well be understood of that admiration, that is the
Daughter of Ignorance.

For, 1. There has no good account been yet given, how our Bodies are formed:
That there is Art in the contrivance of them, cannot be denied, even by those
that are least beholden to Nature: and so elegant is their composure, that this
very Consideration saved Galen from being an Atheist: And I cannot think that
the branded Epicurus, Lucretius and their Fellows were in earnest, when they
resolved this Composition into a fortuitous range of Atoms: 'Twere much less
absurd to suppose, or say, that a Watch, or other curious Automaton, did
perform diverse exact and regular Motions, by chance; than it is to affirm, or
think, that this admirable Engine, an Humane Body, which has so many Parts,
and Motions, that orderly cooperate for the good of the whole, was framed
without the Art of some knowing Agent: But who the skilful, particular Archeus
should be; and by what Instruments, and Art this Fabric is erected, is still
unknown. That God has made us, and fashioned our Bodies in the nethermost
parts of the Earth, is undoubted; But he is the first and universal Cause, who
transacts things in Nature by secondary Agents, and not by his own immediate
hand: (The supposal of this would destroy all Philosophy, and enquiry after
Causes) So that He is still supposed; but the Query is of the next, and
particular Agent, that forms the Body in so exquisite a manner; a Question that
has not yet been answered. Indeed by some it is thought enough to say, That it
is done by the Plastic Faculty; and by others it is believed that the Soul is
that that forms it. For the Plastic Faculty, it is a big word, but it conveys
nothing to the Mind: For it signifies but this, that the Body is formed by a
formative Power; that is, it is done, by a power of doing it. But the doubt
remains still, what the Agent is that has this power? The other Opinion of the
Platonists, has two Branches: some will have it to be the particular Soul,
that fashions its own Body; others suppose it to be the general Soul of the
World: If the former be true, By what knowledge does it do it? and how? The
means, and manner are still occult, though that were granted. And for the other
way, by a general Soul; That is an obscure Principle, of which we can know but
little; and how that acts (if we allow such a being) whether by knowledge, or
without, the Assertors of it may find difficulty to determine. The former makes
it little less than God himself; and the latter brings us back to Chance, or a
Plastic Faculty. There remains now but one account more, and that is the
Mechanical; viz. That it is done by mere Matter moved after such, or such a
manner. Be that so: It will yet be said, that Matter cannot move it self; the
question is still of the Mover; The Motions are orderly, and regular; Query,
Who guides? Blind Matter may produce an elegant effect for once, by a great
Chance; as the Painter accidentally gave the Grace to his Picture, by throwing
his Pencil in rage, and disorder upon it; But then constant Uniformities, and
Determinations to a kind, can be no Results of unguided Motions. There is
indeed a Mechanical Hypothesis to this purpose; That the Bodies of Animals and
Vegitables are formed out of such particles of Matter, as by reason of their
Figures will not lie together, but in the order that is necessary to make such
a Body; and in that they naturally concur, and rest; which seems to be
confirmed by the artificial Resurrection of Plants, of which Chemists speak,
and by the regular Figures of Salts, and Minerals; the hexagonal of Crystal,
the Hemi-spherical of the Fairy-Stone, and diverse such like. And there is an
experiment mentioned by approved Authors, that looks the same way; It is, That
after a decoction of Herbs in a frosty Night, the shape of the Plants will
appear under the Ice in the Morning: which Images are supposed to be made by
the congregated E^uvia of the Plants themselves, which loosly wandering up and
down in the Water, at last settle in their natural place and order, and so make
up an appearance of the Herbs from whence they were emitted. This account I
confess has something ingenious in it; But it is no solution of the Doubt. For
how those heterogenous Atoms should hit into their proper places, in the midst
of such various and tumultuary Motions, will still remain a question: Let the
aptness of their Figures be granted, we shall be yet to seek for something to
guide their Motions: And let their natural Motion be what it will, gravity or
levity, direct or oblique, we cannot conceive how that should carry them into
every particular place where they are to lie; especially considering they must
needs be sometimes diverted from their course by the occursion of many other
Particles. And as for the Regular Figures of many inaminate Bodies, that
consideration does but multiply the doubt.

2. The union of the parts of Matter, is a thing as difficult as any of the
former: There is no account that I know, has yet appeared worth considering,
but that of Descartes; viz. That they are united by juxta-position, and rest.
And if this be all, Why should not a bag of Dust be of as firm a Consistence,
as Marble or Adamant? Why may not a Bar of Iron be as easily broken as a pipe
of Glass; and the Egyptians Pyramids blown away, as soon as those inverst ones
of smoke. The only reason of difference pretended by some, is, that the Parts
of solid Bodies are held together by natural Hooks; and strong ones, by such
Hooks as are more tough and firm: But how do the parts of these Hooks stick
together? Either we must suppose infinite of them holding each other; or come
at last to parts united by mere juxta-position, and rest. The former is very
absurd, for it will be necessary, That there should be some, upon which the
Cohesion of all the rest should depend; otherwise, all will be an heap of Dust.
But in favor of the Hypothesis of Descartes, it may be said, That the
closeness and compactness of the parts resting together, makes the strength of
the Union: For, (as that Philosopher says) Every thing continues in the state
wherein it is, except something more powerful alter it; and therefore the Parts
that rest close together will so continue, till they are parted by some other
stronger Body: Now the more parts are pent together, the more able they will be
for resistance; and what has best compactness, and by consequence fewer parts,
will not be able to make any alteration in a Body that has more. According to
this Doctrine, what is most dense, and least porous, will be most coherent, and
least discerpible; which yet is contrary to experience. For we find the most
porous, spongy Bodies, to be ofttimes the most tough of Consistence. We easily
break a Tube of Glass or Crystal; when one of Elm, or Ash, will hardly be torn
in pieces: and yet as the parts of the former are more, so are they more at
rest; since the liquid Juice diffused through the Wood is in continual
agitation, which in Descartes his Philosophy is the cause of fluidity; so that
according to his Principles, the dryest Bodies should be the most firm; when on
the contrary, we find that a proportionate humidity contributes much to the
strength of the Union. (Sir K. Digby makes it the Cement it self) and the
dryness of many Bodies is the cause of their fragility, as we see it is in Wood,
and Glass, and diverse other Things.

3. We are as much at a loss about the composition of Bodies, whether it be out
of Indivisibles, or out of parts always divisible: For though this question
has been attempted by the subtilest Wits of all Philosophic Ages; yet after
all their distinctions, and shifts, their new-invented words, and modes, their
niceties and tricks of subtilty, the Matter stands yet unresolved. For do what
they can, Actual, Infinite extension every where; Equality of all Bodies,
Impossibility of Motion, and a world more of the most palpable Absurdities,
will press the Assertors of Infinite Divisibility: Nor on the other side, can
it be avoided, but that all Motions would be equal in velocity: That the Lines
drawn from side to side in a Pyramid, would have more Parts than the Basis:
That all Bodies would be swallowed up in a Point; and many other
Inconsistencies will follow the Opinion of Indivisibles. But because I have
confined my self to the Difficulties that are not so usually noted; I shall not
insist on these, but refer the Reader, that has the humor, and leisure, to
inquire into such Speculations, to Oviedo, Pontius, Ariaga, Carelton, and other
Jesuits, whose management of this Controversy, with equal force on either
side, is a considerable Argument of the unaccountableness of this Theory, and
of the weakness of our present Understandings.

I might now take into consideration the Mysteries of Motion, Gravity, Light,
Colors, Vision, Sounds, and infinite such like, (things obvious, yet unknown)
but I insist no further on Instances, but descend to the second thing I
propounded to treat of, viz.

II. The CAUSES of our Ignorance, and Mistakes; And in them we shall find
further evidence of the imperfection of our Knowledge. The Causes to be
considered, are either, 1. The Difficulties and Depth of Science: Or, 2. The
present temper of our Faculties. Science is the Knowledge of things in their
Causes; and so it is defined by the Pretenders to it. Let us now enquire a
little into the difficulties of attaining such Knowledge.

1. We know no Causes by Simple Intuition, but by Consequence and Deduction;
and there is nothing we so usually infer from, as Concomitancy; for instance,
We always feel heat when we come near the Fire, and still perceive Light when
we see the Sun; and thence we conclude, that these are the Causes respectively
of Heat, and Light; and so in other things. But now in this way of inference
there lies great uncertainty: For if we had never seen more Sun, or Stars, than
we do in cloudy weather, and if the Day had always broke with a Wind, which had
increast and abated with the Light; we should have believed firmly that one of
them had been the cause of the other; and so Smoke had been undoubtedly thought
the efficient of the Heat, if nothing else had appeared with it. But the
Philosophy of Descartes furnishes us with a better Instance; All the World
takes the Sun to be the Cause of Day, from this Principle of Concomitance: But
that Philosopher teaches, That Light is caused by the Conamen, or endeavor of
the Matter of the Vortex to recede from the Center of its Motion; so that were
there none of that fluid Ether in the midst of our World, that makes up the
Sun, yet the pressure of the Globuli (as he calls those Particles) upon our
Eyes, would not be considerably less: and so according to this Hypothesis,
there would be Light though there were no Sun, or Stars; and Evening, and
Morning might naturally be before, and without the Sun. Now I say not that this
Opinion is true and certain; but it is possible, and I know no absurdity in it;
and consequently, our concluding a Causality from Concomitancy, here, and in
other Instances may deceive us.

2. Our best natural Knowledge is imperfect, in that, after all our confidence,
Things still are possible to be otherwise: Our Demonstrations are raised upon
Principles of our own, not of Universal Nature; And, as my Lord Bacon notes, we
judge from the analogy of our selves, not the Universe: Now many things are
certain, according to the Principles of one Man, that are absurd in the
apprehensions of many others: and some appear impossible to the vulgar, that
are easy to Men of more improved Understandings. That is extravagant in one
Philosophy, which is a plain truth in another: and perhaps what is most
impossible in the apprehensions of Men; may be otherwise in the Metaphysics,
and Physiology of Angels. The sum is, We conclude this to be certain, and that
to be impossible from our own narrow Principles, and little Scheams of Opinion.
And the best Principles of natural Knowledge in the World, are but Hypotheses,
which may be, and may be otherwise: So that though we may conclude many things
upon such and such Suppositions, yet still our Knowledge will be but fair, and
hopeful Conjecture: And therefore we may affirm that things are this way, or
that, according to the Philosophy that we have espoused; but we strangely
forget our selves when we plead a necessity of their being so in Nature, and an
impossibility of their being otherwise. The ways of God in Nature (as in
Providence) are not as ours are: Nor are the Models that we frame any way
commensurate to the vastness and profundity of his Works; which have a depth in
them greater than the Well of Democritus.

3. We cannot properly and perfectly know any thing in Nature without the
knowledge of its first Causes, and the Springs of Natural Motions: And who has
any pretense to this? Who can say he has seen Nature in its beginnings? We
know nothing but Effects, nor can we judge at their immediate Causes, but by
proportion to the things that do appear; which no doubt are very unlike the
Rudiments of Nature. We see there is no resemblance between the Seed, and the
Herb, and the Flower; between the Sperm, and the Animal; The Egg, and the Bird
that is hatched of it; And since there is so much dissimilitude between Cause
and Effect in these apparent things, we cannot think there is less between them
and their first, and invisible Efficients: Now had not our Senses assured us of
it, we should never have suspected that Plants, or Animals did proceed from
such unlikely Originals; never have imagined, that such Effects should have
come from such Causes, and we can conceive as little now of the nature and
quality of the Causes that are beyond the prospect of our Senses: We may frame
Fancies and Conjectures of them, but to say that the Principles of Nature are
just as our Philosophy makes them, is to set bounds to Omnipotence, and to
circumscribe infinite Power, and Wisdom, by our narrow Thoughts and Opinions.

4. Every thing in Nature has relation to diverse others; so that no one Being
can be perfectly known without the knowledge of many more: Yea, every thing
almost has relation to all things; and therefore he that talks of strict
Science, pretends to a kind of Omniscience. All things are linkt together; and
every Motion depends upon many prerequired Motors; so that no one can be
perfectly known singly. We cannot (for instance) comprehend the cause of any
Motion in a Watch, unless we are acquainted with other dependent Motions; and
have insight into the whole mechanical contexture of it; and we know not the
most contemptible Plant that grows in any perfection, and exactness, until we
understand those other things that have relation to it; that is, almost every
thing in Nature. So that each Science borrows from all the rest, and we attain
not any single one, without comprehending the whole Circle of Knowledge.

I might say much more on this Subject, but I may have further occasion of
speaking to it, under the second General, viz. The Consideration

II. Of the Imperfection of our present Faculties; and the malign Influence our
Senses and Affections have upon our Minds. I begin with the SENSES; and shall
take notice, 1. Of their Dullness; and 2. of their liableness to Error and
Mistake.

1. Our Senses are very scant and limited; and the Operations of Nature subtle,
and various. They are only its grosser Instruments, and ways of working that
are sensible; the finer Threads, and immediate Actions are out of reach; Yea,
it is greatest works are performed by invisible, insensible Agents.

Now most of our Conceptions are taken from the Senses, and we can scarce judge
of any thing but by the help of material Images, that are thence conveyed to
us. The Senses are the Fountain of natural Knowledge; and the surest and best
Philosophy is to be raised from the Phoenomena, as they present them to us:
when we leave these, and retire to the abstracted notions of our minds, we
build Castles in the Air, and form Chymerical Worlds, that have nothing real in
them. And yet when we take our accounts from those best Informers, we can learn
but very little from their Discoveries. For we see but the shadows, and
outsides of things; like the men in Plato's Den, who saw but the Images of
external Objects, and but so many as came in through the narrow entrance of
their Cave. The World of God, no doubt, is an other thing, than the World of
Sense is; and we can judge but little of its amplitude and glory by the
imperfect Idea we have of it. From this narrowness of our Senses it is, that we
have been so long ignorant of a World of Animals that are with us, and about
us, which now at last the Glasses, that in part cure this imperfection, have
discovered; and no doubt, there is yet a great variety of living Creatures that
our best Instruments are too gross to disclose: There is Prodigious fineness,
and subtilty in the works of Nature, which are too thin for our Senses, with
all the advantages Art can lend them: And many, the greatest, and the best of
its Objects are so remote that our Senses reach them not by any Natural or
Artificial helps: So that we cannot have other than short and confufed
apprehensions of those works of Nature: And I sometimes fear, that we scarce
yet see any thing as it is. But this belongs to an other consideration, viz.

2. Our Senses extremely deceive us in their reports, and informations; I mean,
they give occasion to our minds to deceive themselves. They indeed represent
things truly as they appear to them, and in that there is no deception; but
then, we judge the exterior Realities to be according to those appearances, and
here is the Error and Mistake. But because the Senses afford the ground and
occasion, and we naturally judge according to their impressions, therefore the
Fallacies and Deceits are imputed to their misinformations. This I premise, to
prevent a Philosophical mistake, but shall retain the common way of speaking,
and call those the errors of the Senses. That these very frequently misreport
things to us, we are assured even from themselves: a straight stick seems
crooked in the Water, and a square Tower round at a distance; All things are
Yellow to those that have the Jaundice, and all Meats are bitter to the
disaffected Palate: To which vulgar Instances it will presently be answered,
that the Senses in those cases, are not in their just circumstances; but want
the fit medium, due distance, and sound disposition: which we know very well,
and learn there was somewhat amiss; because our Senses represent those things
otherwise at othertimes: we see the stick is straight when it is out of the
Water; and the Tower is square when we are near it. Objects have other Colors,
and Meats other tastes, when the Body, and its Senses are in their usual
temper. In such cases, Sense rectifies its own mistakes, and many times one the
errors of another; but if it did not do so, we should have been always
deceived even in those Instances: and there is no doubt, but that there are
many other like deceptions, in which we have no contrary evidence from them to
disabuse us; not in the matters of common Life, but in things of remoter
speculation, which this state seems not to be made for. The Senses must have
their due medium, and distance, and temper; if any of these are amiss, they
represent their Objects otherwise to us than they are: Now these, we may
suppose they generally have, in the necessary matters of Life, if not to report
things to us as they are in themselves, yet to give them us so, as may be for
our accommodation, and advantage: But how are we assured, that they are thus
rightly disposed, in reference to things of Speculative Knowledge? What medium,
what distance, what temper is necessary to convey Objects to us just so, as
they are in the realities of Nature? I observed before that our Senses are
short, imperfect, and uncommensurate to the vastness and profundity of things,
and therefore cannot receive the just Images of them: and yet we judge all
things according to those confused, and imperfect Idaeas, which must needs lead
us into infinite errors, and mistakes.

If I would play the Sceptick here, I might add, That no one can be sure that
any Objects appear in the same manner to the Senses of other men, as they do to
his: Yea, it may seem probable, that they do not? For though the Images,
Motions, (or whatever else is the cause of Sense) may be alike as from them;
yet the representations may be much varied according to the nature and quality
of the recipient: we find things look otherwise to us through an Optic Tube,
then they do when we view them at a distance with our naked eyes: the same
Object appears red, when we look at it through a Glass of that Color, but
green when we behold it through one of such a Tincture. Things seem otherwise
when the Eye is distorted, then they do, when it is in its natural, ordinary,
posture; and some extraordinary alterations in the Brain double that to us,
which is but a single Object: Colors are different, according to different
Lights, and Positions; as it is in the necks of Doves, and folds of Scarlet:
Thus difference in circumstances alters the sensation; and why may we not
suppose as much diversity in the Senses of several men, as there is in those
accidents, in the perceptions of one? There is difference in the Organs of
Sense, and more in the temper and configuration of the inward parts of the
Brain, by which motions are conveyed to the seat of Sense; in the Nerves,
Humors and Spirits, in respect of tenuity, liquidity, aptitude for motion, and
diverse other circumstances of their nature; from which it seems that great
diversity does arise in the manner of receiving the Images, and consequently in
the perceptions of their Objects. So then, though every man knows, how things
appear to himself, yet what impressions they make upon the so different Senses
of another, he only knows certainly, that is conscious to them And though all
men agree to call the impression they feel from such, or such an Object, by the
same name; yet no one can assuredly tell but that the Sentiment may be
different; It may be one man has the impression of Green from that, which in
another begets the Sense of Yellow; and yet they both call it Green, because
from their infancy they were wont to join that word to that Sentiment, which
such an Object produced in their particular Sense; though in several men it
were a very diverse one. This I know some will think hard to be understood; but
I cannot help that: Those that Consider will find it to be very plain; and
therefore I shall spend no more words about it.

The Sum is, Our Senses are good Judges of Appearances, as they concern us: but
how things are in themselves, and how they are to others, it should seem, we
cannot certainly learn from them: And therefore when we determine that they
are, and must be according to the representations of our individual Senses, we
are very often grossly deceived in such sentences; to which yet we are exceeding
prone; and few but the most exercised minds, can avoid them. Of this I Will give
a great Instance or two.

1. It is almost universally believed (at least by the vulgar,) that the Earth
rests on the Center of the World; and those ancient Philosophers have been
extremely hooted at, and derided, that have taught the contrary doctrine: For
my part, I shall affirm nothing of the main question; but this I say, That the
common inducement to believe it stands still, viz, the Testimony of Sense, is
no argument of it: And whether the opinion of Pythagoras, Copernicus,
Descartes, Galilaeo, and almost all late Philosophers, of the motion of the
Earth, be true, or false; the belief of its Rest, as far as it arises from the
presumed evidence of Sense, is an error.

That there is some common motion that makes the day, and night and the
varieties of seasons, is very plain and sensible; but whether the Earth, or the
Sun be the Body moved, none of our Senses can determine; To Sense the Sun
stands still also; and no Eye can perceive its Actual motion. For though we
find, that in a little time it has changed its Position, and respect to us;
yet whether that change be caused by its translation from us, or ours from it,
the Sense can never tell: and yet from this, and this only, the greatest part
of mankind believes its motion. On the other side, The standing still of the
Earth is concluded the same way; and yet, though it did move, it would appear
fixed to us as now it does, since we are carried with it, in a regular and most
even course, in which case motion is not perceiv^d; as we find sometimes in
sailing in a Ship, when the Shores feem to move, and not that; -- Littus,
Campique recedunt.

But I give another Instance of a like deception; It is, 2. The translation of
our own passions to things without us: as we judge Light and Heat, and Cold, to
be formally in the Sun, Fire, and Air; when as indeed they are but our own
perceptions. As they are in those external Subjects, they are nothing, but such
or such configurations and motions in matter; but when they work on us, they
produce different sentiments, which we call Heat, and Light, etc. This will
appear to be true to any one that can freely and attentively consider it; and
yet it will be thought so strange and absurd by the generality of men, that
they will as soon believe with Anaxagoras, that Snow is black, as him that
affirms, that the Fire is not formally hot; that is, that the very thing we
feel, and call Heat in our selves, is not so in that body: when as there, it is
but a violent agitation of the subtle, and divided parts of matter, that in it
self is nothing like what we perceive from it, and call Heat: That we are hot
our selves, we feel; but that the Fire has any such formal quality as is in
our Sense, no Sense can inform us; and yet from its supposed evidence men
generally so conclude. Which is an other considerable Instance of the false
judgments we make on the occasion of our Senses.

And now, It is not only common understandings that are abused, and deceived by
their Senses; but even the most advanced Reasons are many times missed by them:
And since we live the Life of Beasts before we grow up to Men, and our minds
are Passive to the impressions of Sense, it cannot be, that our first knowledge
should be other, than heaps of Error, and misconception; which might be
rectified by our after-judgments, but that it is another unhappiness of our
natures, that those early impressions stick by us, and we are exeedingly apt
pertinaciously to adhere to them: And though our improving understandings do in
part undeceive us, and destroy some grosser errors; yet others are so fastened,
that they are never after removed, or dissetled. So that we are not quite
weaned from our Childhood till we return to our second Infancy, and even our
Grey-Heads out-grow not those errors, which we learnt before the Alphabet. And
therefore since we contracted so many prejudices in our tender years, and those
Errors have as plausible an appearance, as the most genuine truths, the best
way to attain true Knowledge is to suspend the giving our confirmed assent to
those Receptions, till we have looked them over by an impartial inquiry; To
reckon of them all as false, or uncertain, till we have examined them by a
free, and unpossest Reason; and to admit nothing but what we clearly, and
distinctly perceive. This is the great Rule, in the excellent Method of
Descartes; but the practice of it requires such a clear, sedate and intent
mind, as is to be found but in a very few rare tempers; and even in them,
prejudices will creep in, and spoil the perfection of their Knowledge.

I might discourse next of those Errors that do arise from the fallacies of our
Imaginations, whose unwarrantable compositions and applications, do very
frequently abuse us: and indeed, the Reason of the greatest part of mankind is
nothing else but various Imagination; Yea, it is a hard matter for the best and
freest minds to deliver themselves from the Prejudices, of Fancy; which,
besides the numerous lesser Errors they betray us into, are great occasions
(particularly) of those many mistakes we are guilty of in speculating
Immaterial Natures, and inquiring into the Attributes of God; and we are much
entangled, and puzzled by them, in all things we think, or say about Infinity,
Eternity and Immensity, and most other of the sublime Theories both of
Philosophy, or Theology. But these all arise, either from the false Images of
Sense, and the undue compositions, and wrong inferences that we raise from
them; and therefore I shall not need make this a distinct head from the other,
of which I have just treated.

I come now, II. To consider the evil Influence our Affections have over our
Understandings, by which they are great Reasons of our Ignorance, and Mistakes.
Periit Judicium ubi res transiit in affectum. That Jupiter himself cannot be
Wise, and in Love, was a saying of the Ancients, and may be understood in a
larger Sense then They meant. That understanding only is capable of passing a
just Sentence, that is, as Aristotle says of the Law, (...); but where the
Will and Passions have the casting voice, the cause of Truth is desperate. Now
this is the present unhappy state of Man; our lower powers are gotten
uppermost, and we see like Men on their Heads, as Plato observed of old, That
on the right hand, which indeed is on the left. The Woman in us still
prosecutes a deceit like that begun in the Garden; and we are wedded to an
Eve, as fatal as the Mother of ous Miseries. The Deceiver soon found this soft
place in Adam, and Innocence it self did not secure him from this way of
seduction: We now scarce see any thing but through our passions, that are
wholly blind, and incapable: So that the Monsters that story relates to have
their Eyes in their Breasts, are pictures of us in our invisible selves.

And now, all things being double-handed, and having appearances both of Truth,
and Falsehood, the engaged affection magnifieth the shows of Truth, and makes
the beloved opinion appear as certain; while the considerations on the
otherside being lessened and neglected, seem as nothing, though they are never
so weighty and considerable. But I shall be more particular in the account of
these Deceptions.

Our Affections engage us, by our love to our selves, or others; the former in
the Instance of, 1. Natural disposition, 2. Custom and Education, and 3.
Interest: the latter, in our over-fond Reverence to 4. Antiquity and Authority.

1. There is a certain congruity of some opinions to the particular tempers of
some men: For there is a complexion, and temperament in the mind, as well as in
the body: And the doctrines that are suited to the genius, and special
disposition of the understanding, find easy welcome, and entertainment: whereas,
those that are opposite to it, are rejected with an invincible contempt and
hatred. On this account we find men taking in some particular Opinions with
strange pleasure and satisfaction, upon their first proposals; when they are
incurably barred up against others, that have the advantage of more reason to
recommend them. And I have observed often, that even some Theories in
Philosophy will not lie in some minds, that are otherwise very capable and
ingenious: of which I take this to be a considerable Instance, That diverse
learned men profess, They cannot conceive a Spirit (or any being) without
extension; whereas others say, They cannot conceive, but that whatever is
extended is impenetrable, and consequently corporeal; which diversity I think,
I have reason to ascribe to some difference in the natural temper of the mind.

2. But another very fatal occasion of our mistakes, is the great prejudice of
Custom and Education: which is so unhappily prevalent, that though the Soul
were never so truly (...) (as the Philosopher called it) an unwritten table in
it self; yet this does very often so scribble on it, as to render it incapable
of other impressions: we judge all things by those Anticipations; and condemn,
or applaud them, as they differ, or agree, with our first Opinions. It Is on
this account that almost every Country censures the Laws, Customs, and
Doctrines of every other, as absurd, and unreasonable, and are confirmed in
their own follies beyond possibility of conviction. Our first Age is like the
melted wax to the prepared Seal, that receives any impression; and we suck in
the opinions of our Clime and Country, as we do the common Air, without
thought, or choice; and which is worse, we usually sit down under those
Prejudices of Education and Custom all our Lives after: For either we are loath
to trouble our selves to examine the Doctrines we have long taken for granted,
or we are scared from inquiring into the things that Custom and common Belief
have made Venerable and Sacred. We are taught to think, with the Hermit, that
the Sun shines no were but in our Cells, and that Truth and Certainty are
confined within that Belief, in which we were first instructed. From whence we
contract an obstinate adherence to the conceits in which we were bred, and a
resolved contempt of all other Doctrines: So that what Astrologers say of our
Fortunes, and the events of common life, may as well be said of the opinions of
the most, that they are written in their Stars, having as little freedom in
them as the effects of Destiny. And since the Infusions of Education have such
interest in us, are so often appealed to as the dictates of Truth, and
impartial Reason; it is no wonder we are so frequently deceived, and are so
imperfect in our Knowledge. Another cause of which is,

3. The power that Interest has over our Affections, and by them over our
Judgments. When men are engaged by this, they can find Truth any where; and
what is thought convenient to be true, will at last be believed to be so Facile
credimus quod volumus. So that I do not think, that the learned Assertors of
vain, and false Religions, and Opinions, do always profess against their
Consciences; rather their Interest brings their Consciences to their
Profession; for this does not only corrupt Men's Practice, but very often
pervert their Minds also, and insensibly mislead them into Errors.

4. But our Affections misguide us by the respect we have to others, as well as
by that we bear to our selves: I mentioned The Instances of Antiquity, and
Authority. We look with a superstitious Reverence upon the accounts of past
Ages, and with a supercilious Severity on the more deserving products of our
own: a vanity that has possessed all times as well as ours; and the golden Age
was never present. For as an inconsiderable Weight by virtue of it is distance
from the Center of the Balance will outweigh much heavier bodies that are
nearer to it; so the most light, and vain things that are far off from the
present Age, have more Esteem, and Veneration then the most considerable, and
substantial that bear a modern date: and we account that nothing worth, that is
not fetched from a far off; in which we very often deceive our selves as that
Mariner did, that brought home his Ship Fraught with common Pebbles from the
Indies. We adhere to the Determinations of our Fathers as if their Opinions
were entailed on us; and our Conceptions were ex-Traduce.

And thus while every Age is but an other show of the former, it is no wonder
that humane science is no more advanced above it is ancient Stature: For while
we look on some admired Authors as the Oracles of all Knowledge, and spend that
time, and those pains in the Study and Defense of their Doctrines, which should
have been employed in the search of Truth, and Nature; we must needs stint our
own Improvements and hinder the Advancement of Science Since while we are
Slaves to the Opinions of those before us. Our Discoveries, like water will not
rise higher then their Fountains; and while we think it such Presumption to
endeavor beyond the Ancients, we fall short of Genuine Antiquity, Truth:
unless we suppose them to have reached perfection of Knowledge in spite of
their own acknowledgments of Ignorance.

And now whereas it is observed, that the Mathematics and Mechanic Arts have
considerably advanced, and got the start of other Sciences; this may be
considered as a chief cause of it, That their Progress has not been retarded
by this reverential awe of former Discoveries: 'Twas never an Heresy to
out-limn Apelles, or to out-work the Obelisks: Galilaeu^ without a Crime,
out-saw all Antiquity, and was not afraid to believe his Eyes, in reverence to
Aristotle and Ptolomy. It Is no disparagement to those famous Optic Glasses
that the Ancients never used them; nor are we shy of their Informations,
because they were hid from Ages. We believe the polar virtue of the Loadstone,
without a Certificate from the days of old, and do not confine our selves to
the sole conduct of the Stars, for fear of being wiser than our Fathers. Had
Authority prevailed here, the fourth part of the Earth had been yet unknown,
and Hercules Pillars had still been the Worlds Ne ultra: Senecd's Prophecy had
been an unfulfil'd Prediction, and one Moity of our Globes an empty Hemisphere.

It Is true, we owe much reverence to the Ancients, and many thanks to them for
their Helps and Discoveries; but implicitly and servilely to submit our
Judgments to all Opinions, is inconsistent with that respect that we may, and
ought to have to the freedom of our our own Minds, and the dignity of Humane
Nature. And indeed (as the great Lord Bacon has observed) we have a wrong
apprehension of Antiquity, which in the common acception is but the nonage of
the World. Antiquitas seculi est juventus M^di: So that in those Appeals, we
fetch our Knowledge from the Cradle, and the comparative infancy of days. Upon a
true account, the present Age is the greatest Antiquity; and if that must
govern and sway our Judgments, let multitude of days speak. If we would
reverence the Ancients as we ought, we should d^ it by imitating their Example,
which was not supi^ly and superstitionsly to sit down in fond admiration of the
Learning of those that were before them, but to examine their Writings, to
avoid their Mistakes, and to use their Discoveries, in order to the further
improvement of Knowledge: This they did; especially the Philosopher Aristotle
used the most freedom in censuring and reproving the supposed Errors and
Mistakes of the elder Philosophers, of any that ever had that Name: And
therefore there is the less reason why Men should make his Writing Textuary,
and as it were infallible, without daring to use the liberty that he taught by
his practice.

It was from this servile humor of idolizing some fortunate and famed Authors,
that arose that silly vanity of impertinent Citations, and alleging
Authorities in things, that neither require nor deserve them. The Man, no
doubt, thought the saying to be Learning, and an Elegancy, That Men have
Beards, and that Women have none; when he had quoted Beza for it: and that
other aimed to be accounted no mean Clerk, that could say, Pax res bona est,
says St. Austin: This folly, as ridiculous as it is, was once very common
among those that courted the reputation of being Learned; and it is not quite
worn out of use yet among the Vulgar of Scholars, though all the wiser have
outgrown, and do despise it; And the rest will do the same, when they come to
consider, how vain and inglorious it is, to have our Heads and Books laden, as
Cardinal Campeius his Mules were, with old and useless Luggage. And if the
magnificence of many Pretenders to Knowledge were laid open, it would amount to
no more, than the old Boots and Shoes of that proud and exposed Ambassador.
Methinks it is but a poor easy Knowledge that can be learnt from an Index; and
a mean ambition to be rich in the Inventory of an others Treasure. Authorities
alone make no number, unless evidence of Reason stand before them, and all the
Ciphers of Arithmetic, are no better than a single nothing.

But I return to the consideration of Antiquity: If we impartially look into
the Remains of ancient days, we shall find but little to justify our so
slavish a veneration of them: For if we take an account of the state of Science
from the beginning, and follow the History of it through the most famous Times,
we shall find, that though it has often changed its Channel, removing from one
Nation to another; yet it has been neither much improved, nor altered, but as
Rivers arc in passing through different Countries, viz. in Name, and Method:
For the succeding Times subscribing to, and copying out those that went before
them, with little more than verbal Diversity, Knowledge has still been really
the same poor and mean Thing, though it has appeared in pompous Clothing, and
been dignified by the services of many great and renowned Names. The Grecian
Learning was but a Transcript of the Chaldean and Egyptian; and the Roman of
the Grecian. And though those former Days had, no doubt, many great Wits, and
those that made noble Discoveries; yet we have reason to think that the most
considerable and most worthy of them, have perished and are forgotten. For as
the forementioned great Man, the Lord Bacon has observed, Time, as a River,
brings down to us what is more light and superficial, while the Things that are
more solid and substantial are sunk and lost.

And now after all this, it will be requisite for me to add, That I intend not
these Remarques in favor of any new Conceits in Theology, to gain credit to
such by disparaging Christian Antiquity: No, Here the old Paths are undoubtedly
best, quod verum id prius: And I put as much difference between the pretended
New Lights, and Old Truths, as I do between the Sun and an evanid Meteor:
Though I confess in Philosophy I am a Seeker. Divine Truths were most pure in
their Beginnings; they were born in the fullness of time; and, (as some say the
Sun was Created) in their Meridian Strength and Luster: But the Beginnings of
Philosophy were in a very obscure Dawn, and perhaps it is yet scarce Morning
with it. And therefore what we cannot find among former Inquirers, we are to
seek in the Attempts of more Modern Men, and in the Improvements of nearer
Ages: And not be discouraged by the Old Law, Nil dictum quod non dictum prius.
For as to Knowledge, there is no doubt but there are many things new under the
Sun, and this Age has shown many Novelties even in the Heavens above, etc.

I have thus shown thee How our Senses and Affections mislead our
Understandings, and so are great occasions of our Ignorance and Errors; to
which I may add,

III. That the Understanding more immediately contributes to its own
Deceptions, through its Precipitancy, and have in concluding. Truth is not to
be attained, without much close and severe inquiry: It is not a wide
Superficies, easy to be seen, but like a Point or Line that requires Acutness
and Intention to discover it; which is the more difficult, because it is so
mingled with Appearances and specious Errors, like the Silver in Hiero's Crown
of Gold; or rather like the Grains of Gold in a Mass of baser Metals; It
requires much Care, and nice Observation to extract and separate the precious
Oar from so much vile Mixture; so that the Understanding must be patient, and
wary, and thoughtful in seeking Truth; It must go step by step, and look every
way, and regard many Things: It must distrust Appearances, and be shy of
Assent, and consider again and again before it fixes. This Method is necessary
to the attainment of Knowledge; but the Mind is generally indisposed to so much
Labor and Caution. It is impatient of suspense, and precipitant in concluding;
averse to deep Meditation, and ready to catch at every Appearance: And hence
also it is that we embrace Shadows of Fancy and Opinion, and miss of true and
substantial Knowledge.

Having now given Instances of the Imperfection of our present Knowledge, and
shown some of its Causes, which are further evidence of it; I come to offer a
few Considerations on the whole, against Dogmatizing, and Confidence in
uncertain Opinions. As,

1. Confidence in Philosophy, and Matters of Doubtful Speculation betrays a
grosser, and more stupid sort of Ignorance; For it is the first step of Knowledge
to be sensible that we want it: The most exercised Understandings are most
conscious to their Imperfections; and he that is sensible of the frequent
failings of his Judgment, will not lean with much trust, and assurance on that
which has so often deceived him, nor build the Castle of his intellectual
Security in the Air of Opinions: But on the other side, the shallow, unthinking
Vulgar, are sure of all things, and bestow their peremtory, full assent on
every slight appearance. Knowledge is always modest and wary; but Ignorance is
bold and presuming, as Aristotle has observed of the confidence and
forwardness of Youth. Thus those that have always lived at home, and have never
seen any other Country, are confidently persuaded that their own is the best;
whereas they that have traveled, and observed other Places, speak more coldly
and indifferently of their native Soils; and so those confined Understandings
that never looked beyond the Opinions in which they were bred, are excedingly
assured of the Truth, and comparative excellency of their own Tenants; when as
the larger Minds that have travailed the diverse Climates of Opinions, and
considered the various Sentiments of inquiring Men, are more cautious in their
Conclusions, and more sparing in positive Affirmations. And if the Dogmatist
could be persuaded to weigh the Appearances of Truth and Reason, that are in
many other Opinions that he counts unreasonable and absurd, this would be a
means to allay, if not to cure his Confidence.

2. Dogmatizing in things uncertain, does commonly inhabit with untained
Passions, and is usually maintained upon the obstinacy of an ungover'd Spirit.
For one of the first Rules in the Art of Self-Government, is, to be modest in
Opinions: And this Wisdom makes Men considerate and wary, distrustful of their
own Powers, and jealous of their Thoughts: He that would rule himself, must be
circumspect in his Actions; and he that would be so, must not be hasty, and
over-confident in his Conclusions. It Is Pride, and Presumption of ones self
that causes such forwardness and assurance; and where those reign, there is
neither Virtue nor Reason; No regular Government, but a miserable Tyranny of
Passion and Self-will.

3. Confidence in Opinions, is the great disturber both of our own Peace, and
of the quiet of other Men. He that affirms any thing boldly, is thereby engaged
against every one that opposes it; He is concerned, and undertakes for his
Tenent, and must fight his way: He confronts every different Judgment, and
quarrels all Dissenters; He is angry that others do not see that, which he
presumes is so clear; he clamours and feviles; He is still ditrating, and still
in a storm: He cannot bear a Contraction, nor scarce a Suspense of Judgment. So
that his Peace is at every ones Mercy, and whoever will cross his saying,
throws him into the Fire, and destroys his Quiet: And such a Man need not be
more miserable. On this account the Stoics affected an indifferency and
neutrality in all Things, as the only means to that freedom from Passion and
Disturbance, which they sought: and if there be any repose attainable by the
Methods of Reason, there is nothing so like to afford it, as unconcernment in
doubtful Opinions. The contrary Zeal and assurance, as it robs every Man of his
private happiness, so has it destroyed the Peace of Mankind: It has made the
World an Ac^ldama, and a Babel. For this is the ground of all the Schisms, and
strivings of Sects, that have filled our Air with Smoke and Darkness; yea, and
kindled the fierce Flames that have con^ed us. Every vain Opiniator is as much
assured as if he were infallible; His Opinions are Truths, certain Truths,
Fundamental Ones; and the contrary Doctrines Heretical and Abominable. Hence
arise Disputes, Hatreds, Separations, Wars, of which we have seen, and yet see
very much; and God knows how much more we may: Of all which Mischiefs here is
the Ground, viz. Men's presumptions of the certainty of their own Conceits and
Ways: and could they but be induced to be modest in them, and to look on them
with the eye of less assurance, it would abate their Heats and A^imosities, and
make way for Peace, and charitable Agreement in the things that are undoubtedly
True, and Good.

4. Confidence in Opinions is ill Manners, and an affront to all that differ
from us; For the Dogmatist charge every one with Ignorance and Error, that
subscribes not his Saying. In effect, he gives the lie to whosoever dares
dissent from him; and declares that his Judgment is fittest to be the
Intellectual Standard. This is that Spirit of Pride and Rudeness, that faith to
every different Apprehender, Stand off, I am more Orthodox than thou art; a
Vanity that is worse than any simple Error.

5. Dogmatizing, and Confidence in doubtful Tenants, holds the Opiniator fast
in his Misconceits and Errors. For he that is confident of all things, is
unavoidably deceived in most; and he that assures himself he never errs, will
always err: His Presumptions will defeat all attempts of better Information. We
never seek for that which we think we have already, but reject those Aids that
make promise and offer of it. And he that huggs Vanity and Falsehood, in the
confidence of undoubted (...) and Silence, is commonly intractable to the
Methods that should rectify his Judgment. Ignorance is far fooner cured, than
false conceit of Knowledge: and he was a very wise Man that said, There is more
hope of a Fool, than of him that is wise in his own Eyes.

6. Dogmatizing shows Poverty, and narrowness of Spirit: There is no greater
Vassallage, than that of being enslaved to Opinions. The Dogmatist is pent up
in his Prison, and sees no Light but what comes in at those Grates. He has no
liberty of Thoughts, no prospect of various Objects: while the considerate and
modest Inquirer, has a large Sphere of Motion, and the satisfaction of more
open Light; He sees far, and injoys the pleasure of surveying the diverse Images
of the Mind. But the Opiniator has a poor shrivel'd Soul, that will but just
hold his little Set of Thoughts: His Appetite after Knowledge, is satisfied with
his few Mushromes, and neither knows nor thinks of any thing beyond his Cottage
and his Rags.

I might say a great deal more to the shame of this folly, but what I have writ
will be enough for the Capable and Ingenious; and much less would have been too
much for others.

And now when I look back upon the main Subject of these Papers, it appears so
vast to my Thoughts, that methinks I have drawn but a Cockle-shell of Water
from the Ocean: Whatever I look upon, within the Amplitude of Heaven and Earth,
is evidence of Humane Ignorance: For all things are a great Darkness to us, and
we are so to our selves: The plainest things are as obscure, as the most
confessedly mysterious; and the Plants we tread on are as much above us, as the
Stars and Heavens: The things that touch us, are as distant from us as the
Poles, and we are as much Strangers to our selves, as to the People of the
Indies. On review of which, methinks I could begin anew to represent the
imperfection of our Knowledge, and the vanity of bold Opinions, which the
Dogmatists themselves demonstrate, while each Disputer is confident, that the
others confidence is vain, from which a third, with more reason, may conclude
the same of the confidence of both: And one would think there should need no
more to bring those assured Men to modest Acknowledgments, and more becoming
Temper than this, That there is nothing about which the Reason of Man is
capable of being employed, but has been the Subject of Dispute, and diverse
apprehension: So that the Lord Montaigne has observed, Mankind is agreed in
nothing, no not in this, That the Heavens are over us; Every Man almost differs
from another, yea and every Man from himself; and yet every one is assured of
his own Schemes of conjecture, though he cannot hold that Assurance but by this
proud Absurdity, That he alone is in the right, and all the rest of the World
mistaken. I say then, there being so much to be produced both from the natural
and moral World, to the shame of boasting Ignorance; I cannot reckon of what I
have said but as an imperfect Offer at a Subject, to which I could not do
right, without discoursing all Things: On which account I had resolved once to
suffer this Trifle to pass out of Print and Memory: But then considering, that
the Instances I had given of humane Ignorance were not only clear ones, but
such also as are not ordinarily suspected; from whence to our shortness in
other things, it is an easy Inference; I was thence induced to think it might
be useful to promote that temper of Mind that is necessary to true Philosophy
and right Knowledge.

OF SKEPTICISM AND CERTAINTY. Essay II.

Essay II. OF SKEPTICISM and CERTAINTY: In a short Reply To the Learned Mr.
Thomas White.
To a Friend.
SIR,
I Here send you a Supplement to the former Essay. About two years after my
Vanity of Dogmatizing was first printed, there appeared a Book written in Latin
against it, which had this Title, SCIRI, sive scepties and scepticorum a jure
Disputationis exclusio. The Author was that Learned Man, who has published so
many Writings, and is so highly celebrated by Sir Kenelm Digby; especially
famous for his Tract de Mundo: He calls himself sometimes Thomas ex Albiis East
Saxonum; in other Writings, and particularly in this, Thomas Albius: His
English Name is Thomas White, a Roman Catholic, and famed Writer for that
Church, though censured for some of his Doctrines at Rome. I writ a civil
Answer to his Book, which was annexed to the Vanity of Dogmatizing, reprinted
1665.

That Answer was in English, because the Discourse it defended was so; and I
did not think the Matter worth the Universal Language: Besides, I was induced
to reply in that Tongue, by the Example of a Noble Philosopher, one of the
great Ornaments of his Age, and Nation, who had then newly answered a Latin
Book, written by one Linus against him, in English. About the same time that my
Reply was printed, his SCIRI came forth again in our Language, whether
translated by himself, or any Disciple of his, I do not know; The Title was, An
Exclusion of Scepticks from all title to Dispute: being an Answer to the Vanity
of Dogmatizing: by Tho. White. Now because there was nothing of Reply in that
new Edition of his Book, I thought to have concerned my self no more about it:
but having made you a promise of some Notes concerning Skepticism and
Certainty, I have thought fit to treat of those Matters by way of further
Answer to that Learned Man.

He principally insists on three things. (1.) The Charge of Skepticism. (2.)
The Accountableness of those Philosophical Difficulties I have mentioned, as
things not yet resolved. And, (3.) The Defense of Aristotle. The first is the
Subject for which I stand engaged to you; and the second belongs to it, and
will be a very seasonable, if not necessary Supplement to the Essay against
Confidence in Philosophy. But for the third, I shall refer you to what I have
said in my other Answer, and in my Letter concerning Aristotle; being not
willing to meddle any further in Affairs of that nature.

I. The charge of Skepticism seems to be the main thing: For, besides that it
makes up the Title, the Author has been pleased to write a solemn Warning to
the Youth of the Universities, on the occasion of my Book, which he calls Vleus
Glanvillanum, in the first page of his Preface; and declares this pretended
Skepticism of mine to be the occasion of his engagement, in the first paragraph
of his Discourse.

Now because a great and celebrated Philosopher, with whom I am not fit to be
named, is brought in as the Reviver of this deadly Skepticism, which I am
supposed to endeavor to advance after him; I shall repeat the whole Passage,
that I may the better vindicate both him and my self against this Objection;
and treat a little of this so common Imputation, which is almost every where
alleged against all Free Philosophers, who dare think or say any thing that
Aristotle has not taught. The Learned Man Objects thus, p. 1.

Skepticism born of old by an unlucky miscarriage of Nature, for her own credit
carried off the Tongues of the Elequent, where it had long been fostered and
buried by the steadiness of Christian Faith; this Monster snatched from the
Teeth of Worms, and Insects, Peter Gassendus, a Man of a most piercing
Sagacity, of neat and copious Eloquence, of most pleasing behavior and
wonderful diligence, by a kind of Magic, has endeavored to restore again to
Life. He, a Person (which is the strangest of all) most tenacious of Catholic
Faith, and never suspected guilty of mischievous Tenants: whereas, yet, this
skepticism is the Mother of infinite Errors, and all Heresies, and that very
seducing Philosophy, and vain Fallacy which the Saints warned by the Apostles
have taught us to beware of. Her this Man, otherwise eminent, in his
paradoxical Exercitations against the Aristotelians, has dared to expose, not
veiled as before, and wandering like a Queen in the dark, but bold-fac'd, and
painted, to the Multitude, and Market place.

By his example, the Author of the Vanity of Dogmatizing, has produced her
amongst us, beauteously trickt up, in English: He too a great Master of Wit and
Eloquence; nor indeed are vast Mischiefs to be dreaded from vulgar Heads. This
is the occasion of my undertaking. --

This is the Charge; but the severe imputation is sweetened by many very kind
words of commendation, which are most justly due to the renowned Gassendus, but
given gratis, and undeservedly to the Author of the Vanity of Dogmatizing. In
answer to this charge, I shall set down my Thoughts of Skepticism and
Certainty, Subjects well worth considering.

The word Skepticism is derived from (...), which signifies to speculate, to l^
about, to deliberate: An ancient Sect of Philosophers ^nce called (...),
Scepticks; as also (...), Se^ (...), Doubters; and (...), Pyrrhonians, from
^rho the first noted Author of this Sect. This Pyrrho lived about the time of
Alexander the Great, and was born at Elis: He was at first a Painter; some say
an ill one; and yet he had better have so continued, for his Philosophy was
worse than his Painting. He seems to me, according to the account we have of
him, to have been a gross and humoursome Fanatic; especially if that be true
that is related by Laertius, That he shunned and heeded nothing, and would not
step aside out of the way for Wagons, Precipices, or Dogs, so that he was
followed and looked after like an Idiot, and a Child, then whom his Actions
were more stupid: Besides which testimony, we have a worse character of him
from Aristocles, (...) --, viz. That he neither invented, nor writ any thing
that was good, but railed both at Gods and Men. And yet it should seem, by the
honor his Country did him, that he was not so very a Sot as some thought, and
as diverse Passages in the Story of his Life speak him: For he was made High
Priest, and great Immunities and Privileges given to Philosophers for his
sake. But I have nothing to do with the Story of his Life: His Disciples were
many, the most eminent of them reckoned by Laertius; but none has left so
exact an account in writing of the Sceptick Doctrines, (if they may be so
called) as Sextus Empiricus, one much later than those Sectators of Pyrrho. The
chief ground of Skepticism he says, is this, (...), That every reason has an
equal one opposite to it: So that they gave no assent to any thing. They
allowed Appearances, but would not grant, that things really are in themselves
as they appear to our Senses: or that we can by our Reasons judge any thing
truly, and certainly of them: That there is nothing fair or foul, just or
unjust, nothing true or real in any thing; as Laertius speaks of the belief of
Pyrrho. And therefore their Phrases were, (...), that is, Not more this than
that, (...); perhaps, and not perhaps; viz. perhaps it is, perhaps it is not.
(...), I suspend, (...), I determine nothing; (...), I comprehend not. And for
fear they ^d be Dogmatical, even in these Phrases, Empericus sait^ (...) they
do only declare their present Affections, express^ (...) things appear to them,
without determining any thing, (...) even not determining so much as this, I
determine nothing.

Now besides the professed D^ples of this Sect, diverse other ancient
Philosophers spoke doubtfully, and unresolvedly of things: and Cicero in
Licullus says thus of Empedocles; Empedocles, ut interdum mihi furere
videatur, abstrusa esse omnia, nihil nos sentire, nihil cernere, nihil omnino
quale sit posse reperire. Sextus Empiricus mentions diverse others, who it seems
were thought to be Scepticks, or very near them; as Heraclitus, because he
taught that Contraries are in the same thing: Democritus, for denying Honey to
be sweet or bitter: The Syrenaick Sect, holding that only the Affections are
comprehended: Protagoras, for making the Phenomenon particular to every single
Person. But all these he shows to have been Assertors, and very different from
the Pyrrhonian Sect. He inquires also of the Academick Philosophy, how it
agreed with, or disagreed from the Sceptick. These Philosophers were reputed
anciently, and by some ever since thought to be too much addicted to that way.
But Sextus clears them from it, beginning with Plato the Founder of the first
School, of whom he says, That though in his Gymnasticks, where Socrates is
brought in deriding the Sophists, he has the Sceptick, uncertain Character;
yet in declaring his Opinion, he was a Dogmatist; particularly in his Doctrines
of Idaeas, Providence, the preference of a Life of Virtue: Which if Plate
assent to as existent, he affirms dogmatically; if as probable, he differs from
the Sceptick, in preferring one Opinion before another. Those of the New
Academy say all things are incomprehensible, in which, says Sextus, they
differ from us, because they assert this; but we do not know but that they may
be comprehended. They differ also in asserting Good, and Evils, and that some
things are credible, others not; whereas the Pyrrhonians count all to be equal.
To this purpose he speaks of them: But for the middle Academy founded by
Arcesilaus he says, that that Philosopher's Institution, and theirs were
almost the same, in that Arcesilaus asserted nothing of the existence, or
nonexistence of things, not preferring one Opinion before another, but in all
things suspending. Which he did to make trial of his Discipl^ whether they were
capable of the Doctrine of Plato, which he taught to his Friends.

Thus that famous Sceptick does honor to the memory of those Ancients, by
endeavoring to take what he thought to be credit from them, which indeed was
ever a disgrace, and ought to be so esteemed still. For those Pyrrhonians, that
were of the right strain, seem to me to have been a sort of conceited
Humorists, that took a pride in being singular, and venting strange things;
opposing all knowledge, that they might be thought to have the most, and to have
found out that universal ignorance, and uncertainty, which others could not see
far enough to descry. Which way of pretended Philosophy, as it gratified their
pride, so it served their malice and illnature, which delights much in the
Spirit of Contradiction, and contempt of other Men. This they showed in great
degree according to Laertius, who says, (...); They accounted all Fools that
were not of their own Party. So that they were in no wise to be reckoned as
Philosophers; (...), as Aristocles speaks in Eusebius; For they plucked up the
Principles of Philosophy by the Roots. And indeed their doubting and suspension
was not in order to the forming a surer Judgment, but a resolution to sit down
for ever in despair of Knowledge: And therefore they were very improperly called
(...), Sookers, since their great Principle was, that nothing was to be found.
Upon the whole, it was not without cause that Cicero^, Aristocles, and other
sober Philosophers spoke of their way as downright madness; and we have great
reason to believe so of the Founder of the Sect, if that be true which is
related by Laertius, and others, of his washing a Sow, and running into the
Forum with a Spit of Meat in his hand after the Cook that had offended him; a
thing very unbecoming the Professor of the so much talk^ of (...), or freedom
from disturbance. And his unconcernment another time was as sottish, when he
past on, and would (...) help or take notice of his Friend Anaxarehus, when he
(...) ^n into a Ditch; which was brutish stupidity, rather than Philosophical
Indifference. And indeed this Sect endeavored to divest themselves of H^ne
Nature, as Pyrro's answer implied, when he was upbraided for avoiding a Dog,
viz. that 'twas hard wholly to put off Man; and so they were destructive to the
Societies, and all the Interests of Mankind: This I say upon the supposition
that they were in earnest, and believed themselves; but I incline to think,
that they were only humoursom, and conceited Fellows; rather than I will say
that they were absolutely distracted.

Thus you see I could revile against the Scepticks, as well as my Antagonist;
but letting further censure of them pass, I might take notice on this occasion,
what odd extravagant People have of old had the name of Philosophers, as if
those Ages (as the Turks now) had a reverence for Madmen: For many of their
Actions and Opinions were very wild freaks of Fancy and Humor, and would gain
Men in these days (as foolish and bad as they are) no better name, than that of
Lunaticks, or Bedlams. This will appear to any one that shall impartially
survey the Histories of their Lives, if those Accounts were true that are given
of them. But indeed there is reason enough to doubt that: For the Relations we
have of old times are usually very fabulous and uncertain, and where the
Grecians were concerned as much as any where, for they had the same Character
given them, that the Apostle bestows upon the Cretians; Graecia mendax. Which
among other things shows, how little reason there is we should be
superstitiously fond of the broken, dublous, imperfect Remains of those days.
But methinks those Philosophers should be greater Men, than they were made in
those Histories of their Lives and Doctrines, or else one may justly wonder how
their Names come down to us with so much Renown and Glory. But to return to
more particular Discourse of the Scepticks.

Besides Those anciently, that had that name without just ground sometimes
affixt on them, several worthy Moderns have suffered under the imputation: and
indeed by some all Men are accounted Scepticks, who dare dissent from the
Aristotelian Doctrines, and will not slavishly subscribe all the Tenants of
that Dictator in Philosophy, which they esteem the only true and certain
Foundations of Knowledge: This learned Man seems to be one of those, for the
great Gassendus is charged with so much Skepticism on this account, that he
writ an Exercitation against Aristotle, p. 2. and those that slight Aristotle's
Grounds (says our Author in his Preface to the Universities) must of
necessity, being always in quest of Principles, ever fall short of Science.
Aristotle's Works it seems are the infallibe Canon of Truth and Certainty; in
him are hid all the Treasures of natural Wisdom and Knowledge; and there is no
name given under Heaven, by which we can be saved from Skepticism, and
everlasting uncertainty, but his. If this be so, all the modern Free
Philosophers must be Scepticks, and there is no help: and the Author of the
Vanity of Dogmatizing has no way to escape the imputation; nor indeed, (if
this be all) has he any concern to avoid it. But the Learned Man may be
remembered, that in one respect they are not Scepticks, being confident in this
belief, that the Principles of Aristotle are not such Certainties, but that
it is possible, succeeding Mankind may sometime or other find error and
imperfection in them; and discover (if it have not been done already) that they
are not the infallible Measures of Truth and Nature.

But the Free Philosophers are by others accounted Scepticks from their way of
enquiry, which is not to continue still poring upon the Writings and Opinions
of Philosophers, but to seek Truth in the Great Book of Nature; and in that
search to proceed with wariness and circumspection without too much forwardness
in establishing Maxims, and positive Doctrines: To propose their Opinions as
Hypotheseis, that may probably be the true accounts, without peremptorily
affirming that they are. This, among others, has been the way of those Great
Men, the Lord Bacon, and Descartes; and is now the method of the Royal Society
of London, whose Motto is, Nut^ius in Verba. This is Skepticism with some; and
if it be so indeed, it is such Skepticism, as is the only way to sure and
grounded Knowledge, to which confidence in uncertain Opinions is the most fatal
Enemy. Nor does the Learned Man accuse me of any more than this, in his
Preface, in which he thus speaks. I am not angry with the Man, who with a great
deal of Wit, and an unfordable stream of Eloquence ( excessive courtesy) which
will ripen with his years, prosecutes what he proposes to himself, and takes
for a truth, not without some savor of modesty: For neither does he derogate
from Faith the power of teaching its Tenants, nor disclaim all hopes of
attaining Science hereafter through a laborious amasement of Experiments. --
Here I am absolved from being a Sceptick, in the ill sense; For I neither
derogate from Faith, nor despair of Science: and the Opinions of those of that
character are directly destructive of the one, and everlasting discouragements
of the other. Or, if I should affirm that I despair of Science, strictly and
properly so called, in the Affairs of Philosophy and Nature; If I should say,
we are to expect no more from our Experiments and Inquiries, than great
likelihood, and such degrees of probability, as might deserve an hopeful
assent; yet thus much of diffidence and uncertainty would not make me a
Sceptick; since They taught, That no one thing was more probable than an other;
and so withheld assent from all things.

So that upon the whole I cannot but wonder, that this Philosopher, who seems
to be so concerned for the advancement of Knowledge, should oppose me in a
Design that has the same end: only we differ in the Means and Method; For he
thinks it is best promoted by persuading, that Science is not Uncertainty; and
I suppose that Men need to be convinced, that Uncertainties are not Science.
Now the progress of Knowledge being stopped by extreme Confidence on the one hand,
and Diffidence on the other; I think that both are necessary, though perhaps
one is more seasonable: For to believe that every thing is certain, is as great
a disinterest to Science, as to conceive that nothing is so: Opinion of Fullness
being, as my Lord Bacon notes, among the Causes of Want. So that after all, we
differ but in this, That the Learned Man thinks it more suitable to the
necessities of the present Age, to depress Skepticism; and it may be, I look on
Dogmatizing, and confident Belief as the more dangerous and common Evil: And
indeed between the Slaves of Superstition and Enthusiasm, Education and
Interest, almost all the World are Dogmatists; while Scepticks are but some
more desperate Renegado's, whose Intellects are either debauched by Vice, or
turned out of the way by the unreasonable Confidence of vain Opiniators. In
opposing whose Presumptions, I designed also against the neutrality of the
Scepticks; and did not conceited Scioluts ascribe so much to their Opinions,
there would be no need of SCIRI'S, or Perswasives to easy and peremptory
Assents; which indeed have more need of Restraints than Incentives; since it is
the nature of Man to be far more apt to confide in his Conceptions, than to
distrust them; and it is a question whether there be any Scepticks in good
earnest. So that I am so far from deserving Reproof from the Adversaries of
Intellectual Diffidence, that were there reason for either, I might expect
Acknowledgments: For Confidence in Uncertainties is the greatest Enemy to what
is certain; and were I a Sceptick, I would plead for Dogmatizing; the way to
bring Men to stick to nothing, being confidently to persuade them to swallow
all things. For among a multitude of things carelessly received, many will be
false, and many doubtful: and consequently a mind not wholly stupid will some
time or other find reason to distrust and reject some of its Opinions: Upon
review of which, perceiving it embraced Falsehoods for great Certainties, and
confided in them as much as in those it yet retains, it will be in great danger
of staggering in the rest, and discarding all promiscuously: Whereas if a Man
proportion the degree of his Assent, to the degree of Evidence, being more
sparing and reserved to the more difficult, and not thoroughly examined
Theories, and confident only of those that are distinctly and clearly
apprehended; he stands upon a firm bottom, and is not moved by the winds of
Fancy and Humor, which blow up and down the conceited Dogmatists: For the
Assent that is difficultly obtained, and sparingly bestowed, is better
established and fixed, than that which has been easy and precipitant.

Upon the whole Matter it appears, that this Learned Person had no cause to
write against me as a Sceptick: And I somewhat the more wonder at it, because I
find such things attributed to those, he is pleased to call by that name, that
no way agree with the Way and Spirit of those Philosophers, whose genius I
recommend and desire to imitate: On which account I thought he had some other
notion of Sceptick than was usual; and casting mine eye over his late Purgation
presented to the Cardinals of the Inquisition, I found that his Scepticks were
some of the Modern, Peripatetical Disputers: These, it seems by their many
complaints against his Writings, had obtained a general condemnation of them
from the Pope and Consistory of Cardinals; whom therefore in his Appeal to the
said Cardinals he accuses of Ignorance, Corruption of the Aristotelian
Doctrines, and Tendency to Heresy and Atheism: And that these are the
Scepticks he means, appears from the Preface against me, and diverse other
Passages of his Book: So that it is yet more wonderful, that Gossendus, and the
Author of the Vanity of Dogmatizing, should be called by a Name, which he
bestows upon those of so different a temper.

And thus of that charge of Skepticism, with which he begins as the occasion of
his writing: Having premised which, he endeavors to lay the sure Foundations
of Science, and to establish Certainty in Knowledge. But whatever imperfections
there are in that pretended demonstration, I shall not for the present take
notice of them; but only observe, that this Gentleman is the Author of that
Science, Demonstration, and Self evidence, of which M. Sargeant, a late
controvertial Writer for the Roman Church, makes such boasts of; and here are
his Grounds: Which those learned Men, that are concerned with him, may if they
please, when they have nothing else to do, examine.

Having said thus much of Skepticism, and the Scepticks, I shall enquire a
little into the matter of Certainty, a subject of both difficulty and
importance.

It is taken either (1.) for a firm Assent to any thing, of which there is no
reason of doubt; and this may be called Indubitable Certainty; or (2.) for an
absolute Assurance, that things are as we conceive and affirm, and not possible
to be otherwise, and this is Infallible Certainty.

In the first of these Des Carts lays his Foundations: I cannot doubt, but I
think, though nothing should be as I conceive; and there I cannot suspect
neither, but that I my self, that think, am. I am as sure that I have Idaeas,
and Conceptions of other things without me, as of God, Heaven, Earth, etc. Thus
far that Philosopher is safe, and our Assent is sull; and it is so in this
likewise, That we can compound, or disjoin those Images by affirming, and
denying; and that we have a faculty of Reasoning, and inferring one thing from
another: So much as this we clearly perceive, and seel in our selves, whatever
uncertainty there may be in other matters. To these we give a resolved and firm
Assent, and we have not the least reason of doubt here. Besides which
Principles we find others in our minds that are more general, and are used and
supposed by us in all our Affirmations and Reasonings, to which we assent as
fully, such are these: Every thing is, or is not: A thing cannot be and not be,
in the same respects: Nothing has no Attributes: What we conceive to belong,
or not to belong to any thing, we can affirm, or deny of it.

These are the Principles of all Propositions, and Ratiocinations whatsoever:
and we assent to them fully, as soon as we understand their meaning, to which I
add this great one more, That our Faculties are true, viz. That what our
understandings declare of things clearly and distinctly perceived by us, is
truly so, and agreeing with the realities of things themselves. This is a
Principle that we believe firmly; but cannot prove, for all proof, and
reasoning supposes it: And therefore I think Descartes is out in his method;
when from the Idaea's he endeavors to prove that God is, and from his
Existence that our Faculties are true: When as the truth of our Faculcies was
presupposed to the proof of God's Existence; yea, and to that of our own also.
So that, that great Man seems to argue in a Circle. But to let that pass; This
we constantly assent to without doubting, That our Faculties do not always
delude us, That they are not mere Impostors and Deceivers, but report things to
us as they are, when they distinctly and clearly perceive them. And so this may
be reckoned one of the prime certain Principles, and the very Foundation of
Certainty in the first sense of it.

These and such like Principles result out of the nature of our Minds: But,

2. There are other Certainties arising from the evidence of Sense: As, That
there is Matter, and Motion in the World: That Matter is extented divisible and
impenetrable: That Motion is direct, or oblique: That Matter, and Motion, are
capable of great variety of Modifications and Changes. We learn that these, and
many other such things are so, from Sense, and we nothing doubt here; although
the Theory and Speculative consideration of those Matters be full of
difficulty, and seeming contradiction. In these our Assent is universal and
indubitable: But in many particular cases, we are not assured of the report of
our Senses; yea, we dissent from, and correct their Informations, when they are
not in their due Circumstances, of right Disposition, Medium, Distance, and the
like: and when they pronounce upon things which they cannot judge of: on which
account, though our Senses, and the Senses of Mankind do represent the Earth as
quiescent: Yet we cannot from thence have assurance that it does Rest, since
Sense cannot judge of an even and regular Motion, when it self is carried with
the movent; so that though it should be true that the Earth moves, yet to Sense
it would appear to rest, as now it does; as I have discoursed elsewhere. But
when the Senses are exercised about their right Objects, and have the other
Circumstances that are requisite, we then assent without doubting. And this
fullness of assent is all the certainty we have, or can pretend to; for after
all, it is possible our Senses may be so contrived, that things may not appear
to us as they are: But we fear not this, and the bare possibility does not move
us.

3. There are Certainties arising from the Testimony of others. This in
ordinary cases is very doubtful, and fallacious, but again in some it is
indubitable. As when the Testimony is general, both as to time and place
uninteressed, full, plain, and constant, in matters of Sense and of easy
Knowledge: In such circumstances as these, the evidence of Testimony is no more
doubted, than the first Principles of Reason or Sense. Thus we believe, without
the least scruple about it, That there are such places as Rome, and
Constantinople, and such Countries of Italy and Greece, though we never saw
them; and many other Historical Matters, which our selves never knew. The
Foundation of which assurance is this Principle, That Mankind cannot be
supposed to combine to deceive, in things, wherein they can have no design or
interest to do it. Though the thing have a remote possibility, yet no Man in
his Wits can believe it ever was, or will be so: and therefore we assent to
such Testimonies with the same firmness, that we would to the clearest
Demonstrations in the World.

The second sense of Certainty is that, which I called Certainty Infallible;
when we are assured that it is impossible things should be otherwise, than we
conceive and affirm of them: This is a sort of Certainty, that humanely we
cannot attain unto, for it may not be absolutely impossible, but that our
Faculties may be so contrived, as always to deceive us in the things which we
judge most certain and assured: This indeed we do not suspect, and we have no
reason to do it; which shows that we are certain in the former Sense: But we
may not say it is utterly impossible; and consequently we cannot have the
certainty of this latter sort: which perhaps is proper only to Him, who made
all things what they are; and discerns their true natures by an infallible and
most perfect knowledge.

The sum of which is, that though we are certain of many things, yet that
Certainty is no absolute Infallibility; there still remains the possibility of
our being mistaken in all matters of humane Belief and Inquiry. But this bare
possibility (as I said) moves us not, nor does it in the least weaken our
assent to those things, that we clearly and distinctly perceive: but we believe
with as much firmness of assurance the Matters that our Faculties do so report
to us, as if there were no such possibility; and of greater Certainty than this
there is no need. It is enough for us, that we have such Principles lodged in
our minds, that we cannot but assent to; and we find nothing to give us
occasion to doubt of the truth of them.

This is Humane Certainty, and let vain and affected Scepticks talk what they
will, they cannot in earnest doubt of those first Principles which I have
mentioned. They are universal, and believed by all Mankind; every one knows,
every one uses them: For though they do not lie in the minds of all Men in the
formality of such Propositions, yet they are implicitly there; and in the force
and power of them every Man reasons, and acts also. These are the Seed of
Reason, and all the Conclusions (at never so great a distance) that are truly
deduced from those first Certainties, are as true and certain as they are; and
both together make up what we call Reason. So that this is not so various and
giddy a thing as some vain inconsiderate Men talk; but it is one steady
Certainty, and the same all the World over. Fancies, Opinions, and Humors, that
mistaken Men call Reason, are infinitely diverse, and fallacious; But those
Principles and Conclusions that are clearly and distinctly perceived by our
minds; those that are immdiately lodged in them, and the consequences that
truly arise from those, and the right informations of Sense, they are one, and
certain, without variety or deceit. Now all Men partake of Reason in some
degree (of the prime Principles at least, and the Faculty of deducing one thing
from another); But the most use that little perversely, and to their own
deception, arguing from prejudices of Sense, Imagination, and customary
Tenants, and so filling up their minds with false and deceitful Images, instead
of Truth and Reason. It Is the office and business of Philosophy, to teach Men
the right use of their Faculties, in order to the extending and enlarging of
their Reasons; and one principal Rule it gives is, To be wary and diffident,
not to be hasty in our Conclusions, or over-confident of Opinions; but to be
sparing of our assent, and not to afford it but to things clearly and
distinctly perceived: And this was the aim and design of that Discourse, which
this Learned Man accuses as such a piece of Skepticism, and discouragement of
Science.

I have now said what I intended concerning the first thing, on which my
Assailant insists, The charge of Skepticism, and I suppose I have sufficiently
shown the injustice of it.

I proceed to the second main Business of his Book, which is to give an account
of those difficulties which I have mentioned, as yet unresolved: Concerning
those I affirm not, that they are impossible to be unridled, but that they have
not been explained by any yet extant Hypothesis; a sad Argument of intellectual
deficience, that after so much talk of Science and endeavor after Knowledge, we
should be yet to seek, and that in those Matters which we have the greatest
advantages to understand. But this learned Man thinks he can resolve them; and
I have so great a kindness for any ingenious attempts of this sort, and so
great a desire to be satisfied about those Theories, that I am ready to
entertain any good probability that shall be offered, even by a prosest
Antagonist; for Truth is welcome to me from any hand that brings it. I have
therefore heartily, and impartially considered this Gentleman's Solutions, but
cannot satisfy my self with them. The Reasons of my Dissatisfactions I shall
now give in an examination of his Accounts.

He takes occasion from my waving the difficulties of Magnetism, and the flux
and reflux of the Sea, to give his solution of them, But I am not concerned
here, they are none of the things on which I insist, yea I professedly decline
them; and intimate that these are better known, than less-acknowledg'd
Mysteries; Descartes his Hypothes^is are fair and probable, but I think this
Philosopher's Accounts very obnoxious, especially there where he makes so
constant and regular an effect, as is the flux and reflux of the Sea to be
caused by so uncertain, and proverbially inconstant a thing as the Winds. But I
shall not trouble my self to remarque on Matters, with which my Discourse has
nothing to do. My business is with the pretended Answers to the Difficulties I
mention, as not well resolved by any yet known Hypothesis: On which the Learned
Man enters, Plea 5th, and in order begins with those about the SOUL, in these
words.

1. In the third Chapter therefore of his most eloquent Discourse, he objects
our Ignorance of that thing we ought to be best acquainted with, viz. our own
SOULS, p. 30.

This I do, and to the Difficulties I propound about the Origin of the Soul:
It Is Union with the Body: It Is moving of it, and direction of the Spirits; The
general, short Answer is, That to suppose the Soul a Substance, that may be
made, come, and join^d to another, a Subsistence, Thing, or Substance, is a
most important Error in Philosophy, of which, he says, none can doubt, that is
able to discern the opposition of one, and many, [ ibid.] The meaning of which
must be, That the Soul is no distinct Substance from the Body: And if so,
almost all the World has hitherto been mistaken: For if we inquire i^to the
Philosophy of the Soul, as high as any accounts are given of it, we shall find
its real substantial distinction from the Body to have been the current belief
of all Ages, notwithstanding what this Gentleman says, That none can doubt
that this is an error in Philosophy, that knows the opposition of one and many.
For,

(1.) The highest times, of whose Doctrines we have any History, believed its
Preexistence; and consequently that it is a certain Substance, that might be
made, come, and be joined to another. Of this I Will say a few things.

If credit may be given to the Chaldean Oracles, (and perhaps more is due to
them than some will allow Preexistence is of highest Antiquity. We have that
Doctrine plainly taught in those ancient Verses: (...),
'(...). --
Oportet te festinare ad Lucem, and patris Lumina,
Vnde missa tibi est anima. --


And afterward more clearly, (...)
(...)
(...). --
Quaere tu animae canalem, unde aut quo ordine
Co^pori inservieris in ordinem a quo effluxisti
Rursu^ restituas. --


And Isellus in his exposition of the Chaldean Theology tells us, That
according to their Doctrine Souls descended hither, (...), Either through the
moultring of its Wings, or the will of the Father of Spirits, that they might
adorn this Terrestrial State: And again Zoroa^ter, speaking of Humane Souls,
says they are sent down to Earth from Heaven, (...).

2. Trismegistus (if those remains that bear his Name may be allowed) is
express in asserting the same Doctrine: In his Minerva Mundi he brings in God
threatening those he had placed in an happy condition of Life and enjoyment,
with Bonds and Imprisonment, in case of Disobedience; (...): and they
transgressing, he adds, That he commanded the Souls to be put into Bodies;
(...): And in another place assigns this for the cause of their Imprisonment in
Bodies; (...). He would have them acknowledge that they sustained that
punishment, and imprisonment in Bodies for the things they had done before they
came into them.

3. It was also the Opinion of the Ancient Jews; That all Souls were at first
created together, and resided in a place they call Goph, a Celestial Region.
And therefore it is said in the Mishna, Non aderit filius David, priusquam
exhaustae fuerint universae Animae quae fu^t in Goph. So that they believed all
Generations on Earth to be supplied from that Promptuary, and Element of Souls
in Heaven; whence they supposed them to descend by the North Pole, and to
ascend by the South; whence the saying of the Cabalists, Magnus Aquilo
Scaturigo Animarum; From which Tradition it is like Homer had this Notion, --
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
-- Janua duplex:
Haec Boream Spectans homines demittit: at illa
Respiciens Austrum divinior, invia prorsus
Est homini, praeb^tque viam immortalibus unis.


4. It Is notoriously known, that Pythagoras and his Sectators held the Doctrine
of Transmigration, which supposes Preexistence, and both, that the Soul is a
Substance, which can come, and be joined to another thing. Some Pythagoreans
write, that Pythagoras himself after 216 years Transanimation returned to Life
again. Now this Opinion being so universally imputed to this Philosopher, and
his School, I shall not need to insist on it as far as it concerns them: but I
take notice, that both Jews, Persians, Indians, Arabians, and diverse other
Nations, etc. did of old, and do still hold the same Doctrine. Manasseh ^en
Israel ascribes the Opinion of Transmigration to Abraham; and the Cabalists
teach, that every Soul is successively joined to three Bodies: So the same Soul
they say, was in Adam, David, and the Messiah; and the same in Seth, Shem, and
Moses, according to R. Simeon, who (as the Cabalists generally do) stops the
course in the third Transmigration: as is noted from him by a Learned Man of
our own. There are at this day great Sects among the Indians of the East, that
retain this Doctrine of Transanimation, believing that the Souls of some
descend again into Humane Bodies; but that others pass into the Bodies of
Beasts: So did some of the Ancient Pythagoreans, who taught, that good Men
returned to their former blessed and happy Life; but that the wicked in their
first Transmigration changed their Sex; in the second they descended into
Beasts: yea, some supposed them at last to go into Trees, and other Vegetables.

Now all these committed the great Error in Philos phy, of which I am accused,
in supposing the Soul to be a certain Substance, which may directly be made,
come, and be joined to another thing, and so, according to our Author, They
could none of them discern the opposition of one and many.

But, (2.) This pretended important Error in Philosophy of the Soul's being a
Thing, and Substance; and one distinct from the Body, must be held by all, that
believe its natural Immortality: for Separability is the greatest Argument of
real distinction; especially that which the Schools call Mutual. Now the Soul's
Immortality has had a general Reception from the wiser and better part of
Mankind: The Egyptians, Chaldeans, Assyrians, Indians, Jews, Greeks, and
universally all that had a name for Wisdom among the Ancients, believed it. And
the same has been the apprehension of latter Ages. A Council of the Church of
Rome it self has defined it, and recommended the demonstrating of it to all
Christian Philosophers. And if the Soul lives after the dissolution of the
Body, it is certainly a Substance distinct from it; for nothing can subsist
without it self: and real separability cannot consist with Identity and
Indistinction.

3. The Sacred and Mosaical Philosophy supposes the Soul to be a Substance
that can come, and be joined to another: For it tells us, That God breathed
into Adam's Nostrils the Breath of Life; by which generally is understood his
infusing a Soul into him: And all the Arguments, that are alleged from
Scripture to prove its immediate Creation, do strongly conclude it to be a
distinct Substance from the Body.

And, (4.) The same Doctrine is more than once affirmed by Aristotle himself,
for says he, (...), It remains that the Mind (or ^oul) comes from without, and
is only a Divine Thing. Again, (...), The Mind is separate, etc. a thing apart
from the Body. For elsewhere he says, (...), The Operations of the Body do not
communicate with its (the Soul's) Operations. He calls it, (...), a Substance,
or Subsistence; for supposing which I am reprehended by our Philosopher: And
affirms further, (...); The Mind is a Divine and Impassible Thing. It appears
then from the Testimonies (and I could alledg more, if there were occasion)
that Aristotle taught the real Distinction which I suppose, and so, according
to our Author, is one of them that understands not the opposition of one and
many. Yea,

(5.) Our Philosopher's learned Friend and Admirer Sir Kenelm Digby is another,
for that ingenious Gentleman affirms in his Immortality, That the Soul is a
Substance, and a Substance besides the Body: and almost all that Discourse
depends on that supposal.

(6.) This Author himself affirms as much in his Peripatetical Institutions, as
ever I supposed: For he says, ['Tis most evident, that the Mind is something
of another kind from Quantity and Matter; That it is a substantial Principle of
Man, and no mode or determination of divisibility, and that there is nothing
common to Body and Spirit]. Besides which in the fifth Book of the same
Institutions he discourses of the Soul's separation from the Body, and asserts
it to be evident, that it perishes not with it, because it has Actions that
belong not to a Body, but has of it self the Nature of a Being: and its power
of Existence is not taken away, when the Body fails, the Soul being apart from,
and besides it; and that matter is not necessary to the Soul's Existence: Many
other Expressions there are in that Discourse to like purpose, which speak the
Soul's Real Distinction from the Body, in as great variety of Phrase, as
Diversity and Distinction can be spoken. But all this is forgotten, and now
it is a most important Error in Philosophy to suppose the Soul to be a certain
Substance, which may directly be made, come, and be joined to another, and of
this none can doubt that understand the Opposition of one and many.

I think now by all this it is pretty clear, that my supposition of the Soul's
being a distinct Substance from the Body, is not peccant, except all the wiser
World, both Ancient and Modern, have been mistaken, and our Author himself.

But besides all, (2.) It seems to me evident even from the nature of the
things, abstracting from Authority. And I think it appears,

(1.) From all the common Arguments that prove the Soul Immaterial; For
Perception, Perception of Spirituals, Vniversals, Mathematical Lives, Points,
Superficies, Congenit Notions, Logical, Metaphysical, and Moral,
Self-reflection, Freedom, Indifferency, and Universality of Action: These are
all Properti^ ^t all agreeing with Body or Matter, though of never so pure and
simple a Nature: Nor is it conceivable how any of these should arise from
Modifications of Quantity, being of a diverse kind from all the Effects and
Phenomenon of Motion.

2. If the Soul be not a distinct Substance from the Body, it is then a certain
Disposition and Modification of it; which this Author in the tenth Lesson of
his Intitutions, seems to intimate, saying, That since the Soul is a certain
Affection -- which is introduced, and expelled by corporeal Action -- Hence he
infe^rs something that is not for our purpose to relate: And if so, since all
diversities in Matter arise from Motion and Position of Parts, every different
Perception will require a distinct order and position of the Parts of the
Matter perceiving, which must be obtained by Motion: I demand then, when we
pass from one Conception to another, is the Motion (the cause of this
Diversity) merely casual; or directed by some Act of Knowledge? The former I
suppose no Man in his wits will affirm, since then all our Conceptions will be
nonsense and confusion; Chance being the Cause of nothing that is orderly and
regular: But if there be a knowledge in us of that directs the Motions that make
every distinct Conception; I demand, concerning that Knowledge, whether it be in
like manner directed by some other; or is it the Effect of mere Casual Motion?
If the former, we must run up in infinitum in our inquiry; and the latter
admits the alleged Absurdities. There is no way then of defending the
Assertion of the Souls being Matter, or any modification of it, but by
affirming with Mr. Hobbs, a certain connection between all our Thoughts, and a
necessary fate in all things, which whoever affirms, will find Difficulties
enough in his Assertion to bring him to mine, that there is a Vanity in
Dogmatizing, and Confidence is unreasonable.

I have insisted the longer on this, because the distinction of the Soul from
the Body is a very material Subject, the proof of which is very seasonable for
the present Age; and by it I have disabled our Author's pretended Solution of
the three Difficulties I mention, viz. of the Origin of the Soul; its Union
with the Body, and its moving of it. Concerning whi^ ^st he adds,

P. 33. That true it is, one animated Me^ ^oves another, but not that any
Substance, that is a pure Soul, moves immediately any Member in which the Soul
is not. Which last I know no Body that says; I cannot affirm the Soul moves
any Member immediately, but it is like it does it by the Spirits its
Instruments. Much less did I ever say, That the Soul moves any Member in which
it is not: But the Seat-of-Sense, and Original of Animal Motion is in the Brain
or Heart, or some other main part (of which in particular I determine nothing).
Thence the Soul sends its Influences to govern the Motions of the Body, through
all which it is diffused. It Is true, one animate Member moves another, but the
Motion must somewhere begin: In Actions purely Mechanical, it begins in
material Agents that work upon the Body, and its Parts: but in those that are
immediately under our Wills, the Motion has its beginning from the Soul moving
first something corporeal in us, by which other parts are moved. But our Author
appeals to other Animals, in which, he says, There Is frankly denied a Soul
independent on the Body: But this Learned Man knows, The Platonists assign them
Souls immaterial B^ings diverse from the Body; and the Peripateticks,
substantial Forms distinct from Matter. Des Carts indeed thinks them to be
pure Machines moved altogether after the manner of a Clock or Engine; which if
it should prove to be truly their case, yet have we no reason to believe it so
in our selves, since we feel it otherwise, viz. That we can move and stop many
of our Motions upon the command and direction of the Will; which Faculty
belongs to some Principle Immaterial: And if this be always determined by
something Corporeal, and not in our own power, as he seems to intimate; Farewell
Liberty, and welcome Stoical Necessity, and irresistible Fate in all things.

For the other things that follow page 35. in answer to the Doubts about
Sensation, particularly our decerning Quantities, Distances, etc. It Is evident
by what he speaks of demonstrating those things by the Optics, that he
understands not the force of the Objection, and has said nothing that comes
near it; as will appear plainly to any capable Person, that will take the pains
to compare what we both write.

He comes next, p. 36. to my Difficulties about the Memory; concerning which I
say not, (as he suggests) That it is impossible to be explicated; but that none
of the known Hypotheseis have yet explained it; which is sufficient for my
general conclusion of the present Imperfection, and the Narrowness of our
Knowledge. But our Author thinks Sir K. Digby's account to be the true Solution;
and answers to my Objection, that it is as conceivable how the Images, and
representations of Objects in the Brain should keep their distinct and orderly
situations, without confusion or dissipation; as how the Rays of Light should
come in a direct Line to the Eye; or how the Atomical Effluvia, that
continually flow from all Bodies, should find their way. To which I reply.

(1.) The multiplying Difficulties does not solve any: for supposing these to
be unaccountable, or very hard to be explained; yet this would only argue
another defect in our Knowledge, and so be a new evidence of the truth of my
general Conclusion. But, (a.) The proposed Instances are not so desperate: For
1. supposing Light, with Descartes (which is most probable) to consist in the
conamen of the ethereal Matter, receding from the Center of its Motion; the
direct tendency of it to the Eye is no difficulty worth considering; or if the
Rays be Atomical Streams, and Effluxes from the Sun, there is then nothing
harder to be conceived in this Hypothesis, than in the direct spouting of Water
out of a Pipe; nor any more, than in the beating of the Waves against the side
of a Ship, when it swims in the Sea. And 2. for the other Instance of corporeal
emissions that find their way to the Bodies, with which they have intercourse;
it would require to be proved, that the secret Operations of Nature are
performed by such material effluvia: Perhaps it is more likely that those
strange Effects are not Mechanioal, but Vital, effected by the continuity of
the great Spirit of Nature, which is diffused through all things: or however,
to suppose the Memory to be as clear and plain as Magnetism, and Sympathies,
will be no great Advantage to the belief of the intelligibleness of it.

There needs no more here; only I take notice of the Charge, p. 41. in these
words, -- I Would remember the ingenious Author, that he mis-imposeth the third
Opinion (which relisheth nothing of Philosophy) upon Aristotle, who taught the
Digbaean way. To which, I say, if the Doctrine of Intentional Species be not
Aristotle's, than the Universities of Europe (who have taught this Opinion to
be his) have hitherto been mistaken; and this Assertion, that Aristotle
delivered the Dighaean Doctrine of Atomical Effluvia, will alter the whole
Hypothesis; and then there will be little or nothing of Aristotle in his
Schools. (2.) The Digbaean, Atomical Opinion is notoriously known to have been
the way of Democritus, and Epicurus, which Aristotle frequently and professedly
opposes; That Democritus taught the Atomical Hypothesis we have Aristotle's
affirmation to justify: (...) (speaking of Leucippus and Democritus) (...). --
Dicunt (...) Printas magnitudines, multitudine quidem infinitas, magnitudine
vero indivisibiles -- and as he goes on, (...): Horum complexione, and
circumplexu omnia gig^i. And that these solved the way of Sensation by material
Images we have from Plutarch: (...): Democritus, Epicurus per Idolorum
ingressus putarunt visivum evenire. This Hypothesis Aristotle endeavors to
confute, (...) -- Absurdum e^iam quod illi non ^nerit in mentem clubitare, cur
oculus vidit solus, aliorum vero nullum quibus apparent idola. And again, (...)
-- Democritus and plurimi Physiologerum, quicnque loquuntur de sensia, absurdi^
quidd^m faciunt; omnia enim sensibitia tactilia faciunt. We see then Aristotle
thought the Doctrine of Sensation by Corporeal Images absurd in Democritus and
Epicurus, and therefore he must have much contradicted himself, if he taught
the same Doctrine with Sir K. Digby about the Memory, which was one with that
of those Ancients. And there is little doubt but that the Memory is excited to
Action by the like Instruments that the external Senses are, consonantly to
that of Plato in his Ph^do, (speaking of the Senses) (...), viz. That the
Memory is begot of them: And the same Aristotle affirms almost in the same
words, (...), The Memory is begot out of the Sense. So that I think I am not
mistaken in this matter; or if I am, I err with the great Body of his Sectators.

But whether the Doctrine (...) Intentional Species be Aristotlt's or not, it is
no great matter, I make this no charge against him; And if it be no^ (...),
it is however the common Tenent of his Schools, and so lit to be considered as
an Hypothosis, which I have done, and sh^wn it to be an insufficient account of
the Memory.

To the Difficulty I propose about the Formation of Animals, our Author offers
two Things; The first of them may deserves a word or two about it (...) In his
own words it is thus expres^.

Conceive the first thus; L^'s say the Seed of a Plant, or Animal, contains
invisible parts of all the Animal's Members: These let us say supplied with
moisture increase, with some slight mutation whereof the reason may be easily
rendered (for example that some parts dryer and harder, others are more
thoroughly watered, and grow soft) and what great matter will be apprehended in
the formation of living things?

You may remember Sir, that once, when you and I were talking of the wonderful
discoveries of the Microscope, and the many complete Animals it discloseth,
which lay hid from our unaided sight, we fell thence into a discourse of the
strange and incredible subtilty of Nature in forming so many distinct Parts,
and Members, and Passages in those invisible Creatures; and of the grosness of
our Senses in comparison of the fineness and tenuity of those works: I then
made an offer to you of this Hypothesis of the Formation of Organical Bodies,
which I expressed to this effect: That the Seeds of things are certain, and are
the things themselves in little: having all that is in the completed Body in
smallest and invisible parts; and so generation is but accretion, and growth to
greater bulk and consistence. To this purpose our Author here speaks; and the
Hypothesis receives probability, and advantage from the late discoveries of the
ingenious Malpeghius, and Dr. Grew in his Anatomy of Plants: Nor is it unlikely
but that Vegetables are folded up in their Seeds; and that their Vegetation is
only the expanding and unfolding of them. But in Animals the thing is of more
difficult conception, since the immediate matter of many, if not of most,
Generations is an homogeneous fluid. To which I know it will be said, that the
organized Body is in it, though it be so small as to be invisible: But it is
not very probable, that an invisible Atome of a Creature should expand it self
into the vastness of a Whale or Elephant; or that the Original Bodies of those
immense Creatures, should be undecernable by the acutest sight, when the
seminal Body (if I may so call it) of very small Plants are plainly visible.
And if this be so, that the Seed of Animals actually contains the formed Bodies
of the Animals themselves, those little Bodies must either be supposed created
by God, in the form and consistence in which they are, from the foundation of
the World; or they are produced after, in an orderly course of Nature: If the
former be said, some will be apt to ask, Whether this will not destroy all
Philosophy, being so immediate a recourse to Creation, and the infinite Power
of God? And the manner of those Formations is never the more intelligible for
being resolved into the immediate efficiency of incomprehensible Power and
Wisdom. But if they are produced in a natural way, we are then as much a^ a
loss to find by what Agent, and what direction those Corpuscles are formed, as
we are to understand the way and manner of it in greater Bodies. Or, be they
produced how they will, by Creation, or Nature, yet still the Trouble and
Doubts will be as many and great in the conception of their growth to their
visible Bulk, which we call their Generation: For still must be a Director of
the Matter by which each part is increast, that must separate, dispose, guide,
and proportion it so, as that ^o part may exceed, none may want: and so the
Queries, and Difficulties, that concern the Generation of Organical Bodies, are
unanswered notwithstanding this Hypothesis.

Our Author's second Solution concerns only the gross and material Ingredients
in the formation of Bodies, of which he pretends some account. But this is
nothing at all to our business, which was to enquire after the Principle of
Direction of those various and methodical Motions that are requisite to the
formation of an Animal, or other Organical Body. And the Chemical Processes,
and Elementary Solutions of which he speaks p. 43. signify no more to the
Matter, than if a Man should answer an enquiry about the Art and Method of the
Motions of a Watch, by saying, They are performed by Steel, Iron, Brass, or
Silver, wherein the Matter of the Work indeed is declared, but not the Artifice.

The Learned Man comes next to the Solution of two difficulties I propose about
Matter, the Union of its Parts, and the composition of Quantity, p. 45. His
answer in short is, That there are no actual parts in quantity before division:
Which if it be so indeed, there is then no ground for the Questions how they
are united; or of what compounded. But I shall show; 1. That there are actual
Parts; and, 2. That the Grounds of the contrary Assertion are weak and
insufficient.

1. The formal nature of Quantity is Extention, in the Notion of Aristotle's
Schools; and divisibility in the Philosophy of Sir K. Digby, and our Author;
both which suppose parts, and parts actual: for to be extended, is to have
parts extra parts (as the School Phrase is); and if the Extension be actual,
the Parts must be so: for it is not conceivable how a thing can be extended but
by parts, which are really distinct from one another, though not separate: Nor
can a thing be divided, except we suppose the Parts preexistent in the
divisible; for Divisibility is founded upon real distinction, and it is
impossible to divide that which is one without any diversity. (2.) Except there
are parts in Matter before Division, there are none at all: For after they are
divided they are no parts, but have a compleatness and integrality of their
own, especially if their Subject were an Homogeneous Body. (3.) If there are
not actual Parts in Quantity, Contradictions may be verified de eodem in all
the Circumstances, which the Metaphysics teach to be impossible: For the same
Body may be seen, and not seen, black and white, hot and cold, moist and dry,
and have all other the most contrary Qualities. To this Sir K. Digby answers, [
That it is not one part of the thing that shows it self, and another that does
not, one that is hot, and another cold, etc. But it is the same thing, showing
it self according to one possibility of Division, and not another.] To this I
say first, These distinct Possibilities are founded upon distinct Actualities,
which are the parts I would have acknowledged: and such a capacity of receiving
things so different cannot be in the same Subject without the supposal of parts
actually distinct and diverse. 2. The Subjects of these contrary Qualities are
things actual, whereas Possibilities are but Metaphysical Notions; and these
Subjects are distinct, or Contradictions will be reconciled: from which the
Inference seems necessary, that Quantity has Parts, and Parts Actual; and
distinct Possibilities will not salve the Business. And, 3. why must the common
Speech of all Mankind be altered? and what all the World calls Parts be called
Possibilities of Division? Which yet, if our Philosopher will needs name so,
they be acknowledged distinct, and proved actual, or at least founded
immediately upon things that are so; my Questions will as well proceed this way
as in the common one, viz. How the things that answer to these distinct
Possibilities are united, and of what compounded?

There is another Answer which I find in our Author's Peripatetical
Institutions; the sum of which is, [ That the Contradictions have only a
notional repugnance in the Subject as it is in our Understandings; and since the
parts have a distinct Being in our understanding, from thence it is that they
are capable to sustain Contradictions]. Which answer, if I understand, I have
reason to wonder at, for certainly the Subject sustains the Contradictories as
it is in re; and I never heard of a Notion, black or white, hot or cold, but in
a Metaphor: It Is the real Substance is the Subject of these Contrarieties,
which were impossible, if it had not diverse Realities answering to the
Qualities that so denominate: and therefore it is not the Understanding that
makes the diverse Subjects of these Accidents, as our Author suggests: but their
being such is the ground that we so apprehend them. This I think is enough to
show that there are actual Parts in Quantity. To which I must add,

(2.) That the Grounds of Sir K. Digby, and our Author, on which they build
their Paradox, are insufficient. The Reasons are; 1. Quantity is Divisibility;
1. Divisibility is Capacity of Division; 3. What is only capable of division,
is not actually divided; 4. Quantity is not actually divided, and therefore
has no parts actual. To which I say,

(1.) That Quantity is divisibility, is presumed; but extension is before it,
in Nature, and our Conception; and it is the received Notion, though I think
Impenitrability is the truest. (2.) Division supposes Union, and Union parts
united. (3.) What is only capable of Division in a mechanical Sense, may, and
ought to be divided in a Metaphysical: That is, they ought to be diverse in
their Being, before they can be separated, and distinct in their Quantity; for
Separability must suppose Diversity.

But, (2.) It is pleaded against Actual Parts in Quantity; that if we admit
them, we cannot stop till we come down to Indivisibles; of which to suppose
Quantity compounded, is said to be absurd and impossible. In answer to which, I
grant the Inference, and have acknowledged the Hypothesis of Indivisible; to be
full of seeming Inconsistencies, as is the other also: and therefore I reckon
both among the things that are unconceivable: of which there can be no greater
Argument, than their having driven such great and sagacious wits upon an
Assertion, that is contrary to our Senses, and the apprehension of all the
World: That there are no parts in Quantity. And, (2.) It Is no good method of
reasoning to deny what is plain and obvious, because we cannot conceive what is
abstruse and difficult: To say that Quantity has no actual Parts, contrary to
the suffrage and senses of Mankind, because we cannot untie the Difficulties
that arise from its being compounded of Indivisibles, a nice and intricate
Theory.

Sir, I crave your pardon for this Spinose and dry Discourse, which I could not
well avoid, it being one of the main things of Sir K. Digby's and Mr. White's
Philosophy, and pretended by the latter, as such a Solution of the Doubts I
propounded, as renders them scarce any Difficulties at all: For the other
things he objects, they are smaller Matters; and if you have leisure for such
Trifles, I refer you to the discussion of them in my larger Answer, annexed to
my Scepsis Scientifica: in which also you will find what concerns his
justification of Aristotle and his Philosophy.

I am, Sir, Your affectionate Friend and Servant, J. G.

MODERN IMPROVEMENTS OF Useful Knowledge. Essay III.

Essay III. Modern Improvements OF Useful Knowledge.
NOtwithstanding the show of Science that the World of Books makes, it must be
confessed by considerate Men, that Knowledge is capable of far greater Heights
and Improvements, than it has yet attained; and there is nothing has stinted
its Growth, and hindered its Improvements more, than an over-fond, superstitious
Opinion of Aristotle, and the Ancients, by which it is presumed that their
Books are the Ne Vltra's of Learning, and that little or nothing can be added
to their discoveries: So that hereby a stop has been put upon Inquiry, and Men
have contented themselves with studying their Writings, and disputing about
their Opinions, while they have not taken much notice of the great Book of
Nature, or used any likely Endeavors for further acquaintance with it. This,
whoever will consider, and speak impartially, must confess: and yet in spite
of the evil Instuence of this Humor, there have been some in all Ages, who
have freely searched into the Creatures of God as they are in his World,
without vainly spending of their time in playing with those Images of them that
the phansies of Men have framed in theirs. And perhaps no Age has been more
happy in liberty of Enquiry, than this, in which it has pleased God to excite
a very vigorous and active Spirit for the advancement of real and useful
Learning. This every sensible Man should strive, as he is able, to promote: and
I shall now endeavor, as far as my weakness will permit, to raise the capable
and ingenious, from a dull and drousie acquiescence in the diseoveries of
former tim^ to a noble vigor in the pursuits of Knowleg: And this I (...) do,
by representing the Encouragements we have to proceed, from the Helps and
Advantages we enjoy, beyond those of remote Antiquity. In order to this I
consider,

THat there are Two chief ways whereby Knowledge may be advanced, viz. (1.) By
enlarging the HISTORY of Things: And (2.) By improving INTERCOVRSE and
COMMVNICATIONS.

The History of Nature is to be augmented, either by an investigation of the
Springs of Natural Motions, or fuller Accounts of the grosser and more palpable
Phenomenon. For the searching out the beginnings and depths of Things, and
discovering the Intrigues of remoter Nature, there are THREE remarkable ARTS,
and multitudes of excellent INSTRVMENTS, which are great Advantages to these
later Ages; but were either not at at all known, or but imperfectly, by
Aristotle and the Ancients.

The ARTS in which I instance, are Chemistry, Anatomy, and the Mathematics:
The INSTRVMENTS, such as the Microscope, Telescope, Thermometer, Barometer, and
the Air-Pump: Some of which were first Invented, all of them exceedingly
Improved by the ROYAL SOCIETY.

To begin with the Consideration of the ARTS mentioned, I observe, That these
were very little cultivated or used in Aristotle's Times, or in those following
ones in which his Philosophy did most obtain.

FOr the FIRST, CHEMISTRY, it has indeed a pretense to the great Hermes for
its Author (how truly, I will not dispute): From him it is said to have come to
the Egyptians, and from them to the Arabians: Among these it was infinitely
roingled with vanity and superstitious Devices: But not at all in use with
Aristotle and his Sectators. Nor does it appear, that the Grecians, or the
disputing Ages, were conversant in these useful and lueiferous Processes, by
which Nature is unwound, and resolved into the Rudiments of its Composition;
and by the violence of those Fires it is made confess those latent parts,
which, upon less provocation, it would not disclose. Now, as we cannot
understand the frame of a Watch, without taking it into pieces; so neither can
Nature be well known, without a resolution of it into its beginnings, which
certainly may be best of all done by Chemical Methods: By those Enquiries
wonderful discoveries are made of their Natures; and Experiments are found out,
which are not only full of pleasant surprise and information, but of valuable
use, especially in the Practice of Physic; For It directs Medicines less
loathsome and far more vigorous, and freeth the Spirits, and purer parts, from
the clogging and noxious Appendices of grosser Matter, which not only hinder
and disable the Operation, but leave hurtful Dregs in the Body behind them. I
confess, that among the Egyptians and Arabians, the Paracelsians, and some
other Moderns, Chemistry was very fantastic, unintelligible, and delusive;
and the boasts, vanity, and canting of those Spagyrists, brought a scandal upon
the Art, and exposed it to suspicion and contempt: but its late Cultivators,
and particularly the ROYAL SOCIETY, have refined it from its dross, and made it
honest, sober, and intelligible, an excellent Interpreter to Philosophy, and
help to common Life. For they have laid aside the Chrysopoietick, the delusory
Designs, and vain Transmutations, the Rosiecrucian Vapors, Magical Charms, and
Superstitious Suggestions, and formed it into an Instrument, to know the Depths
and Efficacies of Nature. And this is no small advantage that we have above the
old Philosophers of the Notional Way. And we have another,

(II.) In the Study, Use, and vast Improvements of ANATOMY, which we find as
needful to be known among us, as it is wonderful 'twas known so little among the
Ancients, whom a fond Superstition deterred from Dissections. For the
Anatomizing the Bodies of Men was counted barbarous and inhumane in elder
Times: And I observe from a Learned Man of our own, That the Romans held it
unlawfal to look on the Entrails. Tettullian severely censures an inquisitive
Physician of his time for this practice, saying, That he hated Man, that he
might know him. Yea, one of the Popes (I take 'twas Boniface 8.) threatens to
Excommunicate those, that should do any thing of this (then) abominable nature.
And Democritus was fain to excuse his Dissection of Beasts, even to the great
Hippocrates. Nor does it appear by any thing extant in the Writings of Galen,
that that other Father of Physicians ever made any Anatomy of humane Bodies.
Thus shie and unacquainted was Antiquity with this excellent Art, which is one
of the most useful in humane Life, and tends mightily to the eviscerating of
Nature, and disclosure of the Springs of its Motion. But now in these later
Ages, Anatomy has been a free and general Practice; and particularly in this,
It has received wonderful Improvements from the Endeavors of several worthy
Inquisitors, some of them Ingenious Members of the ROYAL SOCIETY, as Sir George
Ent, Dr. Glisson, and Dr. Willis. I instance in the most remarkable of their
Discoveries briefly; And those I take notice of are, The Valves of the Veins,
discovered by Fabricius ab Aquapendente; The Valve at the entrance of the gut
Colon, found, as is generally thought, by Bauhinus; The Milkie Veins of the
Mesentery, by Asellius; The Receptacle of the Chyle, by Pecquet; The Ductus
Virsungianus, by Jo. George Wirsung of Paedua; The Lymphatick Vessels, by Dr.
Joliffe, Bartholin, and Olaus Rudbeck; The internal Ductus Salivaris in the
Maxillary Glandule, by Dr. Wharton, and Dr. Glisson; The external Ductus
Salivaris in the conglomerated Parotis, The Ductus of the Cheek, The Glandules
under the Tongue, Nose, and Palate, The Vessels in the nameless Glandule of the
Eye, and the Tear-Glandule, by Nich. Steno; A new Artery, called Arterea
Bronchialis, by Fred. Ruysch. I add, the Origination of those Nerves, which
were of old supposed to arise out of the substance of the Brain, but are found
by late Anatomists to proceed from the Medulla Oblongata. And though the Succus
Nutritious be not yet fully agreed upon by Physicians, yet it has so much to
say for it self, that it may not unreasonably be mentioned among the New
Inventions.

But of all the Modern Discoveries, Wit and Industry have made in the Economy
of Humane Nature, the noblest is that of the Circulation of the Blood, which
was the Invention of our deservedly-famous Harvey. It Is true, the envy of
malicious Contemporaries, would have robbed him of the glory of this Discovery,
and pretend it was known to Hippocrates, Plato, Aristotle, and others among the
Ancients: But whoever considers the Expressions of those Authors, which are
said to respect the Circulation, will find, that those who form the Inference,
do it by a faculty that makes all kind of Compositions and Deductions, and the
same that assists the Enthusiasts of our days, to see so clearly all our
Alterations of State and Religion, to the minutest Particulars, in the
Revelation of St. John. And perhaps it may be as well concluded from the first
Chapter of Genesis, as from the Remains of those Ancients; who, if they had
known this great and general Theory, how chance they spoke no more of a thing,
which no doubt they had frequent occasions to mention? How came it to be lost
without memory among their Followers, who were such superstitious porers upon
their Writings? How chance it was not shown to be lodged in those Authors,
before the days of Dr. Harvy, when Envy had impregnated and determined the
Imaginations of those, who were not willing any thing should be found anew, of
which themselves were not the Inventors? But it is not only the remotest
Ancients, whom time has consecrated, and distance made venerable, whose Ashes
those fond Men would honor with this Discovery: But even much later Authors
have had the Glory fastened upon them. For the Invention is by some ascribed to
Paulus Venetus; by others, to Prosper Alpinus; and a third sort give it to
Andreas Caesalpinus. For these, though either of them should be acknowledged to
be the Author, it will make as much for the design of my Discourse, as if Harvy
had the credit; and therefore here I am no otherwise concerned, but to have
Justice for that Excellent Man: And the World has now done right to his
Memory, Death having overcome that Envy which dog's living Virtue to the Grave;
and his Name rests quietly in the Arms of Glory, while the Pretensions of his
Rivals are creeping into darkness and oblivion.

Thus, I have done with the Instances of Anatomical Advancements, unless I
should hitherto refer the late Noble Experiment of Transfusion of the Blood
from one living Animal into another, which I think very fit to be mentioned;
and I suppose it is not improper for this place: Or however, I shall rather
venture the danger of impropriety and misplacing, than omit the taking notice
of so excellent a Discovery, which no doubt future Ingenuity and Practice, will
improve to purposes not yet thought of; and we have very great likelihood of
Advantages from it in present prospect.

For it is concluded, That the greatest part of our Diseases arise either from
the scarcity, or malignant temper and corruption of our Blood; in which cases
Transfusion is an obvious Remedy; and in the way of this Operation, the peccant
Blood may be drawn out, without the danger of too much enfeebling Nature, which
is the grand inconvenience of mere Phlebotomies. So that this Experiment may be
of excellent use, when Custom and Acquaintance have hardened Men to permit the
Practice, in Pleurisies, Cancers, Leprosies, Madness, Ulcers, Smallpox,
Dotage, and all suchlike Distempers. And I know not why that of injecting
prepared Medicines immediately into the Blood, may not be better and more
efficacious, than the ordinary course of Practice: Since this will prevent all
the danger of frustration from the loathings of the Stomach, and the disabling,
clogging mixtures and alterations they meet with there, and in the Intestines,
in which no doubt much of the Spirit and Virtue is lost. But in the way of
immediate injection, they are kept entire, all those inconveniences are
avoided, and the Operation is like to be more speedy and succesful. Both these
noble Experiments are the late Inventions of the ROYAL SOCIETY, who have
attested the reality of the former, that of Transfusion of Blood, by numerous
Trials on several sorts of brute Animals. Indeed the French made the Experiment
first upon humane Bodies, of which we have a good account from Monsieur Dennis:
But it has also since been practiced with fair and encouraging success, by our
Philosophical Society. The other of Injection, if it may be mentioned as a
different Invention, was also the product of the same Generous Inventors;
though indeed more forward Foreigners have endeavored to usurp the credit of
both. This latter likewise has succeeded to considerable good effects, in some
new Trials that have been made of it in Dantzick, as appears in a Letter
written from Dr. Fabritius of that City, and printed in the Philosophical
Transactions.

I proceed now to my THIRD Instance of ARTS, (if I may take leave to use the
word in this large sense) which are Advantages for deep search into Nature, and
have been considerably advanced by the Industry and culture of late Times,
above their ancient Stature. And the Instance was,

(III.) The MATHEMATICS. That these are mighty helps to Practical and Useful
Knowledge, will be easily consest by all, that have not so much ignorance as to
render them incapable of information in these Matters: The Learned Gerard
Vossius has proved it by induction in Particulars: And yet it must be
acknowledged, that Aristotle, and the disputing Philosophers of his School,
were not much addicted to those noble Inquisitions: For Proclus the Commentator
upon Euclide, though he gives a very particular Catalogue of the Elder
Mathematicians, yet has not mentioned Aristotle in that number: And though
Diogenes Laertius takes notice of a Book he inscribed (...), another, (...),
and a Third, yet extant, (...): Yet it appears not that these were things of
very great value; and Aristotle's Metaphysical procedure, even in Physical
Theories, the genius and humor of his Principles, and the airy contentions of
his Sect, are great presumptions that this Philosopher was not very
Mathematical: And his numerous succeeding Followers, were certainly very little
conversant in those Studies. I have elsewhere taken notice, that there is more
published by those Disputing Men on some trifling Question about ens Rationis,
and their Materia prima than has been written by their whole number upon all
the useful parts of Mathematics and Mechanics. It would require much skill in
those Sciences, to draw up the full History of their Advancements; I hear a
very accurate Mathematician is upon it: And yet to fill up my Method, I Will
adventure at some imperfect Suggestions about the Inventions and Improvements
of this kind: And I begin,

(I.) With Arithmetic, which is the Handmaid to all the other parts of
Mathematics. This indeed Pythagoras is said to have brought from the
Phoenicians to the Graecians: but we hear no great matter of it till the days
of Euclide; not the Euclide that was the Contemporary of Plato, and Hearer of
Socrates; but the famed Mathematician of that Name, who was after Aristotle,
and at 90 years distance from the former. This is the first Person among the
Ancients, that is recorded by the exact Vossius to have done any thing
accurately in that Science. After him it was advanced by Diophantus, methodized
by Psellus, illustrated among the Latins by L. Apul^ius; and in later times
much promoted by Cardan, Gemma Frisius, Ramus, Clavius, and diverse more modern
Artists; among whom I more especially take notice of that Ingenious Scotchman
the Lord Napier,

Who invented the Logarithms, which is a way of computing by Artificial
Numbers, and avoiding the tadium of Multiplication and Division. For by this
Method all those Operations are performed by Addition and Substraction, which
in Natural Numbers were to be done those longer ways. This Invention is of
great use in Astronomical Calculations, and it may be applied also to other
Accounts. Besides this, the same Learned Lord found an easy, certain, and
compendious way of Accounting by Sticks, called Rabdology; as also Computation
by Napier's Bones: Both these have been brought to greater perfection by
others, since their first Discovery; particularly by Vrsinus and Kepler.

To them I add the Decimal Arithmettck, which avoids the tedious way of
computing by Vulgar Fractions in ordinary Accounts, and Sexagenaries in
Astronomy; exceedingly and lately improved hy our famous Oughtred, and Dr.
Wallis a Member of the ROYAL SOCIETY. If I should here subjoin the Helps this
Art has had from the Works and Endeavors of Anot^lius, Barlaam, Maximus
Planudes, N^morarius, Floren^inus Bredonus, Pisanus, Orontius; and in this Age,
from those of Adrianus Romanus, Henischius, Cataldus, Malapartius, Keplerus,
Briggius, Crugerus, and a vast number reckoned up by Vossius, I should be
tedious on this Head; and therefore I pass lightly over it, and proceed,

(II.) To Algebra, of universal use in all the Mathematical Sciences, in Common
Accounts, in Astronomy, in taking Distances and Altitudes, in measuring plain
and solid Bodies, and other useful Operations. The first noted Author in this
Method was Diophantus, who lived long since the times of Aristotle. He, and
those other Ancients that used it, performed their Algebraical Operations by
Signs and Characters suited to the several Numbers, and Powers of Numbers, which
they had occasion to use in solving Problems: But the later Mathematicians have
found a far more neat and easy way, viz. by the Letters of the Alphabet, by
which we can solve diverse Problems that were too hard for the Ancients, as far
as can be discovered by any of their remaining Works. For there were many
affected Aequations (as they call them) that did not equally ascend in the
Scale of Powers, that could not be solved by the elder Methods; whereas the
acute Vieta, a Mathematician of this last Age, affirms, he could resolve any
Problem by his own Improvements. Besides him, our excellent Oughtred another,
lately mentioned, did much in this way. But Descartes has outdone both
former and later Times, and carried Algebra to that height, that some
considering Men think Humane Wit cannot advance it further. I will not say so
much; but no doubt he has performed in it things deserving much
acknowledgment, of which we shall hear more in another place. But I proceed,

(III.) To the Consideration of Geometry, which is so fundamentally useful a
Science, that without it we cannot well understand the Artifice of the
Omniscient Architect in the composure of the great World, and our selves.
(...), was the excellent saying of Plato; and the Universe must be known by the
Art whereby it was made. So that what Galileo notes of Aristotle, is a great
sign of his defects, viz. That he reprehended his Venerable Master for his
Geometrical Sublimities, accusing him that he receded from the solid Methods of
Philosophizing, through his too much indulging that Study; Which is so far from
being likely, that Geometry is little less than necessary to solid and real
Philosophy. And therefore Plato admitted none to his School, but those that
were acquainted with that Science: Which practice the mentioned excellent
Modern, notes to be directly opposite to the Peripatetick Genius; and some he
knew great Men of that way, dehorted their Disciples from it; which he
introduces one applauding as a wise Counsel, since Geometry would detect and
shame the futilities of that Notional way. But not to take too large a compass,
this is certain, That Geometry is a most useful and proper Help in the Affairs
of Philosophy and Life. It Is almost as clear from those former intimations,
that Aristotle was not much inclined that way; and we know that his late
Sectators, have very seldom applied themselves to Geometrical Disquisitions.

The Result of which is, We must expect the Advantages of this Science, from
the declining of his and their Empire; and I need not say expect it, they are
both in present view. And if after this any do require accounts of the
Improvements Geometry has received, since the foundation of that Tyranny by
the Man of STAGYRA, I shall offer the best I have; and though I am conscious
that they will be scant and defective, yet I hope sufficient for my present
purpose.

I note then from the celebrated Vossius, That Euclide was the first that
brought Geometry into a Method, and more accurately demonstrated those
Principles, which before were scattered among the Greeks and Egyptians, and
not so cogently or carefully proved. And Proclus reckons this famous Man as the
Compiler and Demonstrator, not as the Inventor of the Elements; and two of
these Books ( viz. 14, and 15.) are ascribed to Apollonius Pergaeus, who was
his nearest Successor in Fame for Mathematical Abilities. This Geometrician
improved the Science by four Books of Conicks, published of old; and three more
have been lately (in the year 1661.) translated out of an Arabic Manuscript in
the Duke of Tuscany's Library, and are now abroad. This Manuscript Jacob Golius
procured out of the East. Besides which, this Magnus Geometra, as he was
called, illustrated Euclide by his Learned Commentary upon him. But Archimedes
of Syracuse, was a Person of the greatest renown for Geometrical and Mechanical
Performances; concerning which, Polybius, Valerius, Plutarch, Livy, and others,
have recorded prodigious things: This great Wit carried Geometry from general
and idle Speculation, to the use and benefit of Mankind; whereas before him it
was an ancient and perverse Opinion, That this Knowledge ought not to be
brought down to vulgar Service, but kept up in abstractive Contemplations: upon
which score Archytas and Eudoxus, those great Geometricians before Euclide,
were scared from the Mechanical and Organical Methods, to the great hinderance
of beneficial Improvements in that way. But the excellent Syracusian
understood, that this Science is not debased, but promoted and advanced by such
Accommodations; and evinced the usefulness and excellency of Geometry, in his
admirable Paradox proposed before King Hieron ( Datis viribus datum pondus
tollere) [(...)]. This Mathematician flourished 160 years after the time of
Aristotle, who has the name of the most Ancient that writ in Mechanics,
though that Book of his be not mentioned, either by Archimedes, Athenaeus,
Hero, or Pappus, Mechanical Authors; and Cardan and Patricius affirm that Work
to be none of Aristotl's: Whose ever it was, the Performance has praise from
the Learned, as explaining the general Causes of Mechanical Geometry. But
Archimedes was more practical and particular: And though Plutarch in the Life
of Marcellus affirms he writ nothing; yet the contrary is abundantly proved by
Gerard Vossius, who has shown that the Books extant under his Name, that
contain so many great Maxims of Mechanics, are genuine; and both Strabo and
Pappus mention them as his. The Design of Archimedes, of combining Mechanism
and Geometrick Theary, was after happily promoted by Hero the Elder of
Alexandria, who invented those ingenuous Automata, that move by Air and Wires;
concerning which he writ a Book that was Translated by Fredericus Commandinus,
as also he did another De Machinis Bellicis, by which he well improved
Geometrick Meohanicks: And Pappus particularly celebrates his exactness in
solving the Deliaick Problem, De Cubo duplicando, acknowledging that he took
most of his own Accounts about that Matter, from that exquisite Man. Next him,
I mention Theodosius of Tripoli, who very much improved Geometry by his three
Books De Figura Sphaerica, which afforded great assistance to Ptolomy, Pappus,
Proclus, and Theon, in their Mathematical Endeavors. Menelaus also, who lived
in Trajan's time, contributed very much to the perfecting the Doctrine of
Sphaericks, as Vitellio well knew, who was famous for those things which he
borrowed from that Author. The Performances also of Ctesibius, who lived in the
time of Ptolomeus Physcon, are much celebrated by Plivy. He invented many
things in Hydraulicks, and according to Atheneus, he was the first Contriver of
Musical Organs. These were Mechanical: but Geminus Rhodius the Master of
Proclus Lycius, applied Logic to Geometry, out of particular Elements
abstracting Vniversals. He demonstrated, That there are only Three similar
Species of all Lines, viz. Right, Circular, and Cylindrical: And Perseus
following his steps, enriched Geometry with the Invention of three kinds of
Crooked Lines, the Parabole, Hyperbole, and Elipsis; for which he expressed his
extatick joy, as Thales, Pythagoras, and Archimedes did upon like occasions, in
a Sacrifice to the Gods. But to be briefer, Pappus improved the Sphoericks;
Theon more methodically digested the Elements of Euclide; Serenus Antinsensis
discovered, that the Section of a right Cylindre, is the same with the Elipsis
of a right Cone; Copernicus improved the Doctrine of Triangles; Ramus corrected
and supplied Euclide, where his Principles were defective; Maurolicus writ
first of Secant Lines, Clavius much illustrated and promoted the Doctrine of
Tangents, Secants, Triangles, Right Lines, and Sphaericks, besides what he did
in his Comment upon Euclide, I might mention with These, the worthy
Performances of Gusanus, Pitiscus, Snellius, Ambrosius Rhodius, Kepler,
Franciseus a Schoten, and others, who contributed very eminently to the
Perfections and Advancements of Geometry, and were lare Men.

But none have done in it like the Excellent Persons whom I reserve for my last
mention; The chief are, Vieta, Descartes, and Dr. Wallis.

To my account of whose Performances, I must premise, That no great things can
be done in Geometry, without the Analytical Method; And though some Learned Men
conceive the Ancients were acquainted with this way of resolving Problems, yet
their skill in it went no higher than the Quadratick Order of Aequations, which
They demonstrated by Circles and Right Lines, which They called Loca Plana: but
they were able to do nothing in the Cubical Aequations, or any of the Superior
Orders; though they endeavored to cover their defects in this Art, by recourse
ad Locos Solidos, (viz. Conick Sections) and Lineares, as they called them,
such as the Helix, Conchoeides, and those of like nature. But those tortous and
curved Lines being described Mechanically by Compound Motions, the Problems
resolved by them, are performed Organically by the Hand and Eye, not
Geometrically.

This was the State of the Analytick Art, as long as Learning flourished in
Greece; when That was subdued by the Barbarians, their Learning with their
Country passed to the Arabians, and also to the Persians, as we have it from
Hottinger and Bullialdus: But these Successors of the Greeks did not advance
their Learning beyond the imperfect Stature in which it was delivered to them.
In that condition it remained till Cardan and Tartaglia, who made some small
addition toward the perfection of it; For they gave some Rules for solving
Cubical Aequations, which were certain in some cases, but not in all. Their
Invention some other Mathematical Men endeavored to advance, laying down Rules
for solving some Cubick and Biquadratick Aequations; but could never find an
universal way, that might reach all such: Yea indeed they utterly despaired,
and held it impossible. At length appears Vieta, who by inventing the Method of
Extracting Roots in the most numerous Aequations, and by converting the Signs
used by the Ancients into Letters, brought Algebra to a very great perfection,
as I have noted above; and by enriching the Analytical Art, by the Accessions
of his Exigetice Numerosa, and Logistice Speciosa, he has contributed infinite
helps to Geometry. After him, diverse other Learned Men polisht and adorned his
Discourses; among whom I mention chiefly our Countrymen Harriot and Oughtred,
who altered Vieta's Notes to advantage, and invented Canons to direct our
Operations in the Extracting of Roots, both in pure and adsected Aequations.

But after these had thus improved the Analytick Art, and well assisted
Geometry by it, Renatus Descartes appears, who in a few Pages, opens a way to
mighty Performances: He shows us how all the Problems of Geometry may be
brought to such terms, that we shall need nothing to the Construction and
Demonstration of them, but the knowledge of the length of certain right Lines;
and that, as all the Operations of Arithmetic are performed by Addition,
Subtraction, Multiplication, Division, and Extraction of Roots (which is a
species of Division). So in Geometry, for the preparation of Lines that they
may be known, nothing needs more to be done, than that others be added to them,
or subtracted from them; or if the Line be single, (which that it may be the
better referred to Numbers, may be called Unity) and beside that, two other
Lines, that a Fourth be found which shall have the same proportion to one of
these Lines, that the other has to Unity, which is the same with
Multiplication; or else, that by them a Fourth be found, which may have the
same proportion to one of them, which Unity has to the other, which is the
same with Division; or lastly, That there be found between Unity, and some
other Right Line, two or more mean Proportionals, which is the same thing with
the Extraction of Quadratick and Cubick Roots. And that he may justify the
introducing of Terms Arithmetical into Geometry, he observes, That the avoiding
thereof was an occasion of much perplexity and obscurity in the Geometry of the
Ancients; of which he could give no other conjecture, but because they did not
sufficiently understand the affinity and cognation of those Sciences. But if I
should intend an exact History of all his Performances, I must transcribe Him;
for he has said so much in little, that it is impossible to abridge those his
close Composures. I shall therefore only hint some principal things referring
to his Writings for the rest.

And I take notice first, That he has proposed an Universal Method for the
Solution of all Problems; not only those propounded in Right Lines, Plains, and
Solids: but also all that are made in Angles, a thing of most general Service
in all parts of Mathematics. By It he resolves the famous Proposition in
Pappus, which was too hard for Euclide, Apollonius, and all the Ancients. He
discourses the nature of crooked Lines, and shows which are fit to be used in
Geometrical Demonstrations; Gives Rules for the place where to apply our selves
in the Demonstration of any Problem; and tells us, That a Problem after it is
brought to an Aequation, and reduced to its least terms, and the unknown
Quantity is Quadratick, or of two Dimensisions, that then it may be
demonstrated by a Right Line and Circles: but if the Aequation, after it is
reduced to its least Terms, leave the unknown Quantity, Cubick or Biquadratick,
it must be demonstrated by some one of the Conick Sections. Whereas again, if
after the Aequation reduced, the unknown Quantity remain of five or six
Dimensions, or more, in infinitum, then the Demonstration must be performed by
Lines more and more compound, according to the degree of Composition in the
unknown Quantity of the Aequation. But because the way by Lines is perplexed and
tedious, he gives Rules to reduce Aequations of many Dimensions, to fewer. He
shows how to fill up Defects, when any Terms are wanting in the Aequation; how
to convert the false Roots into true, to avoid Fractions, and to lessen
Aequations. He has demonstrated, by a Circle and Parabole, the famous Problems
so much agitated among the Ancients, viz. the Trisection of an Angle, and the
finding two mean Proportionals between two Lines given, with more brevity and
expedition than any that went before him. And this shall suffice by way of
intimation, concerning that Prince of Mathematicians and Philosophers.

Since him, others have improved this Method: Schotenius has demonstrated the
Loca Plana of Apollonius: Hadderius has added Inventions of use and pleasant
Speculation in his Tract of Reduction of Aequations. Florimundus de Beaune has
writ ingenious and profitable things, de Natura and Limitibus Aequationum. But
'twould be endless to attempt full Accounts of the Modern Advancements of this
Science, or indeed those accessions of growth it has had since Vieta. And
whoever should go about it, must reckon to begin anew as soon as he has
finished what he intended, since Geometry is improving daily.

I shall therefore add no more here, but only do right to an excellent Person
of our own Nation, Dr. Wallis, a Member of the ROYAL SOCIETY, to whom Geometry
is exceedingly indebted for his rare Discoveries in that Science. Particularly,
he has propounded a Method for the measuring of all kind of crooked Lines,
which is highly ingenious; and put an end to all future Attempts about Squaring
the Circle, which has puzzled and befooled so many Mathematicians, that have
spent their thoughts and time about it. This he has brought to effect as it
near as can be done, and showed the exact performance by rational Numbers
impossible: He has proposed excellent ways for the measuring all kinds of
Plains, and all multangular and solid Bodies. But it is time now to proceed to
the consideration of the next Mathematical Science, Viz.

(4.) Astronomy, one of the grandest and most magnifique of all those that lie
within the compass of Natural Inquiry. I shall not look back to its beginning
among the Chaldaeans, Egyptians, and eldest Graecians, in which Times it was
but rude and imperfect, in comparison to its modern Advancements. For the great
Men among the Greeks are taken much notice of, but for very ordinary and trite
things in this Science: As Anaximander Milesius, for teaching, That the Earth
was Globous, and the Center of the World not bigger than the Sun: Anaximines
for affirming, That the Moon shone but with a borrowed Light; That the Sun and
It were Eclipsed by the Earths interposal; and, That the Stars move round our
Globe. And Pythagoras was the first that noted the obliquity of the Ecliptic.
This Philosopher indeed was a Person of a vast reach, and said things in
Astronomy very agreeable to late Discoveries: But Aristotle made very odd
Schemes, not at all corresponding with the Phenomenon of the Heavens, as
appears from his Hypotheses of Solid Orbs, Epicycles, Excentricks,
Intelligences, and such other ill-contrived Phancies. Besides which, if I
should descend to consider his now palpable Mistakes about the nature of
Comets, the Galaxy, the Sphere of Fire under the Moon, and numerous other such,
I should oblige my self to a large ramble. Wherefore to be brief in these
Notes, I observe, That after Aristotle, Astronomy was cultivated and improved
by Theophrastus, Aratus, Aristarchus Samius, Archimedes, Geminus, Menelaus,
Theon, Hipparchus, Claudius Ptolomaeus, and many others among the Greeks.

Among later Authors, considerable things have been done in this way by both
Latins and Arabians: To omit the latter, I shall give you some particular
Instances of the other.

Johannes de Sacro Bosco, ingeniously and methodically explained the Doctrine
of the Sphere: Thebit first found the Motion of Trepidation: Regiomontanus
published the first Ephemerides: and did excellent things in his Theoricks of
the Planets. Wernerus stated the greatest Declination of the Sun. Albertus
Pighius directed the way to find Aequinoxes and Solstices: Baersius fram ed
perpetual Tables of the Longitudes and Latitudes of the Planets: Copernicus
restored the Hypothesis of Pythagoras and Philolaus, and gave far more neat and
consistent Accounts of the Phenomenon: Joachimus made Ephemerides according to
the Copernican Doctrine: Clavius invented a most useful demonstrative
Astrolabe, and writ an exquisite Comment upon Sacro Bosco.

But I conclude the last Century with the Noble Ticho Brahe, who performed the
great Work of restoring the Fixed Stars to their true places, the assignation
of which before him, was rather by guess, than any competent Rules, and the
mistakes here, were the very Root and Foundation of most Errors in Astronomy.
For which reason it was, that Copernicus left that earnest advice to his
Scholar Joachimus, that he should apply himself to the restitution of the Fixed
Stars; for till this were done, there could be no hopes of attaining to the
true places of the Planets, nor doing any thing to purpose in the whole
Science. This engaged the Noble Tycho to this Enterprise, and he made it the
Foundation of all the rest: The Method he used is described by Gassendus. By
the help of this noble Performance he reformed the elder Astronomical Tables,
both the Ptolomaick and Copernican. And from his Observations of the new Star
of 1572, and six others in his time, he asserted Comets into their place among
Heavenly Bodies, shattering all the Solid Orbs to pieces; And he has done it
with such cleaer conviction, that even the Jesuits, whose thraldom to the
Church of Rome, deters them from closing with the Motion of Earth, confess a
necessity of repairing to some other Hypothesis than that of Ptolomy, and
Aristotle. I might add to this, That this generous Nobleman invented and framed
such excellent Astronomical Instruments, as were for use and convenience far
beyond any of former Times: Himself has a Treatise concerning them. He has
also made exquisite Tables of the difference that Refractions make in the
appearance of the Stars, and done more great things for Astronomical
Improvement, than many Ages that were before him; for which reason I could not
pardon my self in a curt mention of so glorious an Advancer of this Science.

The next Age after him, which is ours, has made excellent use of his
Discoveries, and those of his Elder, the famed Copernicus; and raised Astronomy
to the noblest height and Perfection that ever yet it had among Men. It would
take up a Volume to describe, as one ought, all the particular Discoveries: But
my Design will permit but a short mention: Therefore briefly; I begin with
Galilaeo, the reputed Author of the famous Telescope; but indeed the glory of
the first Invention of that excellent Tube, belongs to Jacobus Metius of
Amsterdam: but 'twas improved by the noble Galilaeo, and he first applied it to
the Stars; by which incomparable Advantage, he discovered the Nature of the
Galaxy, the 21 New Stars that compose the Nebulosa in the Head of Orion, the 36
that conspire to that other in Cancer, the Ansulae Saturni, the Asseclae of
Jupiter, of whose Motions he composed an Ephemeris. By these Lunulae it is
thought that Jupiters distance from the Earth may be determined, as also the
distance of Meridians, which would be a thing of much use, since this has
always been measured by Lunar Eclipses, that happen but once or twice a year;
whereas opportunities of Calculating by the occultations of these new Planets
will be frequent, they recurring about 480 times in the year. Besides, (to
hasten) Galilaeo discovered the strange Phases of Saturn, one while ob^long,
and then round; the increment and decrement of Venus, like the Moon; the Spots
in the Sun, and its Revolution upon its own Axis; the Moons libration,
collected from the various position of its Maculae; and diverse other wonderful
and useful Raritics, that were strangers to all Antiquity: Shortly after
Galilaeo, appears Christopherus Scheiner, who by greater Telescopes viewed the
Sun with a curled and unequal Superficies, and in or near the Hori^n of an
Elliptical Figure. He found also, That that supposed uniform Globe of Light,
was of a different complexion in its several parts; some brighter than the main
Body, as the Faculae, others darker, as the Maculae. He made more than 2000
Observations of ^m, and described their Number, Magnitude, Situation, Figure,
and Revolutions. Kepler is next to be mentioned, who first proposed the
Elliptical Hypothesis, made very accurate and luciferous Observations about the
Motions of Mars, and writ an Epitome of the Copernican Astronomy, in the
clearest and most pers^icuous Method, containing the Discoveries of others, and
diverse considerable ones of his own; not to mention his Ephemerides, and Book
about Comets. Ant. Maria Shirlaeus, with a new Telescope of a larger Diameter
than ordinary, discovered five other Stars more remote from Jupiter than his
Satellites, and a kind of vapid Atmosphere about that Planet. Franciscus
Fontana observed the same Star, with nine others, never leaving it more than
ten of its Diameters; and in 1636, and 1643. with 8. Anno 1645. with 5, 1646.
with 7. on other days with 6. varying their distances one to another, and not
to be seen about Mars or Saturn, nor without extending the Telescope more than
was fitting for Fixed Stars. These Satellites are observed to suffer a
defection of their Light, when Jupiter interposeth between them and the Sun;
whence it is inferred, That they have their Light from It, and that Jupiter
has none of his own to impart to them. To be brief, Longomontanus described
the World according to all the Hypotheses of Ptolomy, Copernicus, and Ticho
Brahe: Jansonius Blaeu made far more perfect and exact Celestial Globes than
any were extant before: Gassendus writ judiciously of the Stars about Jupiter,
and of Mercury in the Sun, and gave the World most excellent Astronomieal
Institutions: Ismael Bullialdus enriched the Science with a new Method, to find
and easily compute the Paralaxes of Solar Ellipses: Hevelius drew a Graphical
Description of the Moon in all its Phases, as it appeared in the Telescope,
accurately delineating its Spots, and showing the inequality and mountanous
protuberances of its Surface, which lends Light to a great Theory. Both these
last named are Fellows of the ROYAL SOCIETY. Of the Selenography of Hevelius,
Ricciolus made an Improvement, both as to the Number, Figure, Magnitude, Site,
Color of the Maculae, and the Eminencies, Profundities, and Asperities of the
Lunar Superficies. Martinus Hortensius found Mercury to have variety of Phases,
like the Moon; as, now Horned, then Gibbous, and at other times Round. But I
conclude this Account with the most Worthy and Learned Prelate Dr. Seth Ward,
now Lord Bishop of Sarum, who among his other excellent Performances in
Astronomy, has demonstratively proved the Elliptical Hypothesis, which is the
most plain and simple, and performed by fewer Operations than either of the
other. This indeed was first discoursed of by Kepler, advanced by Bullialdus,
but demonstrated by this accomplished and venerable Bishop, an Honorable
Member of the ROYAL SOCIETY.

I come next (5.) To consider the Optics, whose Improvements are of great
importance in the Matters of general Philosophy and humane Life; since the
informations of Sense are the ground of both, and this Science rectifies and
helps the noblest of them. Concerning it, there was once a Book of Aristotle's
extant, according to Laertius: but it has submitto Time. Since him, this
Science has been cultivated by Euclide, and the celebrated Archimedes, who is
said to have done strange things by it, upon the Ships of Marcellus: As Proclus
who improved the Archimedian Artifices, destroyed a Fleet by his Specula
Vstoria, that besieged Constantinople. Ptolomy of Alexandria made considerable
Improvements of Optics; and Alhazenus the Arabian, is famous for what he did
in It. From thief, Vitellio drew his, and advanced the Science by his own Wit,
and their Helps. Stevinus corrected Euclide, Alhazen, and Vitellio, in some
fundamental Propositions that were mistakes; and in their room substituted
considerable Inventions of his own. Roger Bacou our famed Countryman (whom
Picus Mirandula calls the Phoenix of his Age, and Vossius, one Learned to a
Miracle) writ acutely of Optics. He was accused of Magic to Pope Clement iv.
and thereupon imprisoned: But the Accusation was founded on nothing but his
skill in Mathematics, and the ignorance of his Accusers. After these, the
Dioptricks were improved by Kepler, Gassendus, Mersennus, and the noble and
incomparable Descartes, who has said the most clear, useful, and improvable
things about it, that ever were extant on the Subject. But nothing has so much
advanced the Science, as the invention of the Telescope by Metius; and that
other of the Microscope, concerning which I have to say in the following
Instances. I pass therefore to the last I shall mention in the Mathematics,
which is,

(VI.) Geography. In this the Ancients were exceedingly defective. And
Aristotle knew the World, by the same Figure by which his Scholar conquered it.
It Is noted by the ingenious Varenius, that the most general and necessary
things in this Science were then unknown; as, The Habitableness of the Torrid
Zone; The flux and reflux of the Sea; The diversity of Winds; The Polar
Property of the Magnet; The true Dimension of the Earth. They wanted
Descriptions of remote Countries, concerning which both the Greeks and Romans
had very fabulous Relations. They knew not that the Earth was encompassed by
the Sea, and that it might be Sailed round. They were totally ignorant of
America, and both the North and South parts of this Hemisphere; yea, and
understood very little of the remoter places of their own Asia: Japan, the
Java's, the Philippicks, and Borneo, were either not at all known, or exceeding
imperfectly of old: But all these are familiar to the latter Times: Mexico and
Peru, and the vast Regions of those mighty Empires, with the many Isles of the
Great Sea are disclosed: The Frozen North, the Torrid Line, and formerly
unknown South, are visited, and by their numerous Inhabitants found not to be
so inhospitable and unkind to Men, as Antiquity believed. The Earth has been
rounded by Magellan, Drake, and Candish: The great Motion of the Sea is vulgar,
and its Varieties inquiring into every day: The diversities of Winds stated,
and better understood: The Treasure of hidden Virtues in the Loadstone found
and used. The Spicy Islands of the East, as also those of the remote South and
North, frequented, and the knowledge of that People and those Countries
transmitted to us, with their Riches; The most distant Parts being traveled
and described. Our Navigation is far greater, our Commerce is more general, our
Charts more exact, our Globes more accurate, our Travels more remote, our
Reports more intelligent and sincere; and consequently our Geography far more
perfect, than it was in the elder Times of Polybius and Possidonius, yea than
in those of Ptolomy, Strabo, and Pomponius Mela, who lived among the Caesar's.
And if it was so short in the flourishing Times of the Roman Empire, how was it
before in the days of Aristotle, and the Graecians? We have an Instance of it
in the Great Macedonian, who thought the Bounds of his Conquests to be the end
of the World; when there were Nations enough beyond him to have eaten up the
Conqueror with his proud and triumphant Armies. So that here also Modern
Improvements have been great; and He will think so, that shall compare the
Geographical Performances of Gemma Frisius, Mercator, Ortelius, Stevinus,
Bertius, and Guil. Blaeu, with the best Remains of the most celebrated
Geographers of the more ancient Ages.

Thus I have touched upon some of the Improvements of the ARTS that search into
the recesses of Nature, with which latter Ages have assisted Philosophical
Inquiries. And in these I see I have struck farther than I was aware into the
account of those things also, which lead us to the grosser Phenomenon; and my
Remarques about Geography are all of that nature. However I shall not alter my
Method; but after I have discoursed the Instruments I mentioned for Useful
Knowledge, I shall consider somewhat of NATURAL HISTORY, which reports the
Appearances, and is fundamentally necessary to all the Designs of Science. As
for the INSTRVMENTS then, that are next, before I come to the Notes I intend
concerning them, I observe, That

The Philosophy that must signify either for Light or Use, must not be the
work of the Mind turned in upon it self, and only conversing with its own
Idaea's; but It must be raised from the Observations and Applications of Sense,
and take its Accounts from Things as they are in the sensible World. The
Illustrious Lord Bacon has noted this as the chief cause of the
unprofitableness of the former Methods of Knowledge, viz. That they were but
the Exercises of the Mind, making Conclusions, and spinning out Notions from
its own native Store; from which way of proceeding nothing but Dispute and Air
could be expected. 'Twas the fault that Great Man found in the Ancients, That
they flew presently to general Propositions, without staying for a due
information from Particulars, and so gradually advancing to Axioms: Whereas the
Knowledge, from which any thing is to be hoped, must be laid in Sense, and
raised not only srom some few of its ordinary Informations; but Instances must
be aggregated, compared, critically inspected, and examined; singly, and in
consort: In order to which Performances our Senses must be aided; for of
themselves they are too narrow for the vastness of things, and too short for
deep Researches: They make us very defective and unaccurate Reports, and many
times very deceitful and fallacious ones: I say therefore, they must be
assisted with Instruments, that may strengthen and rectisie their Operations.
And in these we have mighty advantages over Aristotle and the Ancients; so that
much greater things may well be expected from our Philosophy, than could ever
have been performed by theirs; though we should grant them all the superiority
of Wit and Understanding their fondest Admirers would ascribe to those Sages:
For a weak hand can move more weight by the help of Springs, Wheels, Leavers,
and other Mechanic Powers, than the strongest could do without them: And that
we really have these Advantages, must be shown by Instance: I mentioned Five
that are considerable to that purpose, which I took notice of among many
others; and they were the Telescope, Microscope, Thermometer, Barometer, and
Air Pump.

(I.) The Telescope is the most excellent Invention that ever was, for
assisting the Eye in remote Discoveries. The distance of the Heavens is so
vast, that our unaided Senses can give us but extremely imperfect Informations
of that Upper World; And the Speculations that Antiquity has raised upon them,
have for the most part been very mean, and very false: But these excellent
Glasses bring the Stars nearer to us, and acquaint us better with the immense
Territories of Light: They give us more Phenomenon, and truer Accounts;
disperse the shadows and vain Images of the twilight of naked Sense, and make
us a clearer and larger prospect: By these Advantages they enlarge our
Thoughts, and show us a more magnificent Representation of the Universe: So
that by them the Heavens are made more amply to declare the Glory of God, and
we are helped to nobler, and better-grounded Theories: I have mentioned in my
Account of the Advance of Astronomy some of the most remarkable Discoveries
that have been made by these Tubes, which exceedingly transcend all the
Imaginations of elder Times; and by the further improvement of them, other
things may be disclosed as much beyond all ours. And the present Philosophers
are so far from desiring that Posterity should sit down contented with their
Discoveries and Hypotheses, that they are continually sollicitous for the
gaining more helps to themselves, and those that shall follow, for a further
progress into the knowledge of the Phenomenon, and more certain judgments upon
them. So that these Glasses are exceedingly bettered since their Invention by
Metius, and application to the Heavens by Galilaeo; and several ingenious
Members of the ROYAL SOCIETY are now busy about improving them to a greater
height: What success and informations we may expect from the Advancements of
this Instrument, it would perhaps appear Romantic and ridiculous to say; As,
no doubt, to have talked of the Spots in the Sun, and vast inequalities in the
Surface of the Moon, and those other Telescopical Certainties, before the
Invention of that Glass, would have been thought fantastic and absurd: I dare
not therefore mention our greatest hopes: but this I adventure, That it is not
unlikely but Posterity may by those Tubes, when they are brought to higher
degrees of perfection, find a sure way to determine those mighty Questions,
Whether the Earth move? or, the Planets are inhabited? And who knows which
way the Conclusions may fall? And it is probable enough, that another thing will
at last be found out, in which this lower World is more immediately concerned,
by Telescopical Observations, which is, the most desired Invention of
Longitudes; upon which must needs ensue yet greater Improvements of Navigation,
and perhaps the Discovery of the North-West Passage, and the yet unknown South:
Whatever may be thought of these Expectations by vulgar and narrow Minds, whose
Theories and Hopes are confined by their Senses, those that consider, that one
Experiment discovered to us the vast America, will not despair. But it is time
to pass from this, to a second Modern Aid, whereby our Sight is assisted, which
is,

(II.) The Microscope: The Secrets of Nature are not in the greater Masses, but
in those little Threads and Springs, which are too subtle for the grosness of
our unhelp'd Senses; and by this Instrument our eyes are assisted to look into
the minutes and subtilties of things, to discern the otherwise invisible
Schematis^s and Structures of Bodies, and have an advantage for the finding out
of Original Motions; To perceive the exactness and curiosity of Nature in all
its Composures; And from thence take sensible Evidence of the Art and Wisdom
that is in its Contrivance; To disclose the variety of living Creatures that
are shut up from our bare Senses, and open a kind of other World unto us, which
its littleness kept unknown: This Instrument has been exceedingly improved of
late, even to the magnifying of Objects many thousand times; and diverse useful
Theories have been found and explicated by the notices it has afforded; as
appears by the Microscopical Writings of Dr. Power and Mr. Hook, Members of
the ROYAL SOCIETY.

But (III.) The Thermometer was another Instrument I mentioned, which discovers
all the small unperceivable variations in the heat or coldness of the Air, and
exhibits many rare and luciferous Phenomenon, which may help to better
Informations about those Qualities, than yet we have any. And as to this, I
observe with the great Verulam, and the other Bacon the Illustrious Mr. Boil,
That Heat and Cold are the right and left hand of Nature: The former is the
great Instrument of most of her Operations; and the other has its Interest:
And yet the Philosophy of Aristotle has neither done, nor as much as attempted
any thing toward the Discovery of their Natures; but contented it self with the
jejune, vulgar, and general description, That Heat is a Quality that gathers
together things of a like nature, and severs those that are unlike; and Cold
congregates both. But now if we will know any thing deeply in the business of
Rarefaction and Condensation, the Doctrine of Meteors, and other material
Affairs of Nature, other Accounts about these things must be endeavored; and
the bare informations of our Senses are not exact enough for this purpose; for
their Reports in this kind are various and uncertain, according to the temper
and disposition of our Bodies, and several unobserved accidental Mutations that
happen in them. This Instrument therefore has been invented to supply their
Defects; and it gives far more constant and accurate, though perhaps not always
infallible Relations: but the justest are afforded by the Sealed Thermometer.
And besides the Uses of this Instrument I suggested, it will help very much in
framing the History of Weather, which may be applied to many excellent Purposes
of Philosophy, and Services of Life.

But (IV.) The Barometer is another late Instrument very helpful to Useful
Knowledge: That there is gravity even in the Air it self, and that that Element
is only comparatively light, is now made evident and palpable by Experience,
though Aristotle and his Schools held a different Theory: And by the help of
Quicksilver in a Tube, the way is found to measure all the degrees of
Compression in the Atmosphere, and to estimate exactly any accession of weight,
which the Air receives from Winds, Clouds, and Vapors: To have said in Elder
Times, That Mankind should light upon an Invention whereby those Bodies might
be weighed, would certainly have appeared very wild and extravagant; and it
will be so accounted for some time yet, till Men have been longer, and are
better acquainted with this Instrument: For we have no reason to believe it
should have better luck than the Doctrine of the Circulation, the Theory of
Antipodes, and all great Discoveries in their first Proposals: It Is impossible
to persuade some of the Indians that live near the heats of the Line, that
there is any such thing as Ice in the World; but if you talk to them of Water
made hard and consistent by Cold, they will laugh at you as a notorious Romancer:
And those will appear as ridiculous among the most of us, who shall affirm it
possible to determine any thing of the weight of the Wind or Clouds: But
Experience turns the laugh upon the confident incredulity of the Scoff^r; and
he that will not believe, needs no more for his conviction, than the labor of
a Trial; Let him then fill a Tube of Glass of some Feet in length with
Quicksilver; and having sealed one end, let him stop the other with his
Finger, and immerge that which is so stopped into a Vessel of Mercury, the Tube
being perpendicularly erected; let him then subtract his Finger, and he will
perceive the Quick silver to descend from the Tube into the subjacent Vessel,
till it comes to 29 Digits or thereabouts; there, after some Vibrations, it
ordinarily rests: The reason that this remainder of the Mercury does not
descend also, is, because such a Mercurial Cylinder is just equiponderant to
one of the insumbent Atmosphere that leans upon the Quicksilver in the Vessel,
and so hinders a further descent. It is concluded therefore, That such a
Cylinder of the Air as presses upon the Mercury in the Vessel, is of equal
weight to about 29 Digits of that ponderous Body in the Tube. Thus it is when
the Air is in its ordinary temper: But Vapors, Winds, and Clouds, alter the
Standard, so that the Quicksilver sometimes falls, sometimes rises in the
Glass, proportionably to the greater or less accession of gravity and
compression the Air has received from any of those alterations; and the Degree
of Increase beyond the Standard is the measure of the additional gravity. This
Experiment was the Invention of Torricellius, and used to little more purpose
at first, but to prove a Vacuum in Nature; and the deserted part of the
Glass-Tube was by many thought an absolute void, which I believe is a mistake:
But it has been since improved to this design of weighing the degrees of
compression in the Air; a thing that may signify much, in giving us to
understand its temper in several Places, on Hills and in Caves, in diverse
Regions and Climates, which may tend to the disclosing many excellent Theories
and Helps in Humane Life. And the Air is so Catholic a Body, and has so great
an influence upon all others, and upon ours, that the advantage of such an
Instrument, for the better acquainting us with its nature, must needs be very
considerable, and a good Aid to general Philosophy. And who yet knows how far,
and to what Discoveries this Invention may be improved? The World a long time
only rudely star'd upon the Wonders of the Loadstone, before its use was found
for the advantage of Navigation; and it is not impossible, but that future Times
may derive so much benefit one way or other from this Invention, as may equal
its esteem to that of the Compass. The ROYAL SOCIETY, by their Care and
Endeavors in the using this Instrument, give us hopes, that they will let none
of its useful Applications to escape us: And I know not whether we may not
mention it as the first great benefit we have from it, that it was an occasion
of the Invention of Mr. Boyle's famous Pneumatick Engine: And this is the other
Instrument I noted, and called

(V.) The Air-Pump: concerning the usefulness of which, that excellent Person
himself has given the best Accounts, in his Discourse of Physico-Mechanical
Experiments made in that Engine, by which he has discovered and proved a rare
and luciferous Theory, viz. the Elastick Power or Spring of the Air, and by
this, has put to flight that odd Fancy of the Fuga Vacui; and shown, that the
strange Effects which use to be ascribed to that general and obscure cause, do
arise from the native self-expansion of the Air. The extent of which Elastical
Expansion, he has found diverse ways to measure by his Engine, which also
discovers the Influence the Air has on Flame, Smoke, and Fire; That it has
none in Operations Magnetical; That it is probably much interspersed in the
Pores of Water, and comprest by the incumbent Atmosphere, even in those elose
retreats; What Operation the exsuction of the Air has on other Liquors, as
Oil, Wine, Spirit of Vinegar, Milk, Eggs, Spirit of Urine, Solution of Tartar,
and Spirit of Wine; The gravity and expansion of the Air under Water; The
interest the Air has in the vibrations of Pendulums, and what it has to do in
the propagation of Sounds; That Fumes and Vapors ascend by reason of the
gravity of the Ambient, and not from their own positive levity; The nature of
Suction, the cause of Filtration, and the rising of Water in Siphons; The
nature of Respiration, and the Lungs, illustrated by trials made on several
kinds of Animals, and the interest the Air has in the Operations of Corosive
Liquors: These, and many more suchlike beneficial Observations and
Discoveries, has that great Man made by the help of his Pneumatick Engine; and
there is no doubt but more, and perhaps greater things will be disclosed by it,
when future ingenuity and diligence has improved and perfected this Invention.
(For what great thing was absolute and perfect in its first rise and
beginning?) And it is like this Instrument hereafter will be used and applied to
things yet unthought of, for the advancement of Knowledge, and the conveniences
of Life.

THus I have performed the first part of my promise, by showing what Advantages
the latter Ages, and particularly the ROYAL SOCIETY have, for deep search into
things both by Arts and Instruments newly invented or improved, above those
enjoyed by Aristotle, and the Ancients. I am next,

(II.) To recount what Aids it has received from our better acquaintance with
the Phenomenon. For this I must consider NATURAL HISTORY more particularly,
which is the Repository wherein these are lodged: How this may be compiled in
the best order, and to the best advantage, is most judiciously represented by
the Immortal Lord Bacon; and to show how highly It has been advanced in modern
Times; I need say little more, than to amass, in a brief Recollection, some of
the Instances of newly-discovered Phenomenon, which are scattered under the
Heads of the Arts and Instruments I have discoursed, with the Addition of some
others: As,

In the HEAVENS, those of the Spots and Dinettick motion of the Sun, the
mountanous protuberances and shadows in the Body of the Moon, about nineteen
Magnitudes more of Fixed Stars, the Lunulae of Jupiter, their mutual Eclipsing
one another, and its turning round upon its own Axis; the Ring about Saturn,
and its shadow upon the Body of that Star; the Phases of Venus, the increment
and decrement of Light among the Planets, the appearing and disappearing of
Fixed Stars, the Altitude of Comets, and nature of the Via Lactea: By these
Discoveries, and more such, the History of the Heavens has been rectified, and
augmented by the Modern Advancers of Astronomy, whom in their places I have
cited. In the AIR; Its Spring, the more accurate History and Nature of Winds
and Meteors, and the probable height of the Atmosphere, have been added by the
Lord Bacon, Descartes, Mr. Boil, and others. In the EARTH, New Lands by
Columbus, Magellan, and the rest of the Discoverers; and in these, new Plants,
new Fruits, new Animals, new Minerals, and a kind of other World of Nature,
from which this is supplied with numerous conveniences of Life, and many
thousand Families of our own little one are continually sed and maintained. In
the WATERS, the great Motion of the Sea, unknown in elder Times, and the
particular Laws of flux and reflux in many places, are discovered. The History
of BATHES augmented by Savonarola, Baccius, and Blanchellus; of METALS by
Agricola; and the whole SVBTERRANEOVS WORLD described by the universally
Learned Kircher. The History of PLANTS much improved by Matthiolus, Ruellius,
Bauhinus, and Gerard, besides the late Account of English Vegetables published
by Dr. Merret, a worthy Member of the ROYAL SOCIETY. And another excellent
Virtuoso of the same Assembly, Mr. John Evelyn, has very considerably advanced
the History of Fruit and Forest-Trees, by his Sylva and Pomona; and greater
things are expected from his Preparations for Elysium Britanicum, a noble
Design now under his hands: And certainly the inquisitive World is much
indebted to this generous Gentleman for his very ingenious Performances in this
kind, as also for those others of Sculpture, Picture, Architecture, and the
like practical useful things with which he has enriched it. The History of
ANIMALS has been much enlarged by Gesner, Rondeletius, Aldrovandus, and more
accurately inquired into by the Micrographers: And the late Travelers, who
have given us Accounts of those remote parts of the Earth, that have been less
known to these, have described great variety of Living Creatures, very
different from the Animals of the nearer Regions; among whom the ingenious
Author of the History of the Caribbies deserves to be mentioned as an Instance.
In our own BODIES Natural History has found a rich heap of Materials in the
abovementioned Particulars of the Venae Lacteae, the Vasa Lymphatica, the
Valves and Sinus of the Veins, the several new Passages and Glandules, the
Ductus Chyliferus, the Origination of the Nerves, the Circulation of the Blood,
and the rest. And all the main Heads of Natural History have received aids and
increase from the famous Verulam, who led the way to substantial Wisdom, and
has given most excellent Directions for the Method of such an HISTORY of
NATVRE.

Thus I have dispatched the FIRST Part of my Method proposed in the beginning;
but stand yet engaged for the other, which is to show,

(II.) That the later Ages have great Advantages, in respect of Opportunities
and Helps for the spreading, and communicating of Knowledge, and thereby of
improving and enlarging it. This I shall demonstrate in three great Instances,
viz. Printing, the Compass, and the Institution of the Royal Society.

For the FIRST, Printing; It was, according to Polydore Virgil, the Invention
of John Cuthenberg of Mentz in Germany, though others give the honor to one
Fust of the same City, and some to Laurentius a Burger of Harlem. But whoever
was the Author, this is agreed, That this excellent Art was first practiced
about the year 1440, and was utterly unknown in Elder Times; at least in all
the parts of the World that are on this side the Kingdom of China, which they
say had it more early; but it signifies not to our purpose. Now by reason of
the Ancients want of this Invention, Copies of excellent things could not be so
much dispersed, nor so well preserved either from the Corruptions of Time, and
Interest. The Charge of Books was very great, Forgeries frequent, and Mistakes
of Transcribers numerous: They were quickly swept away out of those few
Libraries in which they were, by Fire and Violence, or spoiled by Dust and
Rottenness. And in the absence of this Art, 'twas easy enough for one
Aristotle to destroy the most considerable Remains of the Ancients, that the
power of his great Scholar put into his hands; which, it is credibly reported of
him, that he did, to procure more fame for his own Performances: as also to
conceal his thefts, and injurious dealings with those venerable Sages, whom he
seems to take a great delight to contradict and expose, as I have elsewhere
proved. But now, by this excellent Invention, the Knowledge that is lodged in
Books, is put beyond the danger of such Corruptions, Forgeries, or any fatal
inconvenience: We communicate upon easy terms at the remotest distance;
converse with the Wise Men that went before us, and securely convey down our
Conceptions to the Ages that shall follow. So that by this means Knowledge is
advantagiously spread and improved; especially since the Assistance Modern
Ingenuity has brought us, in that other admirable Invention,

(2.) The Compass. How defective the Art of Navigation was in elder Times, when
they sailed by the observation of the Stars, is easy to be imagined: For in
dark weather, when their Pleiades, Helice, and Cynosura were hidden from them
by the intervening Clouds, the Mariner was at a loss for his Guide, and exposed
to the casual conduct of the Winds and Tides. For which reason the Ancients
feldom or never durst venture into the Ocean, but steered along within sight of
the safer Shore. So that the Commerce and Communications of those Days were
very narrow; Their famed Travels in comparison were but domestic; and a whole
World was to them unknown. But it has been the happy privilege of later Days
to find the way to apply the wonderful Virtues of the Loadstone to Navigation;
and by the direction of the Compass we securely commit our selves to the
immense Ocean, and find our path in the vastest Wilderness of Waters. So that
Commerce and Traffic is infinitely improved; the other half of the Globe
disclosed; and that on this side the great Sea, better understood: The
Religions, Laws, Customs, and all the Rarities and Varieties of Art and Nature,
which any the most distant Clime knows and enjoys, are laid open and made
common; and thereby the History of Nature is wonderfully enlarged, and
Knowledge is both propagated and improved.

Who it was that first discovered this excellent Mystery, is not certainly
known: But one Flavius Goia of Amalphis in the Kingdom of Naples, is said to be
the Author; and to have found this incomparable Rarity about 300 years ago.
It Is pity that one of the greatest Benefactors to Mankind that ever was, should
lie hid in so neglected an obscurity; when the great Troublers of the World,
who have vexed it by the Wars of the Hand, and of the Brain, have so dear and
so precious a Memory. For my part I think there is more acknowledgment due to
the name of this obscure Fellow, that has scarce any left, than to a thousand
Alexanders and Caesar's, or to ten times the number of Aristotle's and
Aquinas's. And he really did more for the increase of Knowledge, and advantage
of the World by this one Experiment, than the numerous subtle Disputers that
have lived ever since the erection of the School of Wrangling.

And methinks it may not be improper for me here to take notice of that other
great German Invention, that uses to be mentioned in the Company, viz. That of
Gunpowder and Artilery, which has done its Service also for the help and
propagation of Knowledge, as you will perceive when you shall consider; that by
the assistance of these terrible Engines of Death, the great Western Indies
were presently subdued, which likely had not been so easily effected by the
ancient and ordinary Methods of War. 'Twas this Thunder and Lightning, and the
invisible Instruments of Ruin, that destroyed the Courage of those numerous
and hardy People, took away the hearts of the strongest Resisters, and made
them an easiy Prey to the Conquering Invaders.

And now by the gaining that mighty Continent, and the numerous fruitful ^sles
beyond the Atlantic, we have obtained a larger Field of Nature, and have
thereby an advantage for more Phenomenon, and more helps both for Knowledge,
and for Life; which it is very like that future Ages will make better use of to
such Purposes, than those hitherto have done; and that Science also may at last
travel into those Parts, and enrich Peru with a more precious Treasure than
that of its Golden Mines, is not improbable. And so these Engines of
Destruction, in a sense too are Instruments of Knowledge. Of the first Author
of this Experiment we know no more, but that he was a German Monk, who lighted
on it by chance, when he was making some Chemical Trials with Nitre, near about
the time of the Invention of the Compass; but his Name and other Circumstances
are lost.

Now whoever considers, with the Noble Virulam, how much the state of things in
the World has been altered and advanced by these THREE EXPERIMENTS alone, will
conceive great hopes of Modern Experimental Attempts, from which greater
Matters may be looked for, than those which were the Inventions of Single
Endeavourers, or the Results of Chance.

And of all the Combinations of Men that ever met for the Improvement of
Science, there were never any whose Designs were better laid, whose Abilities
were more promising, or whose Constitution was more judiciously or
advantageously formed, than the ROYAL SOCIETY.

This Noble Institution was the THIRD Advantage I mentioned, that the Modern
World has for the Communication and Increase of Knowledge. And here I find I
am happily prevented, and need not say much about it; For the HISTORY of their
Constitution and Performances that is abroad, gives so full and so accurate an
Account of them and their Designs, that perhaps it may be superfluous to do
more in This, than to recommend that excellent Discourse to the perusal of
those that would be informed about those Matters; which I do with some more
than ordinary zeal and concernment, both because the Subject is one of the most
weighty, and considerable, that ever afforded Matter to a Philosophical Pen,
and because it is writ in a way of so judicious a gravity, and so prudent and
modest an expression, with so much clearness of sense, and such a natural
fluency of genuine Eloquence, that I know it will both profit and entertain the
Ingenious. And I say further, That the Style of that Book has all the
Properties that can recommend any thing to an ingenious relish: For it is manly,
and yet plain; natural, and yet not careless; The Epithets are genuine, the
Words proper and familiar, the Periods smooth and of middle proportion: It is
not broken with ends of Latin, nor impertinent Quotations; nor made harsh by
hard words, or needless terms of Art: Not rendered intricate by long
Parentheses, nor gaudy by flanting Metaphors; not tedious by wide fetches and
circumferences of Speech, nor dark by too much curtness of Expression: It Is not
loose and unjointed, rugged and uneven; but as polite and as fast as Marble;
and briefly, avoids all the notorious defects, and wants none of the proper
Ornaments of Language. In this excellent History the Inquisitive may find what
were the Reasons of forming such a Combination as the ROYAL SOCIETY, what is
the Nature of that Constitution, what are their Designs, and what they have
done. For there is Collection of some (among numerous others that are in their
Repository) of the Experiments, Observations, and Instruments which they have
invented and advanced for the improvement of real, useful Knowledge, and a full
vindication of the Design, from the dark suspicions and objections of jealousy
and ignorance.

BUT that I may not wholly refer my Reader, which may look like a put-off, I Will
here offer something concerning this Establishment, as it is an Advantage for
the communication and increase of Science. I say then, That it was observed by
the excellent Lord Bacon, and some other ingenious Moderns, That Philosophy,
which should be an Instrument to work with, to find out those Aids that
Providence has laid up in Nature to help us against the Inconveniences of this
State, and to make such applications of things as may tend to universal
benefit; I say, They took notice, that instead of such a Philosophy as this,
That which had usurped the Name, and obtained in the Schools, was but a
combination of general Theories, and Notions, that were concluded rashly,
without due information from particulars, and spun out into unprofitable
Niceties, that tend to nothing but Dispute and Talk, and were never like to
advance any Works for the benefit and use of Men.

This being considered, the deep and judicious Verulam made the complaint,
represented the defects and unprofitableness of the Notional way, proposed
another to reform and enlarge Knowledge by Observation and Experiment, to
examine and record Particulars, and so to rise by degrees of Induction to
general Propositions, and from them to take direction for new Inquiries, and
more Discoveries, and other Axioms; that our Notions may have a Foundation upon
which a solid Philosophy may be built, that may be firm, tite, and close knit
and suited to the Phenomenon of things: So that Nature being known, it may be
mastered, managed, and used in the Services of Humane Life.

This was a mighty Design, groundedly laid, wisely expressed, and happily
recommended by the Glorious Author, who began nobly, and directed with an
incomparable conduct of Wit and Judgment: But to the carrying of it on, It was
necessary there should be many Heads and many Hands, and Those formed into an
Assembly, that might intercommunicate their Trials and Observations, that might
jointly work, and jointly consider; that so the improvable and luciferous
Phenomenon, that lie scattered up and down in the vast Campaign of Nature,
might be aggregated and brought into a common Store. This the Great Man
desired, and formed a SOCIETY of Experimenters in a Romantic Model, but could
do no more; His time was not ripe for such Performances.

These things therefore were considered also by the later Virtuosi, who several
of them joined together, and set themselves on work upon this grand Design; in
which they have been so happy, as to obtain the Royal Countenance and
Establishment, to gather a great Body of generous Persons of all Qualities and
sorts of Learning, to overcome the difficulties of the Institution, and to make
a very encouraging and hopeful progress in their pursuits: For the account of
which Particulars, I refer to the History, and only take notice, How ignorantly
those rash and inconsiderate People talk, who speak of this Assembly as if they
were a company of Men whose only aim is to set up some new Theories and Notions
in Philosophy; whereas indeed, Their first and chief Employment is, carefully
to seek and faithfully to report how things are de facto; and they continually
declare against the establishment of Theories, and Speculative Doctrines, which
they note as one of the most considerable miscarriages in the Philosophy of the
Schools: And their business is not to Dispute, but Work. So that those others
also that look on them as pursuing phansyful Designs, are as wide and unjust in
their ill-contriv'd Censure: Since Their Aims are to free Philosophy from the
vain Images and Compositions of Fancy, by making it palpable, and bringing it
down to the plain Objects of the Senses; For those are the Faculties which they
employ and appeal to, and complain that Knowledge has too long hovered in the
Clouds of Imagination: So that methinks this ignorant Reproach is, as if those
that doted on the Tales of the Fabulous Age, should clamor against Plutarch
and Tacitus as idle Romancers. For the main intention of this Society is to
erect a well grounded Natural History, which takes off the heats of wanton
Fancy, hinders its extravagant Excursions, and ties it down to sober
Realities.

But we frequently hear an insulting Objection against this Philosophical
Society, in the Question, What have they done?

To which I could answer in short, more than all the Philosophers of the
Notional way, since Aristotle opened his Shop in Greece: Which Saying may
perhaps look to some like a fond and bold Sentence: But whoever compares the
Repository of this Society, with all the Volumes of Disputers, will find it
neither immodest nor unjust: And their History has given us Instances
sufficient of their Experiments, Observations, and Instruments to justify a
bolder Affirmation. But I insist not on this: The thing I would have observed
is, That those who make the captious Question, do not comprehend the vastness
of the Work of this Assembly, or have some fantastical Imaginations of it.
They consider not that the Design is laid as low as the profoundest Depths of
Nature, and reaches as high as the uppermost Story of the Universe; That it
extends to all the Varieties of the great World, and aims at the benefit of
universal Mankind. For could they expect that such mighty Projects as these
should ripen in a moment? Can a Cedar shoot up out of the Earth like a Blade of
Grass? or an Elephant grow to the vastness of his bulk, as soon as a little
Insect can be formed of a drop of Dew?

No; The true knowledge of general Nature, like Nature it self in its noblest
Composures, must proceed slowly, by degrees almost insensible: and what one Age
can do in so immense an Undertaking as that, wherein all the Generations of Men
are concerned, can be little more than to remove the Rubbish, lay in Materials,
and put things in order for the Building. Our work is to overcome Prejudices,
to throw aside what is useless, and yields no advantage for Knowledge, or for
Life; To persuade Men that there is worthier Employment for them, than tying
Knots in Bulrushes; and that they may be better accommodated in a well built
House, than in a Castle in the Air: We must seek and gather, observe and
examine, and lay up in Bank for the Ages that come after. This is the business
of the Experimental Philosophers; and in these Designs a progress has been
made sufficient to satisfy sober expectations: But for those that look they
should give them the Great Elixir, the Perpetual Motion, the way to make Glass
malleable, and Man immortal; or they will object that the Philosophers have
done nothing: for such, I say, their impertinent Taunts are no more to be
regarded, than the chat of Idiots and Children.

But I think I am fallen into things of which the Ingenious Historian has
somewhere given better accounts; However I shall briefly endeavor to show the
injustice of the Reproach of having done nothing, as it is applied to the Royal
Scociety, by a single Instance in one of their Members, who alone has done
enough to oblige all Mankind, and to erect an eternal Monument to his Memory.
So that had this great Person lived in those days, when Men deified their
Benefactors, he could not have missed one of the first places among their
exalted Mortals: And every one will be convinced that this is not vainly said,
when I have added, That I mean the Illustrious Mr. BOIL, a Person by whose
proper Merits that noble Name is as much adorned, as by all the splendid Titles
that it wears: And that this Honorable Gentlem^ has done such things for the
benefit of the World, and increase of Knowledge, will easily appear to those
that converse with Him in his excellent Writings.

(1.) In his Book of the AIR, we have a great improvement of the Magdeburg
Experiment, of emptying Glass Vessels by exsuction of the Air, to far greater
degrees of evacuation, ease, and conveniences for use; as also an advance of
that other famous one of Torticellius, performed by the New Engine, of which I
have said some things above, and called the AIRPUMP. By this Instrument (as K
have already intimated) the Nature, Spring, Expansion, Pressure, and Weight of
the Air; the decrease of its farce when dilated, the Doctrine of a Vacuum, the
Height of the Atmosphere, the Theories of Respiration, Sounds, Fluidity,
Gravity, Heat, Flame, the Magnet, and several other useful and luciferous
Matters, are estimated, illustrated, and explained.

And (2.) The great Doctrine of the Weight and Spring of the Air is solidly
vindicated and further asserted by the Illustrious Author, in another BOOK
against HOBS and LINVS.

(3.) In his PHYSIOLOGICAL and EXPERIMENTAL ESSAYS, he nobly encourages and
persuades the making of Experiments, and collecting Observations, and gives the
necessary Cautions that are to be used in such Designs. He imparts a very
considerable luciferous Experiment concerning the different parts and
redintegration of Saltpeter; whence he deduceth, That Motion, Figure, and
Disposition of parts, may suffice to produce all the secondary Affections of
Bodies; and consequently, That there is no need of the substintial Forms and
Qualities of the Schools. To this he adds a close History of Fluidity and
Firmness, which tends mightily to the elucidating of those useful Doctrines.

(4.) In his SKEPTICAL CHEMIST he cautions against the sitting down and
acquiescing in Chemical and Peripatetical Theories, which many do, to the great
hinderance of the growth and improvement of Knowledge. He therefore advises a
more wary consideration and examen of those Doctrines, before they are
subscribed; and for that purpose he assists them with many very considerable
Observations and Experiments.

(5.) In his VSEFVLNESS of EXPERIMENTAL PHILOSOPHY, he makes it appear how much
that way tends to the advance of the Power and Empire of Man over the
Creatures, and the universal Benefit of the World; confirming and illustrating
his Discourse with innumerable new and useful Discoveries.

(6.) In his HISTORY of COLD, he has to wonder cultivated that barren Subject,
and improved it (as is noted in the Philosophical Transactions) by near 200
choice Experiments and Observations. He has there given an account of the
defectiveness of common Weather-Glasses, the Advantages of the new Hermetical
Thermometers, and an Inquiry concerning the cause of the Condensation of the
Air, and Ascent of Water by Cold in the ordinary Weather-wisers; All which
afford valuable Considerations of Light and Use. But these are only
Preliminaries: The main Discourse presents us with an Account what Bodies are
capable of freezing others, and what of being frozen; The ways to estimate the
degrees of coldness; How to measure the intenseness of Cold produced by Art,
beyond that employed in ordinary Freezing; In what proportion Water will be
made to shrink by Snow and Salt; How to measure the change produced in Water
between the greatest heat of Summer, the first degree of Winter-cold, and the
highest of Art; How to discover the differing degrees of Coldness in different
Regions. A way of freezing without danger to the Vessel. What may be the
effects of Cold, as to the preserving or destroying the texture of Bodies.
Whether specific Virtues of Plants are lost through congelation, and then
thawing. Whether Electrical and Magnetic Virtues are altered by Cold? The
expansion and contraction of Bodies by freezing; how they are caused, and how
their quantity is to be measured. The strength of the expansion of Water
freezing, and an Inquiry into the Cause of that prodigious force. The Sphere of
Activity of Cold. How far the Frost descends in Earth and Water. An Experiment
showing whether Cold can act through an hot medium. A way of accounting the
solidity of Ice, and the strength of the adhesion of its parts: What Liquors
are its quickest Dissolvents. An Experiment of heating a cold Liquor with Ice.
These, and many more such instructive and useful things, are contained in that
excellent Discourse To which is annexed a very ingenious Examination and
Disproof of the common obscure Doctrine of Antiperistasis, and Mr. Hobbs his
Notion of Cold.

(7.) In his EXPERIMENTAL HISTORY of COLOVRS, he has laid a foundation in 150
Experiments at least, for grounded Theory about these Matters. He has shown
the grand mistake of the common belief, That Colors inhere in their Objects;
and proved they depend upon the disposition of the external parts, and the more
inward texture of Bodies. He has stated and explained wherein the Disparity
consists between the Real and Exphatical; explicated the Nature of Whiteness
and Blackness; rectified some Chemical Principles; compounded Colors by
trajecting the Solar Beams through tinged Glasses; showed how by certain
Tinctures it may be known, whether any Salt be acid or sulphurous. Has
proved, there is no necessity of the Peripatetick FORMS for the production of
Colors, by making Green by nine kinds of mixtures; compounded Colors real and
fantastical; turned the Blew of Violets by acid Salts into a Red, and by the
alcalizate into a Green; and performed many other extraordinary things on this
Subject, for the advantage of Knowledge, and the uses of Life.

(8.) In his HYDROSTATICAL PARADOXES he showed, That the lower parts of Fluids
are pressed by the upper; That a lighter may gravitate upon one that is more
ponderous; That if a Body contiguous to it, be lower than the highest level of
the Water, the lower end of the Body will be pressed upwards by the Water
beneath; That the weight of an external Fluid suffices to raise the Water in
Pumps; That the pressure of an external Fluid is able to keep an Heterogeneous
Liquor suspended at the same height in several Pipes, though they are of
different Diameters; That a Body under Water, that has its upper Surface
parallel to the Horizon, the direct pressure it sustains is no more than that
of a Column of Water, which has the mentioned Horizontal Superficies for its
Basis. And if the incumbent Water be contained in Pipes open at both ends, the
pressure is to be estimated by the meight of a Pillar of Water, whose Basis is
equal to the lower Orifice of the Pipe ( parallel to the Horizon) and its
height equal to a Perpendicular, reaching to the top of the Water, though the
Pipe be much inclined, irregularly shaped, and in some parts broader than the
Orifice; That a Body in a Fluid sustains a lateral pressure from it, which
increases in proportion to the depth of the immerst Body in the Fluid; That
Water may be made to depress a Body lighter than it self; That a parcel of Oil
lighter than Water, may be kept from ascending in it; That the cause of the
ascension of Water in Siphons, may be explained without the notion of
abhorrence of a Vacuum; That the heaviest Body known will not sink of it self,
without the assistance of the weight of the Water upon it, when it is at a depth
greater than twenty times its own thickness, though it will nearer the Surface.

This is the sum of the general Contents of that Discourse, which contains
things very useful to be known for the advantage of Navigation, Salt-Works,
Chemistry, and other practical purposes.

(9.) In his Book of the ORIGIN of FORMS and QVALITIES, he delivers the minds
of Men from the imaginary and useless Notions of the Schools about them, which
have no foundation in the nature of things, nor do any ways promote Knowledge,
or help Mankind; but very much disserve those great Interests, by setting the
Understanding at rest in general obscurities, or employing it in airy Nicities
and Disputes, and so hindering its pursuit of particular Causes, and
Experimental Realities. In this Treatise he lays the Foundations and delivers
the Principles of the Mechanic Philosophy, which he strengthens and
illustrates by several very pleasant and instructive Experiments. He shows,
That the most admirable Things which have been taken for the Effects of
substantial Forms, and are used as proofs of the Notional Hypotheses, may be
the results of the mere texture and position of parts; since Art is able to
make Vitriol, as well as Nature; and Bodies by humane skill may be produced,
whose supposed Forms have been destroyed. He gives many very ingenious
instances to prove, That the Mechanic Motions and order of the Parts is
sufficient to yield an account of the difference of Bodies, and their
affections, without having recourse to the Forms and Qualities of the Schools;
as in the restoration of Camphire to its former smell and nature, after its
dissolution and seeming extinction; in the changes of the color, consistence,
fusibleness, and other Qualites of Silver and Copper; in the odd Phenomenon of
a certain anomalous Salt, and those of the Sea Salt, dried, powdered, and mixed
with Aquafortis; and in the Sal Mirabilis, in the production of Silver out of
Gold by his Menstruum Peracutum, in the transmutation of Water into Earth in a
certain Distillation of Spirit of Wine, and Oil of Vitriol. I say, This
excellent Person has by Experiments rare and new about these Subjects, made it
evidently appear, That the internal motions, configuration, and posture of the
parts, are all that is necessary for alterations and diversities of Bodies; and
consequently, That substantial Forms and real Qualities are needless and
precarious Beings.

These are some brief and general Hints of those great things this incomparable
Person has done for the information and benefit of Men; and besides them,
there are several others that He has by him, and the Inquisitive expect, in
which real Philosophy and the World are no less concerned. I received a late
Account of them from an ingenious Friend of his, Mr. Oldenburgh Secretary to
the ROYAL SOCIETY, who also renders himself a great Benefactor to Mankind, by
his affectionate care, and indefatigable diligence and endeavors, in the
maintaining Philosophical Intelligence, and promoting the Designs and Interests
of profitable and general Philosophy. And these being some of the Noblest and
most Public Employments, in which the Services of generous Men can be engaged,
loudly call for their Aids and Assistances, for the carrying on a Work of so
universal an importance.

But I shall have a fitter place to speak of this, and therefore I return to
the Illustrious Person of whom I was discoursing, And for Philosophical News,
and further evidence of the Obligation the World has to this Gentleman; I
shall here insert the Account of what he has more, yet unpublish'd, for its
advantage and instruction. And I take the boldness to do it, because himself
has been pleased to quote and refer to those Discourses in his published
Writings; concerning which, M. O's Account is more particular, and he received
it from the Author. It speaks thus:

(1.) Another Section of the Usefulness of Experimental Philosophy, as to the
Empire of Man over inferior Creatures; where he intends to premise some
general Considerations about the Means whereby Experimental Philosophy may
become useful to Humane Life; proceeding thence to show, That the Empire of Man
may be promoted by the Naturalists skill in Chemistry, by his skill in
Mechanics, or the Application of Mathematics to Instruments and Engines; by
his skill in Mathematics, both pure and mixed: That the Goods of Mankind may be
much increased by the Naturalist's insight into Trades; That the Naturalist may
much advantage Men, by exciting and assisting their curiosity to discover, take
notice, and make use of the homebred Riches and Advantages of particular
Countries, and to increase their number, by transferring thither those of
others; That a ground of high expectation from Experimental Philosophy is
given, by the happy Genius of this present Age, and the productions of it; That
a ground of expecting considerable things from Experimental Philosophy is given
by those things which have been found out by illiterate Tradesmen, or lighted
on by chance; That some peculiar and concealed property of a natural thing, may
enable the knowers of it to perform, with ease, things, that to others seem
either not feasible, or not practicable without great difficulty; That by the
knowledge and application of some unobvious and unheeded Properties and Laws of
natural things, diverse Effects may be produced by other Means and Instruments
than those one would judge likely; and even by such, as if proposed, would be
thought unlikely; That the knowledge of peculiar Qualities, or uses of Physical
things, may enable a Man to perform those things Physically, that seem to
require Books, and dexterity of hand proper to Artificers; That the uses of
scarce one thing in Nature, to Humane Life, are yet thoroughly understood; That a
great Inducement to hope for considerable Matters from Experimental Philosophy,
may be taken from the mutual assistance that the Practical and Theorical part
of Physic may be brought to afford each other; That we are not to make our
Estimates of what may be hoped for hereafter, when Men shall be assisted with
the History of Nature, a method of employing it, and true Principles of Natural
Philosophy, and associated Endeavors, by what is already performed without any
of those Assistances. (2.) He has also in a manner promised Essays touching
the concealments and disguises of the Seeds of living Creatures. (3.) An
Appendix to the PhysicoMechanical Treatise concerning the Air. (4.) Something
concerning Heat and Flame. (5.) The Skeptical Naturalist, showing the
imperfections of Natural Philosophy as we yet have it. (6.) A Discourse of
improbable Truths. (7.) The production of Qualities by Art. (8.) Several useful
Series of Inquiries and Directions of his, whereof diverse are extant in the
Philosophical Transactions; as, (1.) General Heads for a Natural History of a
Country small or great. (2.) Observations and Directions about the Barometer.
(3.) Inquiries touching the Sea; and, (4.) About Mines. (5.) Quaeries and
Trials proposed, for the improving of that Grand Experiment, for the
transfusing Blood out of one live Animal into another. (6.) Others for the
finding the Effects of the Rarifying Engine exhausted, in Plants, Seeds, and
Eggs of SilkWorms. Besides These, he has a great many other unpublish'd
Inquiries, and Series of Experiments and Observations of the most considerable
parts of Natural Philosophy. As, (1.) About precious Stones. (2.) Fermentation.
(3.) Heat and Flame. (4.) An Account of a new kind of Baroscope, which he calls
Statical, and the advantage it has above the Mercurial. (5.) A New Experiment,
showing how a considerable degree of Cold may be suddenly produced without the
help of Snow, Ice, Hail, Wind, or Nitre, and that at any time of the year, viz.
by Sal Armoniack. (6.) A way of preserving Birds taken out of the Eggs; and
other small Foetus's.

This is the Account I received of that Noble Person's further Designs for the
advantage of Useful Knowledge; and though he has not made an absolute Promise
of those Discourses to the Public, yet he is known to have such, and they are
with probability expected, since he is too generous to detain from the capable
and inquisitive those his excellent Discoveries, which tend to the common
Benefit. And thus I have said what may suffice for general Information about
the ROYAL SOCIETY, and the hopes we may justly conceive of this Constitution.
And in what I have discoursed, I have not deviated from my undertaking, which
was to show the advantage that this latter Age has, for the promotion and
increase of Knowledge, above those of former Times: For by describing the
Reasons, Nature, and some of the Effects of this Establishment, I have not
obscurely suggested the Helps that the World has and may expect from Them, for
those great and noble Purposes; and it is easy to see in the very frame of this
Assembly, that they are fitted with Opportunities to collect most of the
considerable Notices, Observations, and Experiments, that are scattered up and
down in the wide World; and so, to make a Bank of all the Useful Knowledge that
is among Men: For either by their whole Body, or some or other of their
particular Members, they hold a Learned Correspondence with the greatest
Virtuosi of all the known Universe, and have several of their own Fellows
abroad in Foreign Parts, by reason of whose Communications, they know most of
the valuable Rarities and Phenomenon observed by the curious in Nature, and all
considerable Attempts and Performances of Art, Ingenuity, and Experiment: To
which consideration, if we add the inquisitiveness of their Genius, and the way
of their proceeding, by particular and cautious Observation; the coldness and
shiness of their Assent, and the numbers of judicious Men that carefully
examine their Reports; I say, If these Particulars be weighed, it will appear
to the unprejudiced, That the World had never such an advantage for the
accumulating a Treasure of substantial Knowledge, as it has by this
Constitution: For single Inquisitors can receive but scant and narrow
Informations, either from their own Experience, or Converses; and those they
have, are frequently very imperfect, or very mistaken: There is often either
vanity or credulity, ignorance or design in their Relations, which therefore
are many times false in the main Matter, and oftener in the Circumstance: So
that the Histories of Nature we have hitherto had, have been but an heap and
amassment of Truth and Falsehood, Vulgar Tales, and Romantic Accounts; and it is
not in the power of particular unassociated Endeavors to afford us better: But
now, the frame of this Society suggests excellent ground to hope from them
sincere and universal Relations, and the best grounded and most useful
Collection of the Affairs of Art and Nature, that ever yet was extant: And as
they have peculiar Privileges for the gathering the Materials of Knowledge, so
They have the same for the impartment and diffusion of them.

I should now put an end to this Discourse, but that there is another common
prejudice against the ROYAL SOCIETY, and all those of that Genius, to which I
must speak a little; The Charge is, That they despise the Ancients, and all old
Learning, which have been venerable among the best and wisest of all Times. To
this I say, That the Modern, free Philosophers, are most ready to do right to
the Learned Ancients, by acknowledging their Wit, and all the useful Theories,
and Helps we have from them; They read, and consider their Writings, and
cheerfully entertain any Notices, or Observations they have imparted to us:
They have a respect for their great names, and are ready to do honor to them:
But yet they do not think that those, however venerable Sages, should have an
absolute Empire over the Reasons of Mankind; nor do they believe, That all the
Riches of Nature were discovered to some few particular Men of former Times;
and that there is nothing left for the benefit and gratification of
after-Inquirers: No; They know, There is an inexhaustible variety of Treasure
which Providence has lodged in Things, that to the Worlds end will afford
fresh Discoveries, and suffice to reward the ingenious Industry and Researches
of those that look into the Works of God, and go down to see his Wonders in the
Deep. This, no doubt, the modesty and justice of the Ancients themselves would
have confessed: But besides this, the Modern Experimenters think, That the
Philosophers of elder Times, though their Wits were excellent, yet the way they
took was not like to bring much advantage to Knowledge, or any of the Uses of
humane Life; being for the most part that of Notion and Dispute, which still
runs round in a Labyrinth of Talk, but advances nothing: And the
unfruitfulness of those disputing Methods, which directly and by themselves
never brought the World so much practical, beneficial Knowledge, as would help
toward the Cure of a Cut Finger, or the Cooling of an Hot Head, is a palpable
Argument, That they were fundamental Mistakes, and that the Way was not right.

For, as my Lord Bacon observes well, Philosophy, as well as Faith, must be
shown by its Works: And if the Moderns cannot show more of the Works of their
Philosophy in six years, than the Peripateticks can produce of theirs, in the
compass of as many Ages, let them be loaded with all that Contempt which is
usually the reward of vain, and unprofitable Projectors. I say then the Modern
Philosophers arrogate nothing to their own Wit, above that of the Ancients: but
by the reason os the thing, and material, sensible Events, they find they have
an advantage by their way. And a lame Child that slowly treads the right Path,
will at last arrive to his Journeys end; while the swift Footman that runs
about in a Wood, will lose himself in his wanderings.

But notwithstanding all this, there are some of Opinion that Aristotle had
more advantages for Knowledge than the Moderns, because he had the Survey of
all Asia, by those who at the charge of his great Scholar were employed to make
Experiments. This I have heard alleged; but I think this reason is very
defective, both in what it affirms, and in what it would infer.

For first, It Is evident that Aristotle and the Ancients did not know all ASIA;
for that part which lay beyond the River, was in a manner a Terra Incognita
unto them: so that they knew scarce any thing of the Indies that lie on the
other side of Ganges, little or nothing of the vast Kingdom of China, nothing
of Japan, or the numerous Oriental Islands, besides the defects in the ancient
Geography, noted above; and these made a great, if not the best part of Asia;
of which though Aristotle might have heard, yet we have no shadow of Reason to
believe that he had any Informations from thence. And then I consider,

(2.) That the Account he had from the best surveyed Regions, were but from
Hunters, Fowlers, Fishermen, and such kind of Inquisitors, who were like enough
to make vain and mistaken Reports, and he was fain to depend upon the credit of
their Relations; and therefore it is observed by Learned Men that his History of
Animals contains many things that are frivolous, and many that are palpably
false. To which I add,

(3.) The remarque of my Lord Bacon, That though Aristotle made some use of
those Experiments; and Observations he had from those Informers, yet it was
after he had concluded and decreed. For he did not use and employ Experiments
for the erecting of his Theories: but having arbitrarily pitched his Theories,
his manner was to force Experience to suffragate, and yield countenance to his
precarious Propositions. And on this account, the Great Man says, he was less
excusable than the Schoolmen, who altogether quitted and neglected the way of
particular Industry and Experiment. Thus then Aristotle neither knew all Asia,
nor had certain Relations of that part thereof, of which he had the best
Informations; nor did he use those he had as he ought; which were enough to
overthrow the conceit of his Superlative Advantages. But I consider further,
That though these things had been otherwise, and as much for the interest of
the fond Phansy as could be wished, yet,

(2.) The Inference must fail, since the latter Ages have a much larger World
than Aristotle's Asia; We have America, and the many New Lands that are
discovered by Modern Navigators; we have larger and more perfect Geography even
of the old World, infinitely more acquaintance and better correspondence in all
the parts of the Universe, by our general Traffic, than the Ancients; whose
Commerce was narrow, and knowledge of remote Parts consisted but in hearsays,
and doubtful Rumors- We have besides, New Heavens as well as a New Earth, a
larger and truer prospect of the World above us. We have traveled those upper
Regions by the help of our Tubes, and made Discoveries more becoming the Wisdom
and Magnificence of our Creator, and more agreeable to the appearances of
things, than the arbitrary Phansies and Conjectures of Aristotle and his
Schools. We have a greater World of Arts, Instruments, and Observations, as in
all Particulars my Discourse has made good. And what are Aristotle's
peragrations of Asia, to all these? To the great Western Indies; to the fuller
and clearer knowledge of the Ancient Lands; to those nobler Accounts we have of
the Heavens, and universal Nature; to our vast Improvements of Chemistry,
Anatomy, Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy, Geography, Optics, Natural History,
Navigation, and all things else of benefit and instruction? I say, What are the
gleanings of a few mercenary Hunters, Fowlers, and Fishermen, over one part of
Asia, to these Advantages? And what are the Reports of a few ordinary Fellows,
and the Trials of a single Person, to the learned Inquiries and Endeavors of
many sagacious inquisitive Ages, and the performances of a numerous Company of
deep, wary, diligent, and Eagle-ey'd Philosophers, who have the help of those
Observations, and the addition of an infinite number more?

But my Design is, by representing the advantages and hopefulness of the Modern
Way, to kindle an ardour toward the generous Experimental Researches, to
vindicate Philosophy from the imputation of being notional and unprofitable,
and to keep Men from adhering to that which is so, and has been the occasion
of the scandal. And as for those that yet stick there, I have some things to
observe concerning the Reasons of their Devotion to that airy disputative
Philosophy, and their Enmity to the Practical.

I consider then, That easy Youth in its first Addresses to Learning, is
wholly passive to the Discipline and Instructions of its Teachers, whose
Documents are promiscuously received with ready submission of Understandings,
that implicitly depend on their Authority. We suck in the first Rudiments as we
do the common Air [ facili haustu] as my Lord Bacon expresses it, without
discrimination or election, of which indeed our tender and unexcercised Minds
are not capable. And, I confess, it is necessary we should do so; nor were there
any hurt in this innocent easiness, did not most Men all their lives worship
the first thing they saw in the morning of their days, and ever after
obstinately adhere to those unexamined Receptions: But this is the mischief, we
infinitely believe every thing when we are Children; and most examine little
when they are Men, but settle in their first Impressions, without giving
themselves the trouble to-consider and review them. And these prejudices, by
custom and long acquaintance with our Souls, get a mighty interest, and shut
them up against every thing that is different from those Images of Education.
This is a general fault and infirmity of humane Nature, and from hence it comes
to pass, that the tutour'd Youth slides easily into the belief of the first
Principles of Philosophy, which they are taught, and are confirmed in them by
their Exercises and Disputes, and Books and Converses: By these their
Understandings, which before were White-Paper, are dyed and deeply tinctured by
the color they have imbibed; And these infusions insensibly pass as 'twere
into the very substance of the Mind, and are appealed to, on all occasions, as
unsophisticated Truths. So that having spent some time in learning and trimming
those Notions, the most divert to Business, or other Studies, without troubling
themselves with any more Philosophical Pursuits; but being satisfied with those
Notices which their first Education lodged in their Minds, they seek no
further, nor do care to be wiser in those Matters, than they were in the
disputing Infancy of their Knowledge.

All this while no other hurt is done, but that Men thus are injurious to
themselves, and hinder their own Improvements: but it is much worse when they
fondly fix these as the Pillars of Science, and would have no body else go
further than their laziness or their cares will permit them to travel; but rail
spitefully at all Endeavors for the advancement of Philosophic Wisdom, and
will be angry with every one that has outgrown his Cherry-stones and Rattles;
speak evil at a venture of things they know not, and like Mastives, are fiercer
for being kept dark. These are the great Enemies of the useful, experimental
Methods of Philosophy: They take it ill that any thing should be accounted
valuable, in which they are uninstructed, being loath to learn in an Age wherein
they expect to Dictate; and the Satyrist has told them another reason.

-- Turpe putant parere minoribus, and quae
Imberbes didicere, senes perdenda fateri.
This is much the case of many of the Peripatetick Disputers, They employed
their Younger Studies upon the Philosophy of Disputation, and, it may be,
gained an ability to out-talk many of their Contemporaries in that way. They
confirmed themselves in these Notions by instructing others in them, and upon
these Foundations have built the Reputation of being great Scholars, and mighty
Disputants among their Admirers. So that we are not to wonder, if they are
vehemently displeased with the ROYAL SOCIETY, and Experimental Philosophers,
since their Designs take away the honor of their Craft, and in this way, They
are upon the same level with those that are but beginning; the thought of which
must needs be distasteful to self-absur'd and imperious Minds. And yet, that it
may not be thought I speak any of this out of envy to their Fame, I shall do
them all the right I can, by acknowledging,

That I take them for Persons that understand the Quiddities and Haecceities,
the Praecisiones formales and the Objectivae, the Homogeneities and
Heterogeneities, the Catagorematice's and the Syncatagorematice's, the
Simpliciter's, and the secundum Quid's.

They know, no doubt, that First Matter that is neither Quid, nor Quale, nor
Quantum; and that wonderful Gremium materiae, out of which Forms were educ'd,
that were never there. They can tell you fine things of the fiery Element under
the Moon, and the Epicycles of the Stars; Can resolve all Questions by the
compendious way of Formaliter, Materialiter, Fundamentaliter, and Eminenter;
Tell the difference between Quodam modo, and Modo quodam; and show the causes
of all things in Sympathy, Antipathy, Combination of the Elements, and
Influences of the Heavens. They see clearly by their Spectactes, That the
Milkie-way is but a Meteor, and Comets only kindled Vapors, in spite of the
contrary information of the deceitful Telescopes. They can, no doubt, dispute
roundly about the composition of Entia rationis, and Vniversals, the
Praedications of Genus and Species, and the manner of their conservation in
Individuals; of the number of the Praedicaments, and what Being is in this, and
what in another; of the inherence and propagation of Accidents, the real
essence of Relations, the nature of Vbi and Quande, and a thousand other
Logical tricks about shuffling and ordering Propositions and Forms of Syllogism.

They can discourse of the nakedness of First Matter, the Education of Forms
out of its Bosom; show, that the want of a Being is a Principle of it, how
forms of Elements are refracted in mixed Bodies; Dispute subtly about the
Primum incipiens in Motion, the instantaneousness of Generation, the Maximum
quod sic, and the Minimum quod non, and infinite more of such wonderful,
useful, significant Speculations.

And in the Metaphysics, I acknowledge them in the words of the incomparable
Droll; They know what is what, and that is as high
As Metaphysick Wit can fly.


These, and other such Profundities, are some of the main things of that
Philosophy, for which Peripatetick Disputers are so zealous. But for the
Mechanic, that attempts material and intelligible Accounts of things, and is
in its grounds much ancienter than that of Aristotle which they admire; for the
Experimental Methods, and late Improvements of useful Knowledge; Many of these
Men have a suspicion, if not a contempt of them: Nor do they pretend any
acquaintance with those Studies: For concluding that nothing more is to be
known, than They learnt in the Circle of Disputations, they sit down in the
Opinion of the perfection of their Knowledge, without caring to be informed
what the Inquisitive World is doing in this Age of Enquiry.

And on this occasion, I observe the incompetency of their Judgments, who are
Enemies to the Real Experimental Philosophy, in that they do not (as I
intimated) at all, or very little, understand what they condemn, This I have
some reason to say, since in the whole compass of my Acquaintance, which is not
very narrow, I profess I know not one who opposes the Modern way, that is not
almost totally unacquainted with it. And on the other side, upon the most
careful turn of my thoughts among my Philosophical Friends, I cannot light on
one of all those, that are for the Free and Experimental Procedure, but who
have been very well instructed in the Peripatetick Doctrines, which they have
deserted, and most of them much better than those who are yet zealous
Contenders for them.

And for my own part, I must confess, That while I was a Youth in the
University, I was much delighted with those subtilties that exercise the Brain
in the Nicities of Notion and Distinctions, and afford a great deal of idle
Employment for the Tongue in the Combats of Disputation: In which I
acknowledge I was none of the most backward, but being highly pleased with
those Engagements, I found as much diversion in them, as in my dearest
Recreations. But after I had spent some years in those Notional Studies,
perhaps with as good success as some others, I began to think CVI BONO: and to
consider what these things would signify in the World of Action and Business,
I say, I thought; but I could find no encouragement to proceed from the Answer
my thoughts made me: I asked my self, what Accounts I could give of the Works
of God by my Philosophy, more than those that have none, and found, that I
could amaze and astonish Ignorance with Distinctions and Words of Art, but not
satisfy ingenious Inquiry by any considerable and material Resolutions. I
considered I had got nothing all this while, but a certain readiness in
talking, and that about things which I could not use abroad, without being
Pedantick and ridiculous. I perceived that that Philosophy aimed at no more,
than the instructing Men in Notion and Dispute; That its Design was mean, and
its Principles at the best uncertain and precarious; That they did not agree
among themselves, nor at all with Nature. I examined the best Records I could
meet with about the Author of those current Hypotheses, but could not be
assured that Aristotle was he. I saw many Reasons to believe, that most of the
Books that bear his Name, are none of his; and those that are most strongly
presumed to be so, are mightily altered and corrupted by Time, Ignorance,
Carelessness and Design. I perceived that the Commentators and late Disputers
had exceedingly disguised and changed the Sense of those very Writings, and
made up a Philosophy that was quite another thing from that which those Books
contain. So that by these means I was by degrees taken off from the implicit
Veneration I had for that Learning, upon the account of the great Name of
Aristotle which it bore. And thus the great impediment was removed, and the
prejudice of Education overcome; when I thought further, That useful Knowledge
was to be looked for in God's great Book the Universe, and among those generous
Men that had conversed with real Nature, undisguised with Art and Notion. And
still I saw more of the justice of the excellent Poet's Censure of those
Notional Philosophers, when he says, They stand
Locked up together hand in hand:
Every one leads as he is led,
The same bare Path they tread,
And dance like Fairies a fantastic Round;
But neither change their Motion, nor their Ground.


From this Philosophy therefore, and these Men, I diverted my Eyes and Hopes,
and fixed them upon those Methods that I have recommended, which I am sure are
liable to none of those Imputations.

And here I think fit to add a Caution which I have given in another Discourse,
and do it once more to prevent a dangerous misunderstanding, viz. [And it is,
That I have said nothing of this, to discourage young Academians from applying
themselves to those first Studies, which are in use in the Universities. Their
Statutes require Exercises in that way of Learning; and so much knowledge of
it, as inables for those Duties, is very fit. Nor do I deny, but that those
Speculations raise, quicken, and whet the Understanding, and on that account
may not be altogether unprofitable, with respect to the more useful
Inquisitious; provided it keep it self from being nice, airy, and addicted too
much to general Notions. But this is the danger, and the greatest part run upon
the Rock. The hazard of which might in great measure be avoided, if the
Mathematics and Natural History were mingled with these other Studies, which
would indeed be excellent Preparatives and Dispositions to future Improvements.
And I add further, That the young Philosophers must take care of looking on
their Systematick Notious as the bounds and perfections of Knowledge; nor make
account to fix eternally upon those Theories, as established and infallible
Certainties: But consider them in the modest sense of Hypotheses, and as things
they are to take in their passage to others that are more valuable and
important. I say, The Peri-patetick Studies thus tempered, will not, I suppose,
be disal-lowed by those who are for the Practical Methods; and so the
Vniversity-Establishments can receive no prejudice from the Spirit that
dislikes a perpetual acquiescence in the Philosophy of the present Schools.

The USEFULNESS OF Real Philosophy TO RELIGION. Essay IV.

Essay IV. THE USEFULNESS OF Real Philosophy TO RELIGION.
IT is the perverse Opinion of hasty, inconsiderate Men, that the study of
Nature is prejudicial to the Interests of Religion; And some, who are more
zealous than they are wise, endeavor to render the Naturalist suspected of
holding secret correspondence with the Atheist: which things if really they
were so, 'twere fit that the Writings of Philosophers should be sent after the
Books of curious Arts, that were voted to Destruction by Apostolic Authority
and Zeal; and then were they all laid together in a fired heap, and one Drop
from my Finger would quench the Flames, I would not let fall that Drop. But
it is to be hoped there is no such guilt or danger in the case; we may suppose
rather, that those unkind surmisals concerning natural Wisdom, are the effects
of superstitious Ignorance; yea, I doubt they are some of the Relics of that
Barbarism, that made Magic of Mathematics, and Heresy of Greek and Hebrew.

And now, were this gross conceit about the Knowledge of Nature only the fear
and fancy of the mere vulgar, it were to be pardoned easily, and lightly to be
considered; but the worst is, the infection of the weak jealousy has spread
it self among some of those whose Lips should preserve Knowledge; and there
are, I doubt, diverse of the Instructers of the People, who should endeavor to
deliver them from the vain Images of Fancy, that foment those fears in their
own Imaginations, and theirs. For the sake of such, and those others, who are
capable of Conviction, I shall endeavor to justific sober Inquisitions into
God's Works; and to show, that they are not only innocent, but very useful in
most of the Affairs wherein Religion is concerned. This I shall do, for more
clearness of proof, by a gradual motion of Discourse, from things that are
plain, and acknowledged (which I shall touch briefly) to the main Matter I
would enforce: In this order;

(I.) That God is to be praised for his Works. (II.) That his Works are to be
studied by those that would praise him for them. (III.) That the study of
Nature, and God's Works, is very serviceable to Religion. (IV.) That the
Ministers and Professors of Religion ought not to discourage, but promote the
knowledge of Nature, and the Works of its Author.
THe FIRST contains two things, viz. That God is to be praised; and
particularly for his Works. The former is the constant Voice of Scripture, and
Universal Nature; He is worthy to be praised, says the Kingly Prophet, 2 Samuel
22. 4. Greatly to be praised, says the same Royal Saint, 1 Chronicles. 16. 25. We
are to offer him the Sacrifice of Praise, Heb. 13. 15. And are encouraged to do
so, because, It is good to sing Praises; and praise is comely for the upright,
Psalm. 1. 47. and Psalm. 33. To recite all the particular recommendations and
commands of this duty, were endless, I only mention the next to my thoughts,
and add,

That Nature says the same; That Praise is the Tribute that is due to the
Author of our Beings; And we can offer him nothing less, and in a manner
nothing else. All the World have been unanimous in this, and the rudest part of
Mankind, have owned the dueness of Praise and devout Acknowledgment.

And (II.) the other Branch is as clear, That God is to be praised particularly
for his Works; For in these we have very full discoveries of his Perfections,
and his Mercies, the most proper Subjects for our Praises. But here I must be
more large, and therefore propose the following things to be considered.

(1.) When God himself would represent his own Magnificence and Glory, he
directs us to his Works. He illustrates his Greatness to Job, by instancing the
Wonders of his Creatures: Among whom we are sent to the Earth, and Ocean; to
the Clouds, and Rain^ to the Light, and heavenly influence; to Behemoth, and
Leviathan; to the Ostrich, and the Eagle; and the other Furniture of Land, and
Air, and Seas, in the four last Chapters of that Book; in all these are the
marks of his Glory, and his Greatness, and they are no less so of his Wisdom,
and his Goodness; For in Wisdom he has made them all, Psalm. 104. and the
Earth is full of his goodness, Psalm. 119. 54.

And again (2.) when devout and holy Men would quicken their own Souls, and
those of others, to praise him, they use the same method, and send abroad their
Thoughts among the Creatures to gather instances of acknowledgment. Thus Elihu
in Job magnifieth his Power by the Lightning and Thunder, by the Snow and Rain,
by the Whirlwinds of the North, and Cold of the South, and calls upon his
afflicted Friend to remember to magnify his Works that Men behold; and again
bids him stand still, and consider the wondrous Works of God, Job 36, and 37
Chapters. And the Psalmist upon the same account urges his Soul to bless his
Maker for his Majesty, and Honor disclosed in the natural Wonders of the
Heavens and Earth, the Winds and Waters, the Springs and Grass, the Trees and
Hills, Psalm. 104. throughout, and he gives particular thanks again, Psalm.
136. for the discoveries of the Divine Wisdom and Mercy in the same instances
of his Providence and Power; which he further celebrates by calling upon the
noblest of inanimates to praise him, Psalm. 148. Praise him Sun and Moon, praise
him O ye Stars and Light; which Creatures of his, though they are not able to
sing Hallelujahs, and vocally to rehearse his praise, yet they afford glorious
Matter for grateful and triumphant Songs, and by their beauty, and their order,
excite those that study and observe them, to adore and glorify their Maker.
And therefore the Prophet runs on further into an aggregation of more
Particulars, of Fire, and Hail, Storms, and Vapors, Mountains, and Cedars,
Beasts, and Fouls, and creeping Things; all which in the same Divine Canticle
are summoned to praise him; that is, we are required to use them as the Matter
and Occasions of Holy Eucharist and Thanksgiving. To these I add,

(2.) That God was pleased to sanctify a solemn Day for the celebration of his
Works. He appointed a Sabbath for rest, and contemplation to himself; and for
praise and acknowledgment to us; and his making Heaven, and Earth, the Sea, and
all that in them is, is intimated as the reason of the consecration of that
Day; which was observed upon that account among the Jews; and the devout
Christians of eldest times kept the same in memory of God's Creation, after the
institution of the other Sabbath. This I take to be enough for the first
Proposition, viz. That God is to be praised for his Works. I descend to the
second, which is,

(II.) That his Works are to be studied by those, that would praise him for
them. We are commanded to sing Praises with understanding, Psalm. 40. 7. and the
Offering he requires, is that of a reasonable service. His Works receive but
little glory from the rude wonder of the ignorant; and there is no wise Man
that values the applauses of a blind admiration. No one can give God the Glory
of his Providence, that lets the Particulars of it pass by him unobserved; nor
can he render due acknowledgments to his Word, that does not search the
Scriptures: It Is equally impossible to praise the Almighty, as we ought, for
his Works, while we carelessly consider them. We are commanded to search for
Wisdom, as for hidden Treasure; It lies not exposed in the common ways; and the
chief wonders of Divine Art and Goodness are not on the surface of things laid
open to every careless eye. The Tribute of praise that we owe our Maker, is not
a formal slight confession that his Works are wonderful and glorious; but such
an acknowledgment as proceeds from deep Observation, and acquaintance with
them. And though our profoundest Study and Inquiries cannot unfold all the
Mysteries of Nature, yet do they still discover new Motives to devout
admiration, and new Objects for our loudest Praises. Thus briefly of the second
Proposition also, viz. That God's Works are to be studied by those that would
praise him for them. From these I now advance to the Third, which will require
more thoughts, and it is this,

(III.) That the study of Nature and God's Works, is very serviceable to
Religion. We commonly believe that the glory of God is the end of this; we say
it is his, and we know it is ours, and the Divine Glory is writ upon the
Creatures; the more we study them, the better we understand those Characters,
the better we read his Glory, and the more fit are we to celebrate, and
proclaim it. Thus the knowledge of God's Works promotes the end of Religion.

And it disposes us to it, by keeping the Soul under a continual sense of God.
He that converseth with his Works, finds in all things the clear stamps of
infinite Benignity and Wisdom; he perceives the Divine Art in all the turnings
and varieties of Nature, and Divine Goodness in that. He observes God in the
color of every Flower, in every fiber of a Plant, in every particle of an
Insect, in every drop of Dew. He meets him in all things, and sees all things
are his, and has an advantage hereby to be instructed how to use them as our
Makers, not ours, with reverence and thanksgiving, with an eye to his Glory,
and an aim at his Enjoyment. This is the tendency of the knowledge of Nature;
if it be abused to different and contrary Purposes, natural Wisdom is not in
fault, but he that turns this excellent Instrument of Religion upon it self.
But that better use may be made of it, and by some is, will appear by
considering particularly how acquaintance with Nature assists RELIGION against
its greatest Enemies, which are Atheism, Sadducism, Superstition, Enthusiasm,
and the Humor of Disputing.

FOr the First, Atheism, I reckon thus, The deeper insight any Man has into
the Affairs of Nature, the more he discovers of the accurateness, and Art that
is in the contexture of things. For the Works of God are not like the
compositions of Fancy, or the Tricks of Juglers, that will not bear a clear
light, or strict scrutiny; but their exactness receives advantage from the
severest inspection; and he admires most, that knows most; since the insides
and remotest recesses of things have the clearest stamps of inimitable Wisdom
on them, and the Artifice is more in the Wheel-work, than in the Case. For if
we look upon any of the Works of Nature through a Magnifying Glass that makes
deep Discoveries, we find still more beauty, and more uniformity of
contrivance; whereas if we survey the most curious piece of humane ingenuity by
that Glass, it will discover to us numerous Flaws, Deformities and
Imperfections in our most Elegant Mechanics: Hence I gather, That the study of
God's Works, showing us more of the riches of Nature, opens thereby a fairer
Prospect of those Treasures of Wisdom that are lodged within it; and so
furnishes us with deeper Senses, and more Arguments, and clearer Convictions
of the existence of an infinitely intelligent Being, that contrived it in so
harmonious and astonishing an order.

So that if any are so brutish, as not to acknowledge him upon the view of the
mere external frame of the Universe, they must yet fall down before the
evidence, when Philosophy has opened the Cabinet, and led them into the
Jewel-bouse, and shown them the surprising variety that is there. Thus though
the obvious Firmament, and the motions of the Sun and Stars, the ordinary
vicissitudes of Seasons, and productions of things, the visible beauty of the
great World, and the appearing variety and fitness of those Parts that make up
the little one in Man, could scarce secure Galen from the danger of being an
Atheist: Yet when he pryed further by Anatomical Enquiries, and saw the
wonderful diversity, aptness, and order of the minutest Strings, Pipes, and
Passages that are in the inward Fabric; He could not abstain from the
devoutness of an Anthem of Acknowledgment. And that the real knowledge of
Nature leads us by the hand to the confession of its Author, is taught us by
the Holy Penman, who suggests that the visible things of the Creation declare
him. The Plebeian and obvious World no doubt does, but the Philosophical much
more. So that whosoever says, that inquiry into Nature, and God's Works leads
to any degree of Atheism, gives great ground of suspicion that himself is an
Atheist; or that he is that other thing that the Royal Psalmist calls him, that
says in his heart there is no God. For either he acknowledges the Art and
exactness of the Works of Nature, or he does not; if not, he disparageth the
Divine Architect, and disables the chief Argument of his existence: If he does,
and yet affirms that the knowledge of it leads to Atheism, he says he knows
not what, and in effect this, That the sight of the order and method of a
regular and beautiful contrivance tends to persuade that Chance and Fortune was
the Author.

But I remember I have discoursed of this elsewhere, and what I have said for
Philosophy in general from its tendency to devout Acknowledgments, is not so
true of any as of the Experimental and Mechanic. For the Physiology of the
modern Peripatetick Schools creates Notions, and turns Nature into words of
second Intention, but discovers little of its real beauty, and harmonious
contrivance; so that God has no glory from it, nor Men any Argument of his
Wisdom or Existence. And for the Metaphysical Proofs, they are for the most
part deep and nice, subject to Evasions and turns of Wit, and not so generally
persuasive, as those drawn from the plain and sensible Topics, which the
Experimental Philosophy inlargeth and illustrates.

This then gives the greatest and fullest assurance of the Being of God, and
acquaintance with this kind of Learning furnishes us with the best Weapons to
defend it. For the modern Atheists are pretenders to the Mechanic Principles,
viz. those of mere Matter and Motion; and their pretensions cannot be shamed or
defeated by any so well, as by those who thoroughly understand that wild Systeme
of Opinions These indeed perceive, that there is only Nature in some things
that are taken to be supernatural and miraculous, and the shallow Naturalist
sees no further, and therefore rests in Nature; But the true Philosopher shows
the vanity and unreasonableness of taking up so short; and discovers infinite
Wisdom at the end of the Chain of Causes. I say, If we know no further than
occult Qualities, Elements, Heavenly Influences and Forms, we shall never be
able to disprove a Mechanic Atheist; but the more we understand of the Laws of
Matter and Motion, the more shall we discern the necessity of a wise mind to
order the blind and insensible Matter, and to direct the original Motions;
without the conduct of which, the Universe could have been nothing but a mighty
Chaos, and misshapen Mass of everlasting Confusions and Disorders. This of the
FIRST, viz. That the knowledge of Nature serves Religion against Atheism; and
that it does also,

(II.) AGainst Sadducism. It Is well known that the Sadduces denied the
existence of Spirits, and Immortality of Souls; And the Heresy is sadly
revived in our days.

(1.) What a Spirit is; and whether there be Spirits, or not; are questions
that appertain to the disquisition of Philosophy. The Holy Scripture, that
condescends to the plain capacities of Men, uses the word Spirit (commonly)
for the more subtle and invisible Bodies, and 'twill be difficult from thence
to fetch a demonstrative proof of Spirits, in the strict Notion. That there are
Angels and Souls which are purer than these gross Bodies, may no doubt be
concluded from thence; But whether these are only a finer sort of Matter, or a
different kind of Beings, cannot (I think) be determined by any thing delivered
in the Divine Oracles. The Inquiry therefore belongs to Philosophy, which, from
diverse Operations in our own Souls concludes, That there is a sort of Beings
which are not Matter or Body, viz. Beings, self-motive, penetrable and
indivisible; Attributes directly contrary to those of Matter, which is
impenetrable, divisible, and void of Selfmotion. By these Properties,
respectively, the distinct nature of Spirit and Body is known; and by the same,
that there are Spirits, in the strictest sense, as well as corporeal Beings.

Now by stating the Nature, and proving the Existence of Spirits, a very
considerable service is done to Religion: For hereby our Notion of the adorable
Deity is freed from all material grosness, in which way those must conceive
him, that acknowledge nothing but Body in the World; which certainly is a very
great dis-interest to his Glory, and suggests very unbecoming thoughts of him.
And by the due settling the Notion of a Spirit, the conceit of the Soul's
Traduction, is overthrown, which either arises from direct Sadducism, or a
defect in Philosophy. Hereby our Immortality is undermined, and dangerously
exposed: But due Philosophical Disquisition will set us right in the Theory.

For the former of the Errors mentioned, viz. the A^hropomorphite Doctrines,
that make God himself a corporeal Substance; Those cannot be disproved, but by
the Use and Application of the Principles of Philosophy; Since let us bring
what Arguments we can from the Scriptures, which speak of the Perfection,
Infinity, Immensity, Wisdom, and other Attributes of God; These no doubt will
be granted; but the Query will be, Whether all may not belong to a material
Being; a question which Philosophy resolves; and there is no other way to
search deep into this Matter, but by those Aids.

So likewise as to the Traduction of the Soul; The Arguments from Scripture
against it are very general; yea many expressions we find there, seem at first
sight to look that way. And therefore this other help, Philosophy, must be used
here also; and by the distinct representation which it gives of the Nature of
Sprit, and Matter, and of the Operations that appertain to each, this Error is
effectually confuted; which it cannot be by any other proceeding.

Thus Philosophy befriends us against Sadducism, in the first Branch of it, as
it explodes the being of Spirits.

(2.) The other is, the denial of the Immortality of our Souls; The
establishment of this likewise, the Students of Philosophy and God's Works have
attempted in all Ages, and they have proved it by the Philosophical
considerations of the nature of Sense; the quickness of Imagination; the
spirituality of the Understanding; the freedom of the Will; from these they
infer, that the Soul is immaterial, and from thence, that it is immortal; which
Arguments are some of the most demonstrative and cogent that the mere reasons
of Men can use; but cannot be managed, nor understood, but by those that are
instructed in Philosophy and Nature.

I confess there are other Demonstrations of our Immortality, for the plain
Understandings that cannot reach those Heights. The Scripture gives clear
evidence, and that of the Resurrection of the Holy Jesus, is palpable; But yet
the Philosophical Proofs are of great use, and serve for the conviction of the
Infidel, to whom the other inducements are nothing; and the deeper knowledge of
things is necessary to defend this great Article of Religion against such Men,
since they allege a sort of Arguments to prove the Soul to be mortal, that
cannot be consuted but by a reason instructed in the Observations of Nature.

For the Modern Sadduce pretends, that all things we do, are performed by mere
Matter and Motion; and consequently, that there is no such thing as an
immaterial Being: so that when our Bodies are dissolved, the whole Man is
destroyed and lost for ever; which dismal conclusion is true and certain, if
there be nothing in us but Matter, and the results of Motion; and those that
converse but little with Nature, understand little what may be done by these;
and so cannot be so well assured that the Elevations, Mixtures, and
Combinations of them cannot be at last improved so far, as to make a sensible,
reasoning Being; nor are they well able to disprove one, that affirms that they
are actually advanced to that height: whereas he that has much inquired into
the Works of God and Nature, gains a clear sight of what Matter can perform,
and gets more and stronger Arguments to convince him, that its Modifications
and Changes cannot amount to perception and sense; since in all its Varieties,
and highest Exaltations, he finds no Specimens of such Powers.

And though, I confess, that all Mechanic Inquirers make not this use of their
Inquisitions and Discoveries; yet that is not the fault of the Method, but of
the Men; and those that have gone furthest in that way, have receded most from
the Sadducean Doctrines. Among such, I suppose, I may be allowed to reckon the
Noble Renatus Descartes; And his Metaphysics and Notions of Immaterial
Beings, are removed to the greatest distance from all Corporeal Affections;
which I mention not to declare, or signify my adherence to those Principles;
but for an Instance, to show, that acquaintance with Matter, and the knowledge
of its Operations, removes the Mind far off from the belief of those high
Effects which some ascribe to Corporeal Motions; and from all suppositions of
the Soul's being bodily and material.

Thus Philosophy is an excellent Antidote against Sadducism, in both the Main
Branches of it. But then I must confess also, that the Philosophy of the late
Peripatetick Writers does rather assist, than overthrow this dangerous
Infidelity; I mean, in what it teaches concerning Substantial Forms, which I
fear tends to the disabling all Philosophical Evidence of the Immortality of
Humane Souls. For these Peripateticks make their Forms, a kind of medium
between Body and Spirit, viz. Beings that are educed (as they speak) out of
Matter; and are so dependent on it, that they perish utterly, or return into
the bosom of the Matter, (as some cant) when they cease to inform it: But yet
they allow not that those Forms are material in their essential Constitution
and Nature.

This is the Peripatetick account of substantial Forms, and such they assign to
all Bodies, and teach, That the noblest sort of them are sensitive and
perceptive, which are the Souls of Brutes.

If this be so, that Beings which are not Spirits, but corruptible dependants
upon Matter, may be endowed with Animadversion, and Sense; what Arguments have
we then to show, that they may not have Reason also, which is but an
Improvement, and higher degree of simple Perception? It Is as hard to be
apprehended how any of the results of Matter, should perceive; as how they
should join their Perceptions into Reasonings; and the same Propositions that
prove the possibility of one, prove both; so that those who affirm that Beasts
also have their degrees of true Reason, speak very consonantly to those
Principles. And if such material, corruptible Forms as the Peripateticks
describe, are sufficient for all the Actions and Perceptions of Beasts, I know
not which way to go about to demonstrate, that a more elevated sort of them may
not suffice for the reasonings of Men. To urge the Topics of Proof, I
mentioned, from Notions, Compositions, Deductions, and the like, which are
alleged to prove our Souls Immaterial; I say, to plead these, will signify
nothing but this, That Humane Souls are no portions of Matter, nor corporeal in
their formal Essence; But how will they evince, that they are not educed from
it, that they depend not on Matter, and shall not perish, when their respective
Bodies are dissolved. Certainly all those Arguments that are brought for our
Immortality, are in this way clearly disabled. For all that we can say, will
prove but this, That the Soul is no Body, or part of Matter; but this will
amount to no evidence, if there are a middle kind of Essences, that are not
corporeal, and yet mortal.

So that when I say, Philosophy serves Religion against Sadducism, I would not
be understood to mean the Peripatetick Hypotheseis; but that Philosophy which
is grounded upon acquaintance with real Nature. This, by leaving this whole
unintelligible sort of Beings out of its Accounts, (as things for which there
is no shadow of ground from Reason, or Nature, but good evidence of their
nonexistence from both) disappoints the Sadduce of the advantage he has from
this needless and precarious Principle. And by distributing Substance into
Body, and Spirit, without the admission of middle Natures; the Real Philosophy
gives demonstrative force to those Arguments for our Immortality, that prove
our Souls are not Bodies; and so Sadducism is ruined by it.

These things I have thought fit to advertise, not out of design to censure any
particular way of Philosophy; but for the security of my Discourse. And though
I have made a little bold with the Peripateticks here, yet the great Name of
Aristotle, to which they pretend, is not concerned; for I am convinced, that he
taught no such Doctrine of substantial Forms, as his later Sectators and
Interpreters have imputed to Him; who indeed have depraved, and corrupted his
sense, (almost) in the whole Body of his Principles; and have presented the
World with their own Fancies, instead of the genuine Opinions of that
Philosopher.

But I proceed,

(III.) THe Real Philosophy, that inquires into God's Works, assists Religion
against Superstition, another of its fatal Enemies. That I may prove this, it
must be premised,

That Superstition consists, either in bestowing Religious Valuation and Esteem
on things, in which there is no good; or fearing those, in which there is no
hurt: So that this Folly expresses it self, one while in doting upon Opinions,
as Fundamentals of Faith; and Idoliziug the little Models of Fancy, for Divine
Institutions: And then it runs away afraid of harmless, indifferent
Appointments, and looks pale upon the appearance of any usual Effect of Nature.
It tells ominous Stories of every Meteor of the Night; and makes sad
Interpretations of each unwonted Accident: All which are the Products of
Ignorance, and a narrow Mind; which defeat the Design of Religion, that would
make us of a free, manly, and generous Spirit; and indeed represent
Christianity as if it were a fond, sneaking, weak and peevish thing, that
emasculates Men's Understandings, making them amorous of toys, and keeping them
under the servility of childish fears; so that hereby it is exposed to the
distrust of larger Minds, and to the scorn of Atheists; These and many more are
the mischiefs of Superstition, as we have sadly seen and felt.

Now against this evil Spirit, and its Influences, the Real, Experimental
Philosophy, is one of the best Securities in the World. For by a generous and
open Inquiry in the great Field of Nature, Men's minds are enlarged, and taken
off from all fond adherences to their private Sentiments. They are taught by
it, That Certainty is not in many things; and that the most valuable Knowledge
is the practical; By which means they will find themselves disposed to more
indifferency toward those petty Notions, in which they were before apt to
place a great deal of Religion; and to reckon, that all that will signify,
lies in the few, certain, operative Principles of the Gospel; and a Life
suitable to such a Faith; not in doting upon Questions, and Speculations that
engender strife: and thus the Modern, Experimental Philosophy of God's Works,
is a Remedy against the notional Superstition (as I may call it) which has
been, and is so fatal to Religion, and the peace of Mankind.

Besides which, (by making the Soul great) this Knowledge delivers it from
fondness on small Circumstances, and imaginary Models; and from little
scrupulosities about things indifferent, which usually work disquiet in narrow
and contracted Spirits: And I have known diverse, whom Philosophy, and not
Disputes, has cured of this Malady.

This we may observe, that those Remedies are the best, and most effectual,
that alter the temper and disposition of the Mind; For it is suitableness to
that, which makes the way to Men's Judgments, and settles them in their
Persuasions. There are few that hold their Opinions by Arguments, and dry
Reasonings, but by congruity to the Understanding, and consequently by relish
in the Affections: So that seldom any thing cures our intellectual Diseases,
(thoroughly) but what changes these. And I dare affirm, that the Free,
Experimental Philosophy will do this to purpose, by giving the Mind another
Tincture, and introducing a sounder Habit, which by degrees will repel and cast
out all Malignities; and settle it in a strong and manly Temperament, that will
master and put to flight all idle Dotages, and effeminate Fears.

The Truth is, This World is a very Bedlam, and he that would cure Madmen, must
not attempt it by Reasoning, or endeavor to show the absurdity of their
Conceits; but such a course must be taken, as may restore the Mind to a right
Crasis; and that (when it is effected) will reduce, and rectify the
extravagances of the distempered Brain, which Disputes and Oppositions will but
inflame and make worse. Thus, for instance, when frantic Persons are fond of
Feathers, and mightily taken with the employment of picking Straws, 'twould
signify very little, to represent to them the vanity of the Objects of their
Delights; and when the Melancholist was afraid to sit down for fear of being
broken, supposing himself of Glass, it had been to little purpose to have
declared to him the ridiculousness of his Fears; the disposition of the Head
was to be altered, before the particular Frenzy could be cured.

It Is too evident how just this is in the application to the present Age;
Superstitious fondness, and fears are a real degree of madness. And though I
cannot say that Philosophy must be the only Catholic way of Cure, (for of
this, the far greatest part of Men is incapable) yet this I do affirm, that
it is a Remedy, for those that are strong enough to take it: and the rest must
be helped by that, which changes the Genius; and this cannot, ordinarily, be
done by any thing that opposes the particular Fancy.

However I must say, (2.) That the sort of Superstition which is yet behind in
my account, and consists in the causless fear of some Extraordinaries, in
Accident, or Nature, is directly cured by that Philosophy, which gives fair
likely-hoods of their Causes; and shows that there is nothing in them
supernatural; the light of the day drives away Apparitions, and vain Images
that fancy forms in obscure shades, and darkness. Thus particularly the Modern
Doctrine of Comets, which have been always great Bugbears to the guilty, and
timorous World; has rescued Philosophers from the trouble of dreadful
Presages, and the mischievous Consequences that arise from those superstitious
Abodings. For whatever the casual Coincidencies may be between those
Phenomenon, and the direful Events, that are sometimes observed closely to
attend them, (which, as my Lord Bacon truly notes, are observed when they bit,
not when they miss) I say, notwithstanding these, the Real, Experimental
Philosophy makes it appear, that they are Heavenly Bodies, far above all the
Regions of Vapors, in which we are not concerned; and so they are neither the
Signs, nor the Causes of our Mischiefs.

And for the other little things, which afford Matter for the Tales about
Prodigies, and other ominous Appearings, the knowledge of Nature, by exciting
worthy and magnificent conceptions of the God of Nature; cures that blasphemous
abuse of the adorable Majesty, whereby foolish Men attribute every trivial
event that may serve their turns against those they hate, to his immediate,
extraordinary interposal. For it is ignorance of God and his Works, that
disposes Men to absurd ridiculous Surmises, uncharitable Censures, seditious
Machinations; and (so) to Thoughts that are prejudicial to the Glory of God,
the Interests of Religion, and the security of Government; to that Justice and
Charity we owe to others, and to the happiness that we seek our selves. To
which I add,

That this kind of Superstition is a relic of Pagan Ignorance, which made Men
look on Thunder, Eclipses, Earthquakes, and all the more terrifying Phenomenon
of Nature, as the immediate Effects of Powers Supernatural; and to judge Events
by flights of Birds, and garbages of Cattle, by the accidental occursions of
this Creature, and the other, and almost every casual occurrence. But these
Particulars have been most ingeniously represented and reproved in a late very
elegant Discourse about Prodigies; And though I do not acquiesce in the Design
of that excellently penned Book, which is to discredit, and take away all kinds
of Presages; Yet I think it has done rarely well, so far as it discovers the
folly and mischiefs of that ignorant and superstitious Spirit, that makes every
thing a Prodigy. With such apprehensions as these, the knowledge of Nature
fills those Minds that are instructed in it.

And there is no doubt, but that the Antipathy the Real Philosophy bears to all
the kinds of Superstition, is one cause why zealous Ignorance brands those
Researches with the mark of Atheism and Irreligion. For superstitious Folly
adopts those groundless Trifles, which Philosophy contemns and reproves, into
the Family of Religion; and therefore reproacheth the Despisers of them, as
Enemies to the Faith and Power of Godliness.

So it fared with some of the bravest Spirits of ancient times, who have had
black Characters fixed upon their great and worthy Names, only for their
Oppositions of the foolish Rites and Idolatries of the vulgar Heathen. We know
the case of Socrates: And (as to the interest of their Names) that of
Anaxagoras, Theodorus, Protagoras, and Epicurus, was much worse; the causless
infamy coming down the Stream as far as the last Ages. Since then, we know who
was an Heretic for saying there were Antipodes; and a Pope was taken for a
Conjurer for being a Mathematician; yea those noble Sciences were counted
Diabolical; and even the Sacred Language could scarce escape the suspicion. In
later times Galilaeo fell into the Inquisition for the Discoveries of his
Telescopes; and Campanella could not endeavor to assert, and vindicate the
freedom of his Mind, without losing that of his Person.

I might come nearer to our own days, and knowledge: Gothic barharity, and the
Spirit of the Iuquisition is not quite worn out of the Reformation; Though
indeed it ordinarily remains but among the scum and dregs of Men: And no one is
either less Religious, or less Wise for being accounted an Atheist by the
common Rabble. But wherever the knowledge of Nature, and God's Works has in
any degree obtained, those vile Superstitions have been despised, and put to an
infamous flight. But to take another step,

(IV.) THe Real Philosophy, and knowledge of God's Works, serves Religion
against Enthusiasm, another dreadful Enemy. Now Enthusiasm is a false conceit
of Inspiration; and all the bold and mistaken Pretensions to the Spirit in our
days, are of this sort. What particularly Religion has suffered from it, would
be too long to reckon upon this occasion; It will be enough to say, in an Age
that has so much and such sad experience of it, That Enthusiasm has
introduced much phantastry into Religion, and made way for all imaginable
Follies, and even Atheism it self; which it has done two ways. (1.) By crying
up the Excesses and Diseases of Imagination for the greatest height of
Godliness; And (2.) By the disparagrment of sober Reason, as an Enemy to the
Principles of Faith. And Philosophy assists Religion against both these.

FOR the first in order; The real knowledge of Nature detects the dangerous
imposture, by showing what strange things may be effected by no diviner a cause
than a strong Fancy impregnated by Heated Melancholy; For this sometimes warms
the Brain to a degree that makes it very active and imaginative, full of odd
Thoughts, and unexpected Suggestions; so that if the Temper determine the
Imagination to Religion, it flies at high things, at interpretations of dark
and Prophetic Scriptures; at Predictions of future Events, and mysterious
Discoveries, which the Man expresses fluently and boldly, with a peculiar and
pathetick Eloquence; which pregnances being not ordinary, but much beyond the
usual tone and temper of the Enthusiast; and he having heard great things of
the Spirits immediate Motions and Inspirations, cannot well fail of believing
himself inspired, and of intitling all the excursious of his Fancy to the
immediate Actings of the Holy Ghost: and those thoughts by the help of natural
pride and self-love, will work also exceedingly upon the heightened Affections,
and they upon the Body so far, as to cast it sometimes into Raptures, Ecstasies,
and Deliquiums of Sense, in which every Dream is taken for a Prophecy, every
Image of the Fancy for a Vision, and all the glarings of the Imagination for
new Lights and Revelations.

Thus have our Modern Prophets been inspired by Temper and Imagination, and not
by Design only; For we may not think they are all Hypocrites and knowing
Impostors; No, they generally believe themselves, and the strength of their
highly invigorated Fancies shuts out the sober Light of Reason that should
disabuse them, as sleep does that of our External Senses in our Dreams. And the
silly People that understand not Nature, but are apt to take every thing that
is vebement to be sacred, are easily deceived into the belief of those
Pretensions; and thus Diseases have been worshipped for Religion. This account
the Philosophy of Humane Nature gives of that, by which the World has been so
miserably abused.

And when we cast our eyes abroad, we may plainly see that those glorious
things are no more, than what has been done by the Extatick Priests of the
Heathen Oracles, and the Madmen of all Religions; by Sybils, Lunaticks, Poets,
Dreamers, and transported Persons of all sorts: And it may be observed daily to
what degrees of elevation excess of drinking will heighten the Brain, making
some witty, nimble, and eloquent, much beyond the ordinary proportion of their
Parts and Ingenuity; and inclining others to be hugely devour, who usually have
no great sense of Religion; As I knew one, who would pray rapturously when he
was drunk, but at other times was a moping Sot, and could scarce speak sense.

Thus also some kinds of Madness, Diseases, Accidents, Peculiarities of Temper,
and other natural things that heat the Brain, fill Men with high surprising
Conceits about Religion, and furnish them with fervid Devotion, great readiness
of Expression, and unexpected applications of Scripture to their crasy
Conceits; I say, the Experimental Philosophy of our Natures informs us, that
all this is common in alienations, and singularities of Mind and Complexion.
And they were remarkable in the Prophets of the Heathen, and the Priest whom
Saint Austin knew, that would whine himself into an Ecstasy; In the wonderful
Discourses of the American Bishop, that said he was the Holy Ghost, and the
canting fluency of the German Enthusiasts, some of whose Imaginations were as
wild and extravagant; of such Instances I might make up a much larger
Catalogue, if I should descend to our Domestic Lunaticks, but their temper is
well known, and therefore I only add this more;

That I have often met with a poor Woman in the North, whose habitual conceit
it was, That she was Mother of God, and of all things living; I was wont to
personate a kind of compliance with her Fancy, and a modest desire to be
further informed about it; which gentleness drew from her so many odd fetches
of Discourse, such applications of Scripture, and such wonderful references to
Things, in which she was never instructed, that looked like gleanings out of
Hobbs and Epicurus, that I have been much amazed at her talk: And yet when I
diverted her to any thing else of ordinary Matters, she spoke usually with as
much sobriety and cold discretion, as could well be expected from a Person of
her Condition; nor did she use to be extravagant in any thing, but about that
particular Imagination; which Instance among many others I might produce, very
much confirms me in the truth of that Observation of those Philosophers who
have given us the best light into the Enthusiastic Temper, viz. That there is
a sort of madness, which takes Men in some particular things, when they are
sound in others: which one Proposition will afford a good account of many of
the Phenomenon of Enthusiasm; and shows that the Extravagants among us may be
really distracted in the Affairs of Religion, though their Brains are untouc'd
in other Matters.

Thus a Philosophical use of observation, and the knowledge of Humane Nature by
it, helps us to distinguish between the Effects of the adorable Spirit, and
those of an hot distempered Fancy; which is no small advantage for the securing
the Purity, Honor, and all the interests of Religion.

But (2.) there is another mischief of the Enthusiastic Spirit behind, and
that is its bringing Reason into disgrace, and denying the use thereof in the
Affairs of Faith and Religion: This is an evil that is the cause of many more;
for it has brought into the World all kinds of Phantastry and Folly, and
exposed Religion to Contempt and Derision, by making Madness and Diseases
Sacred: It leads Men's Minds into a maze of confused Imaginations, and betrays
them into Bogs and Precipices, deprives them of their Light and their Guide,
and lays them open to all the Delusions of Satan, and their own distempered
Brains: It takes Religion off from its Foundations, and leaves the Interest of
Eternity in Men's Souls, to Chance, and the Hits of Imagination; teaching those
that are deluded to lay the stress of all upon Raptures, Heats, and Mysterious
Notions, while they forget^ and scorn the plain Christianity which is an
imitation of Christ in Charity, Humility, Justice, and Purity; in the exercise
of all Virtue, and command of our selves: It renders Men obnoxious to all the
Temptations of Atheism, and the blackest Infidelity; and makes it impossible to
convince an Infidel, to settle one that doubts, or to recover one that is
fallen off from the Faith. These Evils I am content only to name in this place,
having represented them more fully in another Discourse; and the experience of
our own Age may convince us, with a little consideration upon it, That all
those fatal Mischiefs have been t^ Effects of the Contempt, and Disparagement
of Reason.

But yet though I affirm this, I am not so rash, or so unjust as to believe, or
say, That this Spirit has produced all those s^d things in every one that
speaks hotly, and inconsiderately against Reason: I am far from the wildness of
such a censure, because I know how much imprudent Zeal, customary Talk, high
Pretensions, and superstitious Fears, may work even upon honest Minds, who many
times hold bad things in the Principle, which they deny in the Practice, and so
are upright in their Wills, while they are very much confused, and mistaken in
their Understandings. This I account to be the case of multitudes of pious
People in reference to Reason. They have heard hotheaded indiscreet Men
declaim against it, and many of them, whose Opinions will not bear the Light,
have an interest to do so; Their Pretensions were plausible, and their Zeal
great; their Talk loud, and their Affirmations bold; and the honest
well-meaning Folks are caught in their Affections; and these lead bad
Principles into their Minds, which are neither disposed, nor able to examine:
So they believe and speak after their Teachers; and say, That Reason is a low,
dull thing, ignorant of the Spirit, and an Enemy to Faith and Religion; while
in this they have no clear thoughts, nor yet any evil meaning; But let these
Fancies swim a-top in their Imaginations, and upon occasions they run out at
the Tongues end, though they are not always improved to those deadly Practices.
For Charity and Caution I have said this; but yet nothing hinders but that all
the forecited Evils are justly said to be the Tendencies, and in too many
Instances have been, and are the Effects of this Spirit.

And now I doubt not but 'twill be granted readily by all considering Men, that
whatever assists Religion against this destructive Enemy, does it most
important service; and this the Free and Real Philosophy does in a very eminent
degree.

In order to the proof of this, we may consider what I intimated just now, viz.
That Men are led into, and kept in this Fancy of the Enmity of Reason to
Religion, chiefly by two things:

(1.) By an implicit assent to the Systemes and Distates of those who first
instructed them; And (2.) By defect in clearness of Thoughts, and the ability
to state things distinctly, and to understand their Dependencies and Sequels;
Both which Imperfections the Free Philosophy cures.

For as to the First, (1.) That Philosophy begins with the enlargement of the
Mind, and attempts to free it from Prejudices and Pre-ingagements, which
sophisticate and pervert our Judgments, and render us incapable of discerning
Things as they are. Modest, impartial enquiry is the Foundation of the real,
experimental way of Philosophy. Not that it teaches Skepticism and Neutrality
in all Things, but this Caution in our Disquisitions, That we do not suddenly
give firm assents to Things not well understood or examined: which no doubt is
very just and safe. But as to what concerns those, who through ignorance, or
other occasions, are incapable of making due enquiry, I think they ought not to
concern themselves about Matters of Speculation at all; or at least not to
affirm any thing positively about them. It Is enough for such to believe and
practice the plain Duties of Religion, which are clear in the Holy Oracles, and
with which they may be acquainted without much sagacity, or deep Judgment: For
Matters of Theory, and difficult Enquiry, appertain not to the vulgar and lower
rank of Understandings: But for those who are capable of search after Truth,
and are provided with anvantages for it, Freedom of Judgment is necessary in
order to their success. With this, I said, the Real Philosophy begins; and in
all its progresses still more and more disposes the Mind to it, and so
delivers it from the vassalage of Customary Sayings and Opinions.

And now whoever is so disposed, will not be so ready to believe that Reason is
an Enemy to Religion, till he have considered, and examined the Matter with an
impartial Judgment: And I dare say, whoever shall do that, will want nothing to
convince him, that such an Opinion is false and groundless, but clear and
distinct Thoughts, and the knowledge of Consequence, with which Philosophy will
furnish him.

This is the second way whereby it helps to overthrow this Principle of
Enthusiasm, viz.

(2.) By teaching us to state Matters clearly, and to draw out those
conclusions that are lodged in them. For it is confusion of Notions, and a great
defect in reasoning, that makes dark Zeal to rave so furiously against Reason.
Now Philosophy is Reason methodiz'd, and improved by Study, Observation, and
Experiment; and whoever is addicted to these, is exercised frequently in
inquiry after the Causes, Properties, and Relations of Things, which will inure
the Mind to great intentness, and enable it to define and distinguish, and
infer rightly; And by these the Allegations against Reason will be made appear
to be idle Sophisms, that have no sound sense or substance in them.

And though the Discourses of some, who have talked much of Philosophy and
Reason, have been sometimes bold and saucy, and opposite to the Interests of
Religion: Yet true Philosophy, and well managed Reason, vindicate Religion from
those abuses, and show, that there was Sophistry and imposture in those
Pretensions: So that they are no more to be blamed for the Insolences and
Riots of those that usurp their Name, than Religion it self is, for the
Immoralities of such as cloth themselves in the Garments of external Piety and
Saintship. Thus of the services of Philosophy against ENTHVSIASM. I come now to
the last Instance.

(V.) IT helps Religion against the Humor of Disputing; By which I mean that
evil Genius, that makes Men confident of uncertain Opinions; and clamorously
contentious against every different Judgment. This is that pestilent Spirit
that turns Religion into Air of Notion, and makes it intricate and uncertain;
subject to eternal Quarrels, and Obnoxious to Skepticism and Infidelity; That
which supplants Charity, Modesty, Peace, and Meekness; substituting in their
room, Rage and Insolence, Pride and Bitter Zeal, Clamours and Divisions, and
all the Opposites of the Spirit of Christ, and the Gospel. So that, it depraves
Religion, and makes its Sacred Name an Instrument to promote the Projects of
the Kingdom of Darkness; by envenoming Men one against another, and inflaming
their Spirits, and crumbling them into Sects, and disturbing Societies; and so
it hinders the Progress of the Gospel, and lays it open to the scorns of
Unbelievers; it turns Men from the desire of practicing, to the itch of
talking, and abuses them into this dangerous belief, That Godliness consists
more in their beloved Orthodoxy, than in a sober Virtue, and the exercise of
Charity; it makes them pert and pragmatical; buste about the Reformation of
others, while they neglect their own Spirits; fancying a perfection in the
fluency of the Tongue, while the worst of Passions have the Empire of their
Souls. These are some of the sad Effects of the Humor of Disputing, which has
done deplorable execution upon Religion in all Places and Times; and therefore
it is none of the least Services that can be afforded it, to destroy this evil
Genius; and there is nothing, merely humane, that contributes more toward the
rooting of it out of the World, than the Free and Real Philosophy. For,

(1.) An intimate Commerce with God's Works, gives us to see the mighty
Difficulties that are to be met in the speculation of them; and thereby Men are
made less confident of their Sentiments about Nature, and by many
Considerations and Observations of this kind, are at length brought to such an
habitual Modesty, that they are afraid to pass bold Judgments upon those
Opinions in Religion, of which there is no infallible assurance.

And (2.) By the frequent exercises of our Minds, we come to be made sensible
how easily, and how often we are deceived, through the fallibility of Sense, and
shortness of our Understandings; by Education, Authority, Interest, and our
Affections; and so are disposed to a more prudent coldness and diffidence in
things of doubtful Speculation, by which the Disputing Humor is destroyed at
the bottom. Besides which,

(3.) The Real Philosophy brings Men in-love with the Practical Knowledge: The
more we have employed our selves in Notion and Theory, the more we shall be
acquainted with the uncertainty of Speculation; and our esteem, and love of
Opinions will abate, as that sense increases: By the same degrees our respect
and kindness for Operative knowledge will advance, and grow; which disposition
will incline us also to have less regard to Nicities in Religion, and teach us
to lay out our chief Cares and Endeavors about Practical and certain
Knowledge, which will assist and promote our Virtue, and our Happiness; and
incline us to employ our selves in living according to it; And this also will
be an effectual means to destroy the Humor of Contending.

(4.) Philosophy gives us a sight of the Causes of our Intellectual
Diversities; and so lessens our expectation of an Agreement in Opinions; and by
this, it discovers the unreasonableness of making c^sent in less certain
Tenants, the condition of Charity and Union; and of being angry, and dividing
upon every difference of Judgment; By which the hurtful Malignities of Disputes
are qualified, and the Disease it self is undermined.

(5.) It inclines Men to place the Essential Principles of Religion only in the
plain, and certain Articles. For Philosophers are disposed to think, that
Certainty is in a little room: And whoever believes so, concerning the Tenants
of Theology, will not lay the main stress upon any, but the clear acknowledged
Principles; by which prudent Caution he serves all the important Concernments
of Religion. He will not wrangle for every Conceit; nor divide for every
Difference; but takes care to walk in the ways of Charity and Obedience; And so
the Church is safe, and Schisms are prevented and cured.

(6.) The Real Philosophy ends many Disputes, by taking Men off from
unnecessary Terms of Art, which very osten are the chief occasions of the
Contests: If things were stated in clear and plain words, many Controversies
would be ended; and the Philosophy I am recommending, inclines Men to define
with those that are simplest and plainest; and thereby also it very much
promotes the Interests both of Truth and Peace.

In sum, I say, the Free and Real Philosophy makes Men deeply sensible of the
Infirmities of Humane Intellect, and our manifold hazards of mistaking, and so
renders them wary and modest, diffident of the certainty of their Conceptions,
and averse to the boldness of peremptory asserting. So that the Philosopher
thinks much, and examines many things, separates the Certainties from the
Plausibilities, that which is presumed from that which is proved; the Images of
Sense, Fancy, and Education, from the results of genuine and impartial
Reason. Thus he does before he Assents or Denies; and then he takes with him
also a Sense of his own Fallibility and Defects, and never concludes but upon
resolution to alter his Mind upon contrary Evidence. Thus he conceives warily,
and he speaks with as much caution and reserve, in the humble Forms of [ So I
think, and In my Opinion, and Perhaps it is so -- ] with great difference to
opposite Persuasion, candor to Dissenters, and calmness in Contradictions,
with readiness and desire to learn, and great deligh^ in the Discoveries of
Truth, and Detections of his own Mistakes. When he argues he gives his Reasons
without Passion, and shines without flaming, Discourses without wrangling, and
differs without dividing. He catches not at the Infirmities of his Opposite,
but lays hold of his Strength, and weighs the Substance without blowing the
dust in his eyes. He entertains what he finds reasonable, and suspends his
Judgment when he does not clearly understand. This is the Spirit with which Men
are inspired by the Philosophy I recommend. It makes them so just, as to allow
that liberty of Judgment to others, which themselves desire, and so prevents
all imperious Dictates and Imposings, all Captious Quarrels and Notional Wars.
And that this is the Philosophic Genius, may be shown in a grand Instance, the
ROYAL SOCIETY, which is the Great Body of Practical Philosophers. In this
Assembly, though it be made up of all kinds of Dispositions, Professions, and
Opinions; yet has Philosophy so rarely tempered the Constitution, that those
that attend there, never see the least inclination to any unhandsome opposition
or uncivil reflection, no bold obtrusions or consident sayings. The forbearing
such Rudenesses is indeed a Law of that Society, and their Designs and Methods
of Inquiry, naturally form Men into the modest temper, and secure them from the
danger of the Quarrelsome Genius. This is palpable evidence of the sweet
Humor, and ingenious Tendencies of the Free Philosophy; and I believe 'twill
be hard to show such another Example in any so great a Body of differing
Inclinations and Apprehensions. Thus the Experimental Learning rectifies the
grand Abuse, which the Notional Knowledge has so long fostered and promoted,
to the hinderance of Science, the disturbance of the World, and the prejudice
of the Christian Faith. And there is no doubt, but as it has altered and
reformed the Genius in Matters of Natural Research and Inquiry; so it will in
its progress dispose Men's Spirits to more Calmness and Modesty, Charity and
Prudence in the Differences of Religion, and even Silence Disputes there. For
the free sensible Knowledge tends to the altering the Crasis of Men's Minds, and
so cures the Disease at the Root; and true Philosophy is a Specific against
Disputes and Divisions.

To confirm which we may observe further, That wherever this sort of Knowledge
prevails, the Contentious Divinity loses ground; and 'twill be hard to find
any one of those Philosophers, that is a zealous Votary of a Sect: which
reservedness does indeed give occasion to Sectaries, and Bigotts to accuse them
of Atheism and Irreligion: But it really is no Argument of less Piety; but of
more Consideration and Knowledge. And 'twould make much for the advantage of
Religion, and their own, if those fierce Men would understand, that
Christianity should teach them that, which they rail against in the
Philosophers.

But now I must expect to hear,

(I.) That Disputes serve to discover Truth; as latent Fire is excited, and
disclosed by the collision of hard Bodies: So that the Pretense is, That
Philosophy does, on this account, rather disserve than promote the Interests of
Religion.

To this, I Answer, (1.) That all the necessary, material Truths in Divinity
are already discovered; and we have no need of New Lights there, the Ancientest
are truest and best; though in the disquisitions of Philosophy, there will be
always occasions of proceeding. I add, (2.) Disputes are one of the worst ways
to discover Truth; If new things were to be found out in Religion, as well as
Nature, they would scarce be disclosed by this way of Enquiry. A calm Judgment,
and distinct Thoughts, and impartial Consideration of many things, are
necessary for the finding Truth; which lies deep, and is mingled up and down
with much Error, and specious falsehood; and it is hard, if not utterly
impessible, to preserve any one of these in the heat of Disputation: In such
Occasions, the Mind is commonly disordered by Passion, and the Thoughts are
confused, and our Considerations tied to those things which give color to our
Opinions. We are biast by our Affections toward our own Conceits; and our love
to them is inflamed by opposition; we are made incapable of entertaining the
assistance of our Opposites Suggestions by strong prejudice, and inclined to
quarrel with every thing he says by spite, and desire of triumph: and these
are ill Circumstances for the discovery of Truth: He is a wonderful Man indeed
that can thread a Needle when he is at Cudgels in a crowd; and yet this is as
easy, as to find Truth in the hurry of Disputation. The Apostle intimates, 1 Timothy 6. 5. That perverse Disputers are destitute of Truth; and tells us, That
of the strife of words come envy, railings, evil surmisings, but no discovery
of unknown Verities.

But (II.) we are told, in favor of Disputes in Religion, That we are to
contend earnestly for the Faith that was once delivered to the Saints; and
hereby Heresies are said to be confuted and overthrown: So that the disabling
and suppressing of Disputes, seems to be a weakening, rather than any advantage
to Religion, and the Concernments of it.

To this, I say, That by the Faith we are to contend for, I conceive, the
Essentials, and certain Articles are meant; These we may, and we ought, to
endeavor to defend and promote, as there is occasion; and we have seen, how
the Real Philosophy will help our Reasons in that Service. But pious
Contentions for these, are not the disputings of which I am now discoursing,
those are stiff Contests about uncertain Opinions: And such I dare very boldly
say, are no Contentions for the Faith, but the Instruments of the greatest
mischiefs to it. As for those other Disputes that are used to convince Men of
the Truths of the Gospel, and the great Articles thereof; and for the
disproving Infidelity and Heresy; they are necessary, and Philosophy is an
excellent help in such Contests.

So that those other Objections pleadable from the necessity of proving and
trying our Faith, and convincing Heretics; From the Example of our Savior's
disputing with the Doctors and the Sadduces, and of St. Paul at Athens with the
Jews; These, and such other little Cavils, can signify nothing to the
disadvantage of what I have said about the Humor of Disputing, in Matters of
doubtful and uncertain Opinions; against which the Real Philosophy is an
Antidote.

ANd thus I have shown, under five material Heads, That the knowledge of
Nature, and the Works of God, promotes the greatest Interests of Religion; and
by the three last it appears how fundamentally opposite it is to all Schism and
Fanaticism, which are made up and occasioned by Superstition, Enthusiasm, and
ignorant, perverse Disputings. So that for Atheists, and Sadduces, and
Fanatics, to detest and inveigh against Philosophy, is not at all strange;
It Is no more than what may well be expected from Men of that sort; Philosophy
is their Enemy; and it concerns them to disparage and reproach it: But for the
Sober and Religious to do any thing so unadvised, and so prejudicial to
Religion, is wonderful and deplorable: To set these right in their Judgment
about Philosophical Inquiry into God's Works, is the Principal design of these
Papers; and in order to the further promoting of it, I advance to the last Head
of Discourse proposed, viz.

(IV.) THat the Ministers and Professors of Religion ought not to discourage,
but promote the knowledge of Nature, and the Works of its Author.

This is the result of the whole Matter, and follows evidently upon it. And
though it will not infer a necessity of all Men's deep search into Nature, yet
this it will, That no Friend or Servant of Religion should hinder or
discountenance such Inquiries: And though most private Christians, and some
public Ministers, have neither leisure nor ability to look into Matters of
natural Research and Inquisition; yet they ought to think heartily, and wish
well to the endeavors of those that have; and it is a sin and a folly either in
the one or other to censure, or discourage those worthy Undertakings. So that I
cannot without trouble, observe how apt some are, that pretend much to
Religion, and some that minister in it, to load those that are studious of
God's Works, with all the studious Names that contempt and spite can suggest;
The Irreligion of which injurious carriage, nothing can excuse but their
ignorance; And I will rather hope that they neither know what they say, nor
what they do, than believe that they have any direct design against the Glory
of their Maker, or against any laudable endeavors to promote it.

I know well what mischief Prejudice will do, even upon Minds that otherwise
are very honest, and intelligent enough. And there are many common slanders,
and some plausible Objections in the Mouths of the Zealous against Philosophy,
which have begot an ill Opinion of it in well-meaning Men, who have never
examined things with any depth of Inquiry. For the sake of such, I shall
produce the most considerable Allegations of both sorts, and I hope make such
returns to them, as may be sufficient to satisfy those whose Minds are not
barred by Obstinacy, or Ignorance.

I speak first of the bold and broad Slanders, among which, that

(I.) Of Atbeism is one of the most ordinary; But certainly it is one of the
most unjust Accusations that Malice and Ignorance could have invented. This I
need not be industrious to prove here, having made it appear, that Philosophy
is one of the best Weapons in the World to defend Religion against it; and my
whole Discourse is a confutation of this envious and foolish charge.

Concerning it I take notice, That Philosophical Men are usually dealt with by
the Zealous, as the greatest Patrons of the Protestant Cause are by the Sects.
For as the Bishops and other Learned Persons, who have most strongly oppugned
the Romish Faith, have had the ill luck to be accused of Popery themselves; in
like manner it happens to the humblest and deepest Inquisitors into the Works
of God, who have the most and fullest Arguments of his Existence, have raised
impregnable Ramparts, with much industry and pious pains against the Atheists,
and are the only Men that can with success serve Religion against the Godless
Rout; These, Superstitious Ignorance has always made the loudest outcry
against, as if themselves were guilty of that which they have most happily
oppugned and defeated. And the certain way to be esteemed an Atheist by the
fierce and ignorant Devoto's, is to study to lay the Foundations of Religion
sure, and to be able to speak groundedly and to purpose against the desperate
Cause of the black Conspirators against Heaven. And the greatest Men that have
employed their Time and Thoughts this way, have been pelted with this Dirt,
while they have been laboring in the Trenches, and endeavoring to secure the
Foundations of the Holy Fabric.

But besides I observe, That narrow, angry People take occasion to charge the
freer Spirits with Atheism, because they move in a larger Circle, and have no
such fond adherence to some Opinions which they adore and count Sacred. And for
my own part, I confess I have not Superstition enough in my Spirit or Nature,
to incline me to dote upon all the Principles I judge true, or to speak so
dogmatically about them, as I perceive confident and disputing Men are wont.
But contenting my self, with a firm assent to the few practical Fundamentals of
Faith, and having fixed that end of the Compass, I desire to preserve my
Liberty as to the rest, holding the other in such a posture, as may be ready to
draw those Lines, my Judgment informed by the Holy Oracles, the Articles of our
Church, the Apprehensions of wise Antiquity, and my particular Reason, shall
direct me to describe. And when I do that, it is for my self, and my own
satisfaction; but am not concerned to impose my Sentiments upon others: nor do
I care to endeavor the change of their Minds, though I judge them mistaken, as
long as Virtue, the Interests of Religion, the Peace of the World and their own
are not prejudiced by their Errors. By this modest indifference I secure
Charity for all the diversities of Belief, and equally offer my Frienship and
Converses to the several Sects and Persuasions, that stick to the plain
Principles of the Gospel and a Virtuous Life, overlooking their particular
fondnesses and follies. This is the temper of my Genius, and this some warm
People, who have more Heat than Light, are apt to call Skepticism and cold
Neutrality: But that it deserves better Names, I have made appear in some other
Papers.

True it is, That the Men of the mere Epicurean sort, have left God, and
Providence out of their Accounts; But other Philosophers have shown what Fools
they are for doing so, and how absurd their pretended Philosophy is in
supposing things to have been made and ordered by the casual hits of Atoms, in
a mighty Void. And though their general Doctrine of Matter and Motion be
exceeding ancient, and very accountable; when we suppose Matter was at first
created by Almighty Power, and its Motions ordered, and directed by Omniscient
Wisdom; Yet the supposal, that they are independent and eternal, is very
precarious and unreasonable. And that all the regular Motions in Nature should
be from blind tumultuous jumblings, intermixtures, is the most unphilosophical
Fancy, and ridiculous Dotage in the World; So that there is no reason to
accuse Philosophy of a Fault, which Philosophy sufficiently shames and
reproves; and yet I doubt too many have entertained great prejudice against it
upon this score; and it is a particular brand upon some of the modern Men, that
they have revived the Philosophy of Epicurus, which they think to be in its
whole extent Atheistical and Irreligious.

To which I say, that the Opinion of the World's being made by a fortuitous
concurrence of Atoms, is impious and vile: And this those of Epicurus his Elder
School taught: Whereas the late Restorers of the Corpuscularian Hypothesis
hate, and despise the wicked and absurd Doctrine; But thus far they think the
Atomical Philosophy reasonable, viz. as it teaches, That the Operations of
Nature are performed by subtle streams of minute Bodies; and not by I know not
what imaginary Qualities and Forms: They think, That the various Motions and
Figures of the parts of Matter, are enough for all the Phenomenon, and all the
varieties, which with relation to our Senses we call such, and such Qualities.
But then they suppose, and teach, That God created Matter, and is the supreme
Orderer of its Motions, by which all those Diversities are made: And hereby
Piety, and the Faith of Providence is secured.

This, as far as we know any thing of elder Times, was the ancient Philosophy
of the World, and it does not in the least interfere with any Principle of
Religion. Thus far I dare say I may undertake for most of the Corpuscularian
Philosophers of our times, excepting those of M. Hobbes his way.

And therefore I cannot but wonder at a late Reverend Author, who seems to
conclude those Modern Philosophers under the name and notion of such Somatists,
as are for mere Matter and Motion, and exclude immaterial Beings: whereas those
Learned Men, though they own Matter and Motion as the material and formal
causes of the Phenomena; They do yet acknowledge God's Efficiency, and
Government of all Things, with as much seriousness; and contend for it with as
much zeal, as any Philosophers or Divines whatsoever. And it is very hard that
any number of Men should be exposed to the suspicion of being Atheists, for
denying the Peripatetick Qualities and Forms; and there is nothing else
overthrown by the Corpuscularian Doctrines, as they are managed by those
Philosophers. So that methinks that Reverend Person has not dealt so fairly
with the great Names of Descartes, and Gassendus, where he mentions them
promiscuously with the mere Epicurean and Hobbian Somatists, without any note
to distinguish them from those Sadduces; For both those celebrated Men have
labored much in asserting the Grand Articles of Religion against the Infidel
and Atheist.

But (2.) it is alleged by some, Philosophy disposes Men to despise the
Scriptures; or at least to neglect the study of them; and therefore is to be
flighted, and exploded among Christians.

To this I say, That Philosophy is the knowledge of God's Works; and there is
nothing in God's Works that is contrary to his Word; How then should the study
of the one incline Men to despise the other? Certainly had there been any such
impious tendency in searching into God's Works to the lessening of our value of
the Scriptures, The Scripture it self would never have recommended it so much
unto us; Yea, this is so far from being true, that on the contrary, the
knowledge of God's Works tends in its proper nature to dispose Men to love and
veneration of the Scriptures; For by familiarity with Nature, we are made
sensible of the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of God, fresh Instances of which we
shall find in all things; And it is one great design of the Scripture to promote
the Glory of these Attributes: How then can he, that is much affected with
them, choose but love, and esteem those Holy Records which so gloriously
illustrate the Perfections he admires?

Besides, by inquiry into God's Works, we discover continually, how little we
can comprehend of his Ways and Menagements; and he that is sensible of this,
will find himself more inclined to reverence the declarations of his Word,
though they are beyond his reach, and though he cannot fathom those Mysteries,
he is required to believe: Such a disposition is necessary for the securing our
Reverence to the Divine Oracles, and Philosophy promotes it much.

So that, though it is like enough, there may be those that pretend to
Philosophy, who have less veneration and respect for the Scripture than they
ought, yet that impious disesteem of those sacred Writings, is no effect of
their Philosophy, but of their corrupt and evil Inclinations: And to remove the
scandal brought upon Natural Wisdom by those Pretenders, it may be observed,
that none are more earnest, or more frequent in the proof and recommendation of
the Authority of Scripture, than those of Philosophical Inclination and Genius,
who by (...) ^mblick Capacity and Profession, have the best opportunities to
give testimony to the Honor of that Divine Book.

But to justify the imputation of the disservice Philosophy does Religion, and
the Scriptures, it may by some be pleaded,

That Philosophy, viz. that which is called, the new, teaches Doctrines that
are coutrary to the Word of God; or at least such as we have no ground from
Scripture to believe; For instance, That the Earth moves: and, That the Moon is
of a Terrestrial Nature, and capable of Inhabitants: which Opinions are
presumed to be impious, and Antiscriptural.

In return to this, I say,

(1.) In the general; It Is very true, that Philosophy teaches many things
which are not revealed in Scripture; for this was not intended to instruct Men
in the Affairs of Nature; but its Design is, to direct Mankind, and even those
of the plainest Understandings, in Life and Manners; to propose to us the way
of Happiness, and the Principles that are necessary to guide us in it; with the
several Motives and Encouragements that are proper to excite our Endeavors,
and to bear them up against all Difficulties and Temptations. This, I say, was
the chief Design of that Divine Book; and therefore it is accommodated, in the
main, to the most ordinary capacities, and speaks after our manner, suitably to
sense, and vulgar Conception. Thus we find that the Clouds are called Heaven,
the Moon one of the greater Lights, and the Stars mentioned, as less
considerable: and the Stars also, Genesis 1. We read of the going down of the Sun,
and of the ends of the Earth, and of the Heavens; and diverse other such
Expressions are in the Scriptures, which plainly show, That they do not concern
themselves to rectify the Mistakes of the Vulgar, in Philosophical Theories,
but comply with their Infirmities, and speak according as they understand. So
that,

(2.) No Tenent in Philosophy ought to be condemned and exploded, because there
may be some occasional Sayings in the Divine Oracles, which seem not to comport
with it; And therefore the Problems mentioned, concerning the Motion of the
Earth; and Terrestrial Nature of the Moon, ought to be left to the
Disquisitions of Philosophy: The Word of God determines nothing about them; for
those Expressions, concerning the running of the Sun, and its standing still,
may very well be interpreted, as spoken by way of accommodation to Sense, and
common apprehension; as it is certain, that those of its going down, and running
from one end of the Heavens to the other, and numerous resembling Sayings, are
so to be understood. And when it is elsewhere said, That the Foundations of the
Earth are so fixed, that it cannot be moved at any time, or to that purpose;
It Is supposed, by Learned Men, that nothing else is meant but this, That the
Earth cannot be moved from its Center, which is no prejudice to the Opinion of
its being moved upon it.

For the other Hypothesis of the Moon's being a kind of Earth; the Scripture
has said nothing of it, on either hand; nor can its silence be argumentative
here, since we know, That all Mankind believes many things, of which there is
no mention there: As that there are such places as China, and America, That the
Magnet attracts Iron, and directs to the North, and that the Sea has the
motion of Flux, and Reflux, with ten thousand such other things discovered by
Experience, of which there is not the least hint in the Sacred Volume: And are
not these to be believed, till they can be proved from Scripture? This is
ridiculously to abuse the Holy Oracles, and to extend them beyond their proper
Business and Design.

To argue against this Supposal, as some do, by Queries, What Men are in that
other Earth? Whether fallen? and how saved? is very childish and absurd. He
that holds the Opinion, may confess his ignorance in all these things, without
any prejudice to his Hypothesis of the Moon's being habitable; or the supposal
of its being actually inhabited. For that may be, though no living Man can tell
the Nature and Condition of those Creatures.

But for my part, I assert neither of these Paradoxes; only I have thought fit
to speak thus briefly about them, that they may be left to the freedom of
Philosophical Inquiry, for the Scripture is not concerned in such Queries. And
yet besides this, which might suffice to vindicate the Neoterick Philosophy,
from the charge of being injurious to the Scripture in such Instances, I add,

(3.) The Free Experimental Philosophy which I recommend, does not affirm
either of those so much dreaded Propositions: For neither of them has
sufficient evidence to warrant peremptory and dogmatical Assertions: And
therefore, though perhaps some of those Philosophers may think, they have great
degrees of probability, and are fit for Philosophical Consideration; Yet there
are none, (that I know) who look on them as Certainties, and positive Truths:
It Is contrary to the Genius of their way; to dogmatize for things of so great
an uncertainty; or to be confident against them, where there wants full proof
to assure the Negative. But whether the one be true, or the other, Religion and
the Scriptures are not at all concerned.

Thus briefly of the Slanders that are affixt upon Philosophy, viz. of its
Tendency to Atheism, and disparagement of the Scriptures. The other lesser ones
are answered in the discussion of these.

BUT besides the foul and slanderous Imputations, fastened on Philosophy; there
are some vulgar plausibilities pretended; the chief of which I shall now recite
and answer; It Is said,

(1.) There is too much curiosity in those Inquiries; and St. Paul desired to
know nothing but Christ, and him crucified.

To which I answer, That what is blameable curiosity in things not worth our
pains, or forbidden our scrutiny, is Duty, and laudable endeavor in Matters
that are weighty, and permitted to our search. So that no ill can justly be
fastened upon Philosophical Inquisitions into Nature, on this account, till it
be first proved, That a diligent observance of God's Goodness and Wisdom in his
Works, in order to the using them to his Glory, and the benefit of the World,
is either prohibited or impertinent.

There is indeed such a depth in Nature, that it is never like to be thoroughly
fathomed; and such a darkness upon some of God's Works, that they will not in
this World be found out to Perfection: But however, we are not kept off by any
expressness of Prohibition; Nature is no Holy Mount that ought not to be
touched; yea, we are commanded, To search after Wisdom, and particularly after
this, when we are so frequently called upon to celebrate our Creator for his
Works; and are encouraged by the success of many that have gone before; For
many shall go to and fro, and Science shall be increased. So that our
Iniquiries into Nature are not forbidden; and he that says they are frivolous,
and of no use, when the Art of the Omniscient is the Object, and his Glory, and
the good of Men, the end, asperseth both the Creator and the Creature, and
contradicts his duty to both.

As for the latter clause of the Objection, which urges that Speech of St.
Paul, of his desiring to know nothing but Christ and him crucified, 1 Cor. 2.
2. I return to it, That he that shall duly consider the Discourse of the
Apostle in the verse before, and those that succeed, will perceive, That in
this expression he only slights the affected Eloquence of the Orators and
Rhetoricians; He spoke in plainness and simplicity, and not in those enticing
words of Man's Wisdom, which he desired either not to know at all, or not in
comparison with the plain Doctrines of the Gospel. Or, if any should take the
words in the largest sense, then all sorts of Humane Learning, and all Arts and
Trades are set at naught by the Apostle; And if so, the meaning can be no more
than this, That he preferred the Knowledge of Christ before these; For it is
ridiculous to think, that he absolutely slighted all other Science. The
Knowledge of Christ is indeed the chiefest and most valuable Wisdom, but the
Knowledge of the Works of God has its place also, and ought not quite to be
excluded and despised: Or, if Philosophy be to be slighted, by this Text, all
other Knowledge whatsoever must be condemned by it.

But it will be urged,

(2.) That there is a particular Caution given by the Apostle against
Philosophy, Col. 2. 8. Beware lest any one spoil you through Philosophy.

To this I have said elsewhere, That the Apostle there means either the
pretended Knowledge of the Gnostics, the Genealogies of the Jews, or the
disputing Learning of the Greeks; and perhaps he might have a respect to all
those sorts of Science falsely so called. That the Disputing Philosophy of the
Greeks is concerned in the Caution, will appear very probable, if we consider,
That much of it was built on mere Notion, that occasioned division into
manifold Sects, which managed their Matters by Sophistry and Disputations, full
of nicity and mazes of Wit; and aimed at little, but the pride of mysterious
talk of things, that were not really understood. Such a Philosophy the Apostle
might justly condemn, and all Wise Men do the same, because it is very injurious
to Religion, Real Knowledge, and the Peace of Men. But what is this to that,
which modestly inquires into the Creatures of God, as they are; That collects
the History of his Works, raising Observations from them for the Discovery of
Causes, and Invention of Arts, and Helps for the benefit of Mankind? What
vanity; what prejudice to Religion can be supposed in this? Is this, think we,
that Philosophy, that Wisdom of this World, which the great Apostle censures
and condemns? He is bold that says it, speaks a thing he knows not, and might,
if he pleased, know the contrary; Since the Method of Philosophy I vindicate,
which proceeds by Observation and Experiment to Works, and uses of Life, was
not, if at all, the way of those Times in which the Apostles lived, nor did it
begin to show it self in many Ages after; and therefore cannot be concerned in
St. Paul's Caution to his Colossians; nor in his smartness against worldly
Wisdom elsewhere, for by that we are to understand the Fetches of Policy, the
Nicities of Wit, and Strains of Rhetoric that were then engaged against the
progress of the Gospel: But what is all this to the Philosophy of God's Works;
which illustrates the Divine Glory, and comments upon his Perfections, and
promotes the great Design of Christianity, which is doing good; and in its
proper Nature tends to the disposing of Men's Minds to Virtue and Religion?

But (3.) If Philosophy be so excellent an Instrument to Religion; it may be
asked (and the Question will have the force of an Objection) why the Disciples
and first Preachers of the Gospel were not instructed in it; They were plain
illiterate Men, altogether unacquainted with those Sublimities; God chose the
foolish things of this World, to confound the wise. So that it seems he did not
show this kind of Wisdom that respect which according to our Discourse is due
unto it.

I answer, That this choice the Divine Wisdom made of the Publishers of the
Glad Tidings of Salvation, is no more prejudice or discredit to Philosophy,
than it is to other sorts of Learning; and indeed it is none at all to any: For
the special Reasons of God's making this Election seem such as these, viz. That
his Power might more evidently appear in the wonderful propagation of the
Religion of Christ Jesus, by such seemingly unqualified Instruments; That the
World might not suspect it to be the contrivance of Wit, Subtilty and Art, when
there was so much plainness and simplicity in its first Promoters: And perhaps
too it was done in contempt of the vain and pretended knowledge of the Jews and
Greeks, over which the plainness of the Gospel was made gloriously to triumph.
To which I add this; It might be to show, That God values Simplicity and
Integrity above all Natural Perfectious, how excellent soever. So that there
being such special Reasons for the choosing plain Men to set this grand Affair
on foot in the World, it can be no disparagement to the Knowledge of Nature,
that it was not begun by Philosophers. And to counter-argue this Topic, we may
consider, That

The Patriarchs, and Holy Men of Ancient Times that were most in the Divine
Favor, were well instructed in the Knowledge of God's Works, and contributed
to the good of Men by their useful Discoveries and Inventions. Adam was
acquainted with the Nature of the Creatures; Noah a Planter of Vineyards;
Abraham (as Grotius collects from Ancient History) a great Mystes in the
Knowledge of the Stars. Isaac prosperous in Georgicks. Jacob blessed in his
Philosophical Stratagem of the speckled Rods. Moses a great Man in all kinds of
Natural Knowledge. Bezaleel and Aholiab, inspired in Architecture. Solomon a
deep Naturalist, and a Composer of a voluminous History of Plants. Daniel,
Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariab, skilled in all Learning and Wisdom; Ten times
better, says the Text, than the Magicians and Astrologers in Nebuchadnezzar's
Realm: And to accumulate no more Instances, the Philosophers of the East made
the first Addresses to the Infant Savior.

CONCLUSION.
WE see upon the whole. That there is no shadow of Reason why we should
discourage or oppose modest Inquiries into the Works of Nature; and whatsoever
ignorant Zeal may prompt the common sort to, methinks those of generous
Education should not be of so perverse a frame: Especially it becomes not any
that minister at the Altar, to do so great a disservice to Religion, as to
promote so unjust a Conceit as that of Philosophy's being an Enemy unto it.

The Philosophers were the Priests among the Egyptians, and several other
Nations in Ancient Times; and there was never more need that the Priests should
be Philosophers, than in ours; For we are liable every day to be called out to
make good our Foundations against the Atheist, the Sadduce, and Enthusiast; And
it is the Knowledge of God in his Works that must furnish us with some of the
most proper Weapons of Defense. Hard Names, and damning Sentences; the Arrows
of bitter words, and raging passions, will not defeat those Sons of Anak; these
are not fit Weapons for our Warfare. No, they must be met by a Reason
instructed in the knowledge of Things, and fought in their own Quarters, and
their Arms must be turned upon themselves; This may be done, and the advantage
is all ours. We have Steel and Brass for our Defense, and they have little else
than Twigs and Bull-rushes for the Assault; we have Light, and firm Ground, and
they are lost in Smoke and Mists; They tread among Bogs and dangerous Fens, and
reel near the Rocks and Steeps. And shall we despise our Advantages, and
forsake them? Shall we relinquish our Ground, and our Light, and muffle our
selves up in darkness? Shall we give our Enemies the Weapons, and all the odds,
and so endeavor to insure their Triumphs over us? This is so^tishly to betray
Religion and our selves.

If this Discourse chance to meet with any that are guilty of these dangerous
Follies, it will, I hope, convince them, That they have no reason to be afraid
of Philosophy, or to despise its Aids in the Concerns of Religion. And for
those who never yet thought of this part of Religion to glorify God for his
Works, I wish it may awaken them to more attentive consideration of the wisdom
and goodness that is in them; and so excite their pious acclamations. And to
encourage them to it, I shall adventure to add,

That it seems very probable, that much of the Matter of those Hallelujah's and
triumphant Songs, that shall be the joyful entertainment of the Blessed, will
be taken from the wonders of God's Works; and who knows, but the contemplation
of these, and God in them, shall make up a good part of the employment of those
glorified Spirits; who will then have inconceivable advantages for the
searching into those Effects of Divine Wisdom and Power, beyond what are
possible for us Mortals to attain. And those Discoveries which for ever they
shall make in that immense Treasure of Art, the Universe, must needs fill their
Souls every moment with pleasant astonishment, and inflame their hearts with
the ardours of the highest Love and Devotion, which will breathe forth in
everlasting Thanksgivings. And thus the study of God's Works joined with those
pious Sentiments they deserve, is a kind of anticipation of Heaven; And next
after the contemplations of his Word, and the wonders of his Mercy discovered
in our Redemption, it is one of the best and noblest Employments; the most
becoming a reasonable Creature, and such a one as is taught by the most
reasonable and excellent Religion in the World.

THE AGREEMENT OF Reason and Religion. Essay V.

Essay V. THE AGREEMENT OF Reason and Religion.
THere is not any thing that I know, which has done more mischief to Religion,
than the disparaging of Reason, under pretense of respect and favor to it: For
hereby the very Foundations of Christian Faith have been undermined, and the
World prepared for Atheism. And if Reason must not be heard, the Being of a
God, and the Authority of Scripture, can neither be proved nor defended; and so
our Faith drops to the Ground like an House that has no Foundation:

By the same way, those sickly Conceits, and Enthusiastic Dreams, and unsound
Doctrines that have poisoned our Air, and infatuated the Minds of Men, and
exposed Religion to the scorn of Infidels, and divided the Church, and
disturbed the Peace of Mankind, and involved all the Nation in so much Blood,
and so many Ruins; I say hereby, all these fatal Follies, that have been the
oceasions of so many Mischiefs, have been propagated and promoted. On which
accounts I think I may affirm, with some confidence, That here is the
Springhead of most of the Watters of Bitterness and Strife; And here the
Fountain of the Great Deeps of Atheism and Fanaticism, that are broken up upon
us.

So that there cannot be a more seasonable Service done either to Reason or
Religion, than to endeavor the stopping up this Source of Mischiefs, by
representing the Friendship and fair Agreement that is between them: For hereby
Religion will be rescued from the impious accusation of its being groundless
and imaginary: And Reason also defended against the unjust Charge of its being
profane and irreligious: This we have heard often from indiscreet and hot Men;
For, having entertained vain and unreasonable Doctrines, which they had made an
Interest, and the Badges of a Party, and perceiving that their Darling Opinions
could not stand, if Reason, their Enemy, were not discredited; They set up loud
cries against it, as the grand Adversary of Free Grace and Faith; and zealously
endeavored to run it down under the misapplyed names of Vain Philosophy,
Carnal Reasoning, and the Wisdom of this World; and what have been the Effects
of this proceeding, we have seen and felt.

So that, in my Judgment, it is the great duty of all sober and reasonable Men,
to rise up (as they can) against this Spirit of Folly and Infatuation: And
something I shall attempt now, by showing, That Reason is very serviceable to
Religion; and Religion very friendly to Reason. In order to which, I must

(1.) State, what I mean by Religion? and what by Reason? For there is nothing
in any Matter of Enquiry or Debate that can be discovered, or determined, till
the Terms of the Question are explained, and the Notions settled. The want of
this has been the occasion of a great part of those Confusions we find in
Disputes; and particularly most of the Clamours that have been raised against
Reason in the Affairs of Religion have sprung from it. For while ungrounded
Opinions, and unreasonable Practices are often called Religion, on the one
hand; and vain Imaginations, and false Consequences are as frequently styled
Reason, on the other; It Is no wonder that such a Religion disclaims the use of
Reason; or that such Reason is opposite to Religion. Therefore, in order to my
showing the Agreement between True Religion, and the Genuine Reason, I shall,
with all the clearness that I can, represent the just meaning of the one, and
of the other.

For Religion first; It is taken either strictly for the Worship of God; or in
a more comprehensive sense, for the sum of those Duties we owe to Him: And this
takes in the other, and agrees with the Notation of the Name, which imports
Binding, and implies Duty. Now all Duty is comprised under these two, viz.
Worship and Virtue: Worship comprehends all Duties that immediately relate to
God, as the Object of them; Virtue, all those that respect our Neighbor and
our Selves. So that Religion primarily, and mainly consists in Worship and
Virtue.

But Duty cannot be performed without Knowledge, and some Principles there must
be to direct the Practice: and those that discover the Duties, and guide Men in
the performance of them, are called Principles of Religion.

These are of two sorts; Some (1.) Fundamental and Essential. Others (2.)
Accessory and Assisting.


Fundamental is a Metaphor taken from the Foundation of a Building, upon which
the Fabric is erected, and without which it cannot stand. So that Fundamental
Principles are such, as are presupposed to the Duties of Religion (one, or
more) and such, as are absolutely necessary to the doing of them: of this sort
I shall mention three, viz.

(1.) The Being of God, and the perfections of his Nature. The belief of these
is necessary to all the parts of Religion. He that comes unto God, in any way
of Worship, or Address, must know that he is, and in some measure, what:
Namely, he must know, and own the commonly acknowledged Attributes of his Being.

2. A second necessary Principle is, The Providenee of God, viz. the Knowledge,
That he made us, and not we our selves; that he preserves us, and daily
provides for us the good things we enjoy: This is necessary to the Duties of
Prayer, Praise, and Adoration: And if there be no Providence; Prayer, and
Thanksgiving, and other Acts of Worship, are in vain.

3. A third Fundamental, is, Moral, Good, and Evil. Without this there can be
no confession of Sin; no respect to Charity, Humility, Justice, Purity, or the
rest that we call Virtues.

These will be confes'd to be Fundamentals of Religion: And I shall not dispute
how many more may be admitted into the number. These we are sure are such, in
the strictest sense, for all Religion supposes, and stands upon them: And they
have been acknowledged by Mankind in all Ages and Places of the World.

But besides these, there are other Principles of Religion, which are not in
the same degree of absolute necessity with the former, but yet are highly
serviceable, by way of encouragement and assistance. I reckon four, viz.

(1,) That God will pardon us if we repent. (2.) That he will assist us, if we
endeavor. (3.) That he will accept of Services that are imperfect, if they are
sincere. (4.) That he will righteously reward and punish in another World.

These contain the Matter and Substance of the Gospel; more clearly and
explicitly revealed to the Christian Church; but in some measure owned also by
the Gentiles. So that I may reckon, that the Principles I have mentioned, are
the sum of the Religion of Mankind; I mean, as to the Doctrinal Part of it: and
the Duties recited before, are the Substance of the Practical, which primarily
and most essentially is Religion. And Christianity takes in all these Duties,
and all these Principles; advancing the Duties to higher degrees of Excellency
and Perfection; encouraging them by new Motives and Assistances; and
superadding two other Instances, Baptism, and the Lord's Supper. And for the
Principles, it confirms those of Natural Religion; it explains them further,
and discovers some few new ones: And all these, both of the former and the
latter sort, are contained in the Creed. Here are all the Fundamentals of
Religion, and the main Assisting Principles also.

And though our Church require our assent to more Propositions; yet those are
only Articles of Communion, not Doctrines absolutely necessary to Salvation.
And if we go beyond the Creed for the Essentials of Faith; who can tell where
we shall stop?

The sum is, Religion primarily is Duty; And Duty is All that which God has
commanded to be done by his Word, or our Reasons; and we have the substance of
these in the Commandments: Religion also, in a secondary sense, consists in
some Principles relating to the Worship of God, and of his Son, in the ways of
devout and virtuous living; and these are comprised in that Summary of Belief,
called the Apostles Creed.

This I take to be Religion; and this Religion I shall prove to be reasonable:
But I cannot undertake for all the Opinions some Men are pleased to call
Orthodox; nor for all those that by many private Persons, and some Churches,
are accounted essential Articles of Faith and Salvation. Thus I have stated
what I mean by Religion.

The OTHER thing to be determined, and fixed, is, the proper Notion of Reason.

For this we may consider, that Reason is sometimes taken for Reason in the
Faculty, which is the Understanding; and at other times, for Reason in the
Object, which consists in those Principles and Conclusions, by which the
Understanding is informed. This latter is meant in the Dispute concerning the
Agreement or Disagreement of Reason and Religion. And Reason in this sense, is
the same with natural Truth, which I said is made up of Principles and
Conclusions. By the Principles of Reason we are not to understand the Grounds
of any Man's Philosophy; nor the Critical Rules of Syllogism; but those imbred
Fundamental Notices, that God has implanted in our Souls; such as arise not
from external Objects, nor particular Humors or Imaginations, but are
immediately lodged in our Minds; independent upon other Principles or
Deductions; commanding a sudden assent; and acknowledged by all sober Mankind.

Of this sort are these,

That God is a Being of all Perfection.

That nothing has no Attributes.

That a Thing cannot be, and not be.

That the Whole is greater than any of its Parts.

These, and suchlike, are unto Us, what Instincts are to other Creatures. And
these I call the Principles of Reason.

The Conclusions are those other Notices that are inferred rightly from these;
and by their help, from the Observations of Sense; And the remotest of them
that can be conceived, if it be duly inferred from the Principles of Reason, or
rightly circumstantiated Sense, is as well to be reckoned a Part and Branch of
Reason, as the more immediate Conclusions, that are Principles in respect of
those distant Truths. And thus I have given an account also of the proper
Notion, and Nature of Reason.

I AM to show next, (2.) That Religion is reasonable; and this implies two
things, viz. That Reason is a Friend to Religion; and that Religion is so to
Reason.

I begin with the FIRST: and here I might easily show the great congruity that
there is between that Light, and those Laws, that God has placed in our Souls;
and the Duties of Religion, that by the expressness of his written Word he
requires from us; and demonstrate that Reason teaches All those, excepting
only the two Positives, Baptism and the Holy Eucharist. But there is not so
much need of turning my Discourse that way; and therefore I shall confine it to
the Principles of Religion, which are called Faith, and prove that Reason
exceedingly befriends these.

It does this (I.) By proving some of those Principles; And (II.) By defending
all. For the clearing both, let us consider, That the Principles of Religion
are of two sorts.

Either (1.) Such as are presupposed to Faith; or such as (2.) are formal
Articles of it. Of the first are; The Being of a God; and the Authority of the
Scripture. And of the second, such as are expressly declared by Divine
Testimony; as the Attributes of God; the Incarnation of his Son, and such like.

(I.) For the former, they are proved by Reason; and by Reason only. The others
we shall consider after.

(1.) That the Being of a God, the Foundation of all, is proved by Reason, the
Apostle acknowledges, when he says, That what was to be known of God, was
manifest; and to the Heathen, Romans 1. 19. and he adds, verse. 20. That the
invisible Things from the Creation of the World, are clearly seen, being
understood by the Things that are made. And the Royal Psalmist speaks to the
like purpose, Psalm. 19. The Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the Firmament
shows his handy-Works. And again, Psalm. 148. 3. Praise him Sun and Moon,
praise him ye Stars and Light; which intimates, that these Works of his afford
Matter to our Reasons for Religious Acknowledgments. And Reason proves the
Existence of God, srom the beauty, and order, and ends, and usefulness of the
Creatures; for these are demonstrative Arguments of the Being of a wise and
omnipotent Mind, that has framed all things so regularly and exactly; and that
Mind is God. This Article then, Reason proves, which was the first Branch of
the Particular; and I add, that it is Reason only that can do it; which was the
other. For there are but three things from whence the Existence of any Being
can be concluded, viz. Sense, Revelation, or Reason.

Sense has no more to do here, but to present Matter for our Reasons to work
on; and Revelation supposes the Being of a God, and cannot prove it; for we
can have no security that the Revelation is true, till we are assured it is
from God, or from some commissioned by him. The knowledge of his Being
therefore, must precede our Faith in Revelation; and so cannot be deduced from
it. So that only Reason is left to assure us here. And thus Reason lays the
very Corner Stone of Religion.

The next to this, is the other Principle mentioned, viz.

(2.) The Divine Authority of Scripture: This also is to be proved by Reason,
and only by it. The great Argument for the truth of Scripture, is the Testimony
of the Spirit in the Miracles wrought by Christ and his Apostles: Our Savior
himself uses this Argument to gain credit to his Doctrines, Believe me for the
Work's sake; The Works that I do bear testimony of me; and if I had not done
among them the Works that no other Man did, they had had no sin, John 15. 24.
And the Apostles continually urge that great Miracle, the Resurrection of
Christ from the dead, for the conviction both of the Jews and Gentiles, That he
was the Son of God, and his Doctrines true. Now Miracles are an Argument to our
Reasons, and we reason from them thus: Miracles are God's Seal, and they are
wrought by his Power, and he is true and good, and would not lend these to
Impostors to cheat and abuse Mankind: Therefore whoever works real Miracles for
the confirmation of any Doctrine, it is to be believed, that he is taught of
God, and commissioned to teach us: And that Christ and his Apostles did those
things which are recorded of them, is Matter of Testimony; and Reason clears
the validity of this, by the aggregation of multitudes of Circumstances, which
show, That the first Relators could not be deceived themselves, and would not
deceive us; nor indeed could in the main Matters, if they had designed it. And
the certainty of the conveyance of those things to us is evinced also by
numerous convictive Reasons: So that the matter of Fact is secure; and that
such Doctrines were taught, as are ascribed to those Divine Persons; and those
Persons inspired that penned them, are proved the same way: And so it follows
from the whole, that the Gospel is the Word of God; and the Old Testament is
confirmed by that. Thus Reason proves the Divine Authority of Scripture; and
those other Arguments that use to be produced for it, from its Style, and its
influence upon the Souls of Men; from the excellency of its Design, and the
Providence of God in preserving it; are of the same sort, though not of the
same strength. Reason then proves the Scriptures, and this only; for that they
are from God, is not known immediately by Sense; and there is no distinct
Revelation that is certain and infallible to assure us of it; and so Reason
only remains to demonstrate the Article.

These two great Truths, The Existence of God, and Authority of Scripture, are
the first in our Religion; and they are Conclusions of Reason, as well as
Foundations of Faith. And thus briefly of those Principles of Religion that are
presupposed unto it; we have seen how Reason serves for the Demonstration of
them.

(II.) I COME now to the other sort of Principles, viz. those that are formally
so; They are of two sorts, ^t and pure: The mixed are those that are discovered
by Reason, and declared by Revelation also; and so are Principles both of
Reason, and Faith: Of this kind are the Attributes of God; Moral good, and
evil; and the immortality of Humane Souls. The Principles of pure Faith, are
such, as are known only by Divine Testimony, as the Miraculous Conception, the
Incarnation, and the Trinity.

The first sort Reason proves, as well as Scripture; this I show briefly in the
Instances mentioned.

(1.) That the Divine Attributes are revealed in the Holy Oracles, is very
clear; and as plain it is that they are deduced from Reason; For it is a general
Principle through the World, That God is a Being absolutely perfect; And hence
Reason concludes all the particular Attributes of his Nature; since Wisdom,
Goodness, Power, and the rest, are Perfections, and imply nothing of
imperfection or defect; and therefore ought to be ascribed to the infinitely
perfect Being.

(2.) That there is moral Good, and Evil, is discoverable by Reason, as well as
Scripture. For these are Reason's Maxims; That every Thing is made for an end;
and every Thing is directed to its end by certain Rules: These Rules, in
Creatures of understanding and choice, are Laws; and the transgressing these,
is Vice and Sin.

(3.) The Immortality of our Souls is plain in Scripture; and Reason proves it,
by showing the spirituality of our Natures; and that it does, from the nature
of Sense; and our perception of Spiritual Beings; of Vniversals, and of
Logical, Metaphysical, and Mathematical Notions; From our compounding
Propositions, and drawing Conclusions from them; From the vastness and
quickness of our Imaginations, and liberty of our Wills; all which are beyond
the Powers of Matter, and therefore argue a Being that is Spiritual, and
consequently immortal; which Inference, the Philosophy of Spirits proves.

Also, the Moral Arguments of Reason from the goodness of God, and his Justice
in distributing Rewards and Punishments; the nature of Virtue, and tendencies
of Religious Appetites, conclude, I think, very hopefully, That there is a Life
after this. Thus in short of the Principles I called mixed, which Reason
demonstrates.

BUT for the others, viz. (2.) Those of pure Revelation, Reason cannot prove
them immediately; nor is it to be expected that it should: For they are Matters
of Testimony; and we are no more to look for immediate proof from Reason of
those things, than we are to expect, that abstracted Reason should demonstrate,
That there is such a place as China; or, that there was such a Man as Julius
Caesar: All that it can do here, is to assert and make good the credibility,
and truth of the Testimonies that relate such Matters: and that it does in the
present case, proving the Authority of Scripture; and thereby, in a remoter
way, it demonstrates all the Mysteries of Faith, which the Divine Oracles
immediately discover. And it is no more disparagement to our Reasons, that they
cannot evince those Sacred Articles by their own unaided force, than it is a
disgrace unto them, that they cannot know that there are such things as
Colors, without the help of our Eyes; or that there are Sounds, without the
faculty of Hearing. And if Reason must be called blind upon this account,
because it cannot know of it self such things as belong to Testimony to
discover; the best Eyes in the World may be so accounted, because they cannot
see Sounds; and the best Palate dull and dead, because it cannot taste the
SunBeams.

But though I have said, That Reason cannot of it self immediately prove the
Truths of pure Revelation; Yet (1.) it demonstrates the Divine Authority of the
Testimony that declares them; and that way proves even these Articles. If this
be not enough,

I add thesecond Assertion, (2.) That Reason defends all the Mysteries of Faith
and Religion: And for this, I must desire it be noted, That there are two ways
whereby any thing may be defended, viz. Either (1.) by showing the manner how
the thing is; Or, if that cannot be done, by showing (2.) That it ought to be
believed, though the manner of it be not known: For instance, if any one
denies, That all sorts of Creatures were in the Ark, under pretense, that it is
impossible they should be contained within such a space; He that can show how
this might be, by a distinct enumeration of the kinds of Animals, with due
allowance for the unknown Species, and a computation of the particular capacity
of the Ark; he defends the Sacred History the first way: But if another denies
the conversion of Aaron's Rod into a Serpent, upon the same account, of the
unconceivableness of the manner how it was done; this cannot indeed be defended
the former way: But then it may, by representing that the Power of God is
infinite; and can easily do what we cannot comprehend: and that we ought to
believe upon the credit of the Testimony, (that being well proved to us) though
the manner of this miraculous performance, and such others as it relates, be
unknown. And as it is in this last case, so it is in all the Mysteries of Faith
and Religion; Reason cannot defend them indeed the first way: But it does the
second, by showing, That the Divine Nature is infinite, and our Conceptions
very shallow and finite; that it is therefore very unreasonable in us to
endeavor to pry into the Secrets of his Being, and Actions; and to think that
we can measure and comprehend them: That we know not the Essence and Ways of
acting of the most ordinary and obvious Things of Nature, and therefore must
not expect thoroughly to understand the deeper Things of God, That God has
revealed those Holy Mysteries unto us; and that it is the highest reason in the
World to believe, That what be says is true, though we do not know how these
things are. These are all Considerations of Reason, and by the proposal of
them, it sufficiently defends all the Mysteries that can be proved to be
contained in the Sacred Volume, and shows that they ought to be received by us,
though they cannot be comprehended.

Thus if any one should ask me, How the Divine Nature is united to the Humane?
and declare himself unwilling to believe the Article till he could be
satisfied, how; My answer would be in short, That I cannot tell; and yet I
believe it is so; and he ought to believe the same, upon the credit of the
Testimony, though we are both ignorant of the Manner. In order to which I would
suggest, that we believe innumerable things upon the evidence of our Senses,
whose Nature and Properties we do not know: How the parts of Matter cohere; and
how the Soul is united to the Body, are Questions we cannot answer; and yet
that such things are, we do not doubt: And why, says Reason, should we not
believe God's Revelation of things we cannot comprehend; as well as we do our
Senses about Matters as little understood by us? It Is no doubt reasonable that
we should, and by proving it is so, Reason defends all the Propositions of
Faith and Religion. And when some of these are said to be above Reason, no more
is meant, Than that Reason cannot conceive how those things are; and in that
sense many of the Affairs of Nature are above it too.

Thus I have shown how serviceable Reason is to Religion. I am next to prove,

That (II.) Religion befriends it: And here I offer some Testimonies from the
Holy Oracles to make that good; and in them we shall see, how God himself, and
Christ, and his Apostles, do own and acknowledge Reason.

I consider (1.) that God, Isa. 1. 18. calls the rebellious Israelites to
reason with him; Come now, and let us reason together, says the Lord; and by
Reason he convinces the People of the vanity of Idols, Isa. 44.9. And he
expostulates with their Reasons, Ezekiel. 18. 31. Why will ye die, O ye House of
Israel? And Mich. 6. 3. O my People, what have I done unto thee? And wherein
have I wearied thee? Testify against me. He appeals unto their Reasons, to
judge of his proceedings. Isa. 5. 3. And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and
Men of Judah, judge I pray you between me and my vineyard; are not my ways
equal? and are not your ways unequal? In this he intimates the competency of
their Reasons, to judge of the equity of his Ways, and the iniquity of their
own.

And (2.) our Savior commands the Disciples of the Pharisees, to give unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's;
implying the ability of their Reasons to distinguish between the things that
belonged to God, and those that appertained to Caesar. And he in diverse places
argues from the Principles and Topics of Reason: From that which we call, a
majori ad minus, from the greater to the less, John 13. 14. He shows it to be
the duty of his Disciples, to serve their Brethren in the meanest Offices, and
to wash one another's feet, because he had washed theirs, Verse. 14. enforcing
it by this consideration of Reason; For the Servant is not greater than his
Lord, Verse. 26. and uses the same, John 15. 20. to show, that they must expect
Persecution, because He, their Lord, was persecuted. And Luke 12. 23. He
endeavors to take them off from carking care and solicitude about Meat and
Raiment, by this consideration from Reason, That the Life is more than Meat,
and the Body than Raiment, intimating that God having given them the greater,
there was no doubt but he would bestow the less, which was necessary for the
preservation of it. To these Instances, I add some few from the Topic, a
minori ad majus, from the less to the greater, in the arguings of our Savior.
Thus Mat. 7. 11. If ye being evil know how to give good Gifts to your Children,
how much more shall your Father which is in Heaven give good Things to those
that ask him? The ground of the Consequence is this Principle of Reason, That
God is more benign and gracious, than the tenderest and most affectionate of
our earthly Parents. So Luke 12. 24. He argues, that God will provide for Us,
because he does for the Ravens, since we are better than they; How much more
are ye better than the Fowls? Which arguing supposes this Principle of Reason,
that that Wisdom and Goodness, which are indulgent to the viler Creatures, will
not neglect the more excellent. He proceeds further in the same Argument, by
the consideration of God's clothing the Lillies, and makes the like inference
from it, Verse. 28. If God so clothe the Grass, how much more will be clothe
you? And Mat. 12. He reasons that it was lawful for him to heal on the
Sabbith-day, from the consideration of the general Mercy that is due even to
brute Creatures; What Man shall there be among you that shall have one Sheep,
and if it fall into a Pit on the Sabbath day, will he not lay hold of it to
lift it out? How much more then is a Man better than a Sheep? Verse. 12. Thus
our Savior used Arguments of Reason.

And (3.) the Apostles did so very frequently. S. Paul disproves Idolatry this
way, Acts 17. 29. Forasmuch then as we are the Offspring of God, we ought not
to think that the God head is like unto Gold, or Silver, or Stone graven by
Art. And the same Apostle proves the Resurrection of the Dead by the mention of
seven gross Absurdities that would follow the denial of it, 1 Cor. 1. 15. viz.
If the Dead rise not, Then 1. Christ is not risen; And then 2. our Preaching is
vain, and we false Apostles, And if so, 3. your Faith is vain; And then 4. you
are not justified, but are in your sins; And hence it will follow 5. That those
that are departed in the same Faith are perished; And then 6. Faith in Christ
prosits only in this Life; And if so, 7. we are of all Men the most miserable,
Because we suffer all things for this Faith; From ver. 14. to ver. 19. And the
whole Chapter contains Philosophical Reasoning, either to prove or illustrate
the Resurrection; or to show the difference of glorified Bodies from these. And
S. Peter, in his second Epistle, Chap. 2. shows, that sinful Men must expect to
be punished, because God spared not the Angels that fell. Instances of this
would be endless; these may suffice. And thus of the Second thing also, which I
proposed to make good, viz. That Religion is friendly to Reason; and that
appears, in that God himself, our Savior, and his Apostles own it; and use
Arguments from it, even in Affairs of Faith and Religion.

BUt diverse Objections are urged against the use of Reason in Religion, from
Scripture, and other Considerations: The chief of them I shall consider briefly.

From Scripture it is alleged, (1.) That God will destroy the Wisdom of the
Wise, 1 Cor. 1. 19. And the World by Wisdom knew not God, verse. 21. And not
many wise Men after the flesh are called, verse. 26. And God chose the foolish
things of this World to confound the wise, verse. 27. By which expressions of
wisdom and wise, it is presumed that Humane Reason, and Rational Men, are meant.
But these Interpreters mistake the Matter much, and as they are wont to do, put
mere Arbitrary Interpretations upon Scripture; For by Wisdom here, there is no
cause to understand the Reason of Men; but rather the Traditions of the Jews;
the Philosophy of the Disputing Greeks; and the worldly Policy of the Romans,
who were the (...), The Rulers of that World: That the Jewish Learning in their
Law is meant, the Apostle intimates, when he asks in a way of Challenge, verse.
20. Where is the Scribe? And the word (...), signifies one that was skilled in
their Laws and Customs. And that the Philosophy of the Greeks is to be
understood likewise, we have ground to believe from the other Question in the
same Verse; Where is the Disputer of this World? Which, though some refer to
the Doctors among the Jews also, yet, I humbly think, it may more properly he
understood of the Philosophers among the Grecians; For the Apostle writes to
Greeks, and their Philosophy was notoriously contentious. And lastly, That the
worldly Policies of the Romans are included in this Wisdom of this World, which
the Apostle vilifies, there is cause to think from the sixth Verse of the
second Chapter, where he says, He spoke not in the Wisdom of the Princes of
this World; And it is well known that Policy was their most valued Wisdom; Tu
regere imperio -- To govern the Nations, and promote the grandeur of their
Empire, was the great design and study of those Princes of this World. Now all
these the Apostle sets at naught in the beginning of this Epistle; Because they
were very opposite to the simplicity, and holiness, self-denial, and meekness
of the Gospel. But that is this to the disadvantage of Reason; to which those
sorts of Wisdom are as contrary, as they are to Religion? And by this I am
enabled,

(2.) To meet another Objection urged from 1 (...) 2^ 14. But the natural Man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto
him; neither can be know them, because they are spiritually discerned. Hence
the Enthusiast argues the Universal Inability of Reason in things of Religion;
and its Antipathy to them: Whereas I can apprehend no more to be meant by the
words, than this, viz. That such kind of natural Men as those Scribes, and
Disputers, and Politioians, having their Minds depraved; and prepossessed with
their own Wisdom, were indisposed to receive this, that was so contrary unto
it. And they could not know those things of God, because they were Spiritual,
and so would require a Mind that was of a pure and spiritual frame, viz. free
from that earthly Wisdom of all sorts, which counts those things foolishness;
and which by God is counted so it self; 1 Cor. 3. 19. which place

(3.) Is used as another Scripture against Reason. The Wisdom of this World is
foolishness with God: But it can signify nothing to that purpose, to one that
understands and considers the Apostle's meaning. What is meant by the Wisdom of
this World here, I have declared already; And by the former part of my
Discourse it appears, that whatever is to be understood by it, our Reason
cannot; since that either proves, or defends all the Articles of Religion.

(4.) And when the same Apostle elsewhere, viz. 2 Cor. 1. 12. says, That they
had not their Conversation in fleshly Wisdom; we cannot think he meant Humane
Reason by that; for Reason directs us to live in simplicity, and godly
sincerity, which he opposes to a life in fleshly Wisdom. By this therefore, no
doubt; he means the Reason of our Appetites, and Passions, which is but Sense
and Imagination, (for these blind Guides are the Directors of the Wicked) but
not the Reason of our Minds, which is one of those Lights that illuminate the
Consciences of good Men, and help to guide their Actions. And whereas it is
objected,

(5.) From Col. 2. 8. Beware lest any spoil you through Philosophy. I Answer,
There is nothing can be made of that neither, for the disgrace of Reason; for
the Philosophy the Apostle cautions against, is the same which he warns Timethy
of, 1 Timothy 1. 4. Neither give heed to Fables and endless Genealogies that
minister Questions; calling these, profane, and vain bablings, and oppositions
of Science, falsely so called, 1 Timothy 6. 20. By all which, Learned Interpreters
understand the pretended Knowledge, of which the Gnostics boasted, which
consisted in the fabulous Pedigrees of the Gods under the name of (...); and it
may be the Genealogies of which the Jews were so fond; and the disputing
Philosophy among the Greeks, which was properly, Science falsely so called, and
did minister Questions, and endless Strife; I say, it is very probable these
might be comprehended also: But Reason is no otherwise concerned in all this,
but as condemning, and reproving these dangerous Follies.

THUS we see the Pretensions from Scripture against Reason are vain. But there
are other Considerations by which it uses to be impugned, as,

(1.) OUR Reason is corrupted, and therefore is not fit to meddle in Spiritual
Matters.

To this I say, That Reason, as it is taken for the Faculty of Understanding,
is very much weakened and impaired; It sees but little, and that very dully,
through a Glass darkly, as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 13. And it is very liable
to be misled by our Senses, and Affections, and Interests, and Imaginations; so
that we many times mingle Errors, and false Conceits, with the genuine Dictates
of our Minds, and appeal to them, as the Principles of Truth and Reason, when
they are but the vain Images of our Phansies, or the false Conclusions of
Ignorance and Mistake. If this be meant by the corruption of Reason, I grant
it; and all that can be inferred from it will be; That we ought not to be too
bold and peremptory in defining speculative, and difficult matters; especially
not those that relate to Religion, nor to set our Reasonings against the
Doctrines of Faith and Revelation. But this is nothing to the disreputation of
Reason in the Object, viz. Those Principles of Truth which are written upon our
Souls; or any Conclusions that are deduced from them: These are the same that
they ever were, though we discern them not so clearly as the Innocent State
did: They may be mistaken, but cannot be corrupted. And as our Understandings,
by reason of their weakness, and liableness to Error, may take falsehoods for
some of those; or infer falsely from those that are truly such; so we know, they
do the same by the Scriptures themselves, viz. they very often mis-interpret,
and very often draw perverse conclusions from them; And yet we say not, That
the Word of God is corrupted, nor is the use of Scripture decryed because of
those abuses. But here advantage will be taken to object again,

(2.) That since our natural Understandings are so weak, and so liable to
mistake, they ought not to be used in the Affairs of Religion; and 'twill
signify little to us that there are certain Principles of eternal Reason, if
we either perceive them not, or cannot use them.

To this I Answer, That if on this account we must renounce the use of our
natural Understandings, Scripture will be useless to us also; For how can we
know the meaning of the words that express God's Mind unto us? How can we
compare one Scripture with another? How can we draw any Consequence from it?
How apply general Propositions to our own particular Cases? How tell what is to
be taken in the Letter; what in the Mystery, what plainly; whatin a Figure?
What according to strict and rigorous Truth? What by way of accommodation to
our Apprehensions? I say, without the exrcise of our Understandings, using the
Principles of Reason, none of these can be done, and without them Scripture
will signify either nothing at all, or very little to us. And what can
Religion get this way? This Inference therefore is absurd and impious. All that
can justly be concluded from the weakness of our Understandings, will be what I
intimated before, that we ought to use them with modesty and caution; not that
we should renounce them. He is a Madman, who, because his eyes are dim, will
therefore put them out.

But it may be objected further,

(3.) That which Men call Reason is infinitely various, and that is reasonable
to one, which is very irrational to another; Therefore Reason is not to be
heard. And, I say, Interpretations of Scripture are infinitely various, and one
calls that Scriptural, which another calls Heretical; Shall we conclude
therefore, That Scripture is not to be heard? Reason in it self is the fame all
the World over, though Men's apprehensions of it are various, as the Light of
the Sun is one, though Colors are infinite: And where this is, it ought not to
be denied, because follies and falsehoods pretend relation to it; or call
themselves by that name. If so, farewell Religion too.

But (4.) It Is Socinianism to plead for Reason in the Affairs of Faith and
Religion.

And I Answer, It Is gross Phanaticism to plead against it. This Name is
properly applicable to the Enemies of Reason; But the other of Socinianism is
groundlesly applied to those that undertake for it; and it absurdly supposes
that Socinians are the only rational Men; when as diverse of their Doctrines,
such as, The Sleep, and natural mortality of the Soul, and utter ex^inction,
and annihilation of the Wicked after the Day of Judgment, are very obnoxious to
Philosophy and Reason. And the Socinians can never be confu^ed in their other
Opinions, without using Reason to maintain the Sense and Interpretation of
those Scriptures that are alleged against them. It Is an easy thing, we know,
to give an ugly Name to any thing we dislike; and by this way the most
excellent and sacred Things have been made contemptible and vile. I wish such
hasty Censurers would consider before they call Names; That no Truth is the
worse, because rash Ignorance has thrown dirt upon it. I need say no more to
these frivolous Objections. Those that allege Atheism, and tendency to
Infidelity against the reverence and use of Reason, are disproved by my whole
Discourse: Which shows that the Enemies of Reason most usually serve the ends
of the Infidel, and the Atheist; when as a due use of it destroys the
Pretensions of both.

NOw from the foregoing brief Discourse I shall deduce some Corollaries, that
may be of use for the better understanding of the whole Matter.

1. Reason is certain and infallible; This follows from the state I gave of the
Nature and Notion of Reason in the beginning. It consists in First Principles,
and the Conclusions that are raised from them, and the Observations of Sense.
Now first Principles are certain, or nothing can be so; for every possible
Conclusion must be drawn from those, or by their help; and every Article of
Faith supposes them: And for the Propositions that arise from those certain
Principles, they are certain likewise; For nothing can follow from Truth, but
Truth in the longest Series of Deduction. If Error creep in, there is ill
consequence in the case. And the sort of Conclusions that arise from the
Observations of Sense, if the Sense be rightly circumstantiated, and the
Inference rightly made, are certain also. For if our Senses in all their due
Circumstances deceive us, All is a delusion, and we are sure of nothing: But we
know, that first Principles are certain, and that our Senses do not deceive us,
because God, that bestowed them upon us, is True and Good; and we are as much
assured, that whatever we duly conclude from either of them, is certain;
because whatever is drawn from any Principle, was virtually contained in it.

(2.) I infer, That Reason is, in a sense, the Word of God, viz. That which he
has written upon our Minds and Hearts; as Scripture is that which is written
in a Book. The former is the Word, whereby he has spoken to all Mankind; the
latter is that whereby he has declared his Will to the Church, and his
peculiar People. Reason is that Candle of the Lord, of which Solomon speaks,
Prove. 20. 27. That Light, whereby Christ has enlightened every one that comes
into the World, John 1. 9. And, that Law whereby the Consciences of the Heathen
either accuse, or excuse one another, Romans 2. 15. So that Hierocles spoke well,
when he said, (...): To be persuaded by God and right Reason, is one and the
same thing. And Luther called Philosophy, within its own bounds, The Truth of
God.

(3.) The belief of our Reason is an Exercise of Faith; and Faith is an Act of
Reason. The former part is clear, from the last Particular, and we believe our
Reasons, because we have them from God, who cannot mistake, and will not
deceive. So that relying on them, in things clearly perceived, is trust in
God's veracity and goodness, and that is an exercise of Faith. Thus Luke 12.
The not belief of Reason, that suggests from God's clothing the Lillies, that
He will provide for us, is made by our Savior a defect of Faith, Verse. 28. O
ye of little Faith! And for the other part, that Faith is an Act of Reason,
that is evident also: For, It Is the highest Reason to believe in God revealing.

(4.) No Principle of Reason contradicts any Articles of Faith. This follows
upon the whole. Faith befriends Reason; and Reason serves Religion, and
therefore they cannot clash. They are both certain, both the Truths of God; and
one Truth does not interfere with another, (...), says Aristotle, Truth agrees
with all things that are. Whatsoever contradicts Faith, is opposite to Reason;
for it is a Fundamental Principle of that, That God is to be believed. Indeed
sometimes there is a seeming contradiction between them; But then either
something is taken for Faith, that is but Fancy; or something for Reason,
that is but Sophistry; or the supposed contradiction is an Error and Mistake.

(5.) When any thing is pretended from Reason, against any Article of Faith, we
ought not to cut the Knot, by denying Reason; but endeavor to unite it, by
answering the Argument; and it is certain it may be fairly answered. For all
Heretics argue either from false Principles, or fallaciously conclude from
true ones: So that our Faith is to be defended, not by declaiming against
Reason, in such a case, (which strengthens the Enemy, and, to the great
prejudice of Religion, allows Reason on his side); But we must endeavor to
defend it, either by discovering the falsehood of the Principles he uses in the
name of Reason; or the ill Consequence, which he calls Proof.

(6.) When any thing is offered us for an Article of Faith that seems to
contradict Reason, we ought to see that there be good cause to believe that
this is divinely revealed, and in the sense propounded. If it be, we may be
assured from the former Aphorisms, that the Contradiction is but an Appearance;
and it may be discovered to be so. But if the Contradiction be real, This can
be no Article of Revelation, or the Revelation has not this sense. For God
cannot be the Author of Contradictions; and we have seen, that Reason, as well
as Faith, is his. I mean, the Principles of Natural Truth, as well as those of
Revelation. (...), faith Aristotle, Truth is throughout contrary to falsehood;
and what is true in Divinity, cannot be false in Reason. It Is said indeed in
the Talmud, If two Rabbis differ in Contradictories, yet both have their
Opinions from Moses, and from God. But we are not obliged to such an irrational
kind of Faith; And ought not to receive any thing as an Article of it, in a
sense that palpably contradicts Reason, no more than we may receive any sense
that contradicts the direct Scriptures. Faith and Reason accord, as well as the
Old Testament, and the New; and the Analogy of Reason is to be heeded also,
because even that is Divine and Sacred.

(7.) There is nothing that God has revealed to oblige our Faith, but he has
given us reason to believe that he has revealed it. For though the thing be
never so clearly told me, if I have not reason to think, that God is the
Revealer of what is so declared, I am not bound to believe it; except there be
evidence in the thing it self. For it is not Faith, but vain credulity to
believe every thing that pretends to be from God. So that we ought to ask our
selves a Reason, why we believe the Scripture to be the Revelation of God's
Will, and ought not to assent to any sense put upon it, till we have ground to
think, that that sense is his mind? I say, we must have ground, either from our
particular Reasons, or the Authority of the Church; otherwise our Faith is vain
Credulity, and not Faith in God.

(8.) A Man may hold an erroneous Opinion from a mistaken sense of Scripture,
and deny what is the truth of the Proposition, and what is the right meaning of
the Text, and yet not err in Faith. For Faith is a belief of God revealing: And
if God have not so revealed this, or that, as to give us certain ground to
believe this to be his sense, he has not sufficiently revealed it to oblige
our Faith. So that though I deny such, or such a sense, while I believe it is
not from God; his veracity and Authority is not concerned, since I am ready
however to give a cheerful assent to whatever is clearly and sufficiently
revealed. This Proposition follows from the former, and must be understood only
of those Doctrines that are difficult, and obscurely delivered: And that many
things are so delivered in Scripture, is certain; For some are only hinted, and
spoken occasionally; some figuratively, and by way of Parable, and Allegory;
some according to Men's Conceptions; and some in Ambiguous and Aenigmatical
Phrases; which Obscurities may occasion mistake in those, who are very ready to
believe whatever God says; and when they do, I should be loath to say that
such err in Faith; Though those that wrest plain Texts to a compliance with
their Interests, and their Lusts; Though their Affections may bring their
Judgments to vote with them, yet theirs is Error in Faith with a witness, and
capable of no benefit from this Proposition.

(9.) In searching after the sense of Scripture, we ought to consult the
Principles of Reason, as we do other Scriptures. For we have shown, That Reason
is another part of God's Word. And though the Scripture be sufficient for its
own end, yet Reason must be presupposed unto it; for without this, Scripture
cannot be used, nor compared, nor applied, nor understood.

(10.) The Essentials of Religion are so plainly revealed, that no Man can miss
them, that has not a mighty corrupt bias in his Will and Affections to
infatuate and blind his Understanding. Those Essentials are contained in the
Decalogue and the Creed: Many speculative remoter Doctrines may be true, but
not Fundamental. For it is not agreeable to the goodness or justice of God, that
Men's eternal Interests should depend upon things that are difficult to be
understood, and easily mistaken. If they did, No Man could be secure, but that,
do what he could, he should perish everlastingly, for not believing, or
believing amiss some of those difficult Points, that are supposed necessary to
Salvation; and all those that are ignorant, and of weak understanding, must
perish without help, or they must be saved by implicit Faith in unknown
Fundamentals.

THESE are some Propositions that follow from my Discourse, and from one
another. The better they are considered, the more their force will be
perceived; and I think they may serve for many very considerable purposes of
Religion. Charity, and the peace of Mankind.

ANd now, as a Conclusion to the whole, I shall add some Considerations of the
dangerous tendency of the common practice (at least among the Sects) of
declaiming against Reason as an Enemy to Religion.

(1.) It tends to the introduction of Atheism, Infidelity, and Skepticism; and
has already brought in a flood of these upon us. For what advantage can the
Atheist and Infidel expect greater than this, That Reason is against Religion?
What do they pretend? What can they propose more? If so, there will be no
proving, That there is a God; or, That the Scripture is his Word; and then we
believe gratis; and our Faith hangs upon Humor and Imagination; and that
Religion that depends upon a warm Fancy, and an ungrounded belief, stands but
till a Disease, or a new Conceit alter the Scene of Imagination, and then down
falls the Castle, whose Foundation was in the Air. 'Twas the charge of Julian
the Apostate against the Primitive Christians; (...); That their Wisdom was to
believe; as if they had no ground for their Faith. And those that renounce and
decry Reason, justify Julian in his Charge. If this be so, Religion will have
no bottom, but the Fancy of every one that professes it; and how various and
inconstant a thing Imagination is, every Man knows. These are the Consequences
of defamations of Reason, on the pretended account of Religion; and we have
seen, in multitudes of deplorable Instances, That they follow in practice, as
well as reasoning. Men of corrupt inclinations suspect that there is no Reason
for our Faith and Religion, and so are upon the borders of quitting it; And the
Enthusiast, that pretends to know Religion best, tells them, that these
Suspicions are very true; and thence the Debauchee gladly makes the desperate
Conclusion: Or at least; when they hear that Reason is uncertain, various, and
fallacious, they deny all credit to their Faculties, and become confounded
Scepticks, that settle in nothing. This I take to have been one of the greatest
and most deadly occasions of the Atheism of our days; and he that has rejected
Reason, may be one when he pleases, and cannot reprehend, or reduce any one,
that is so already.

(2.) The denial of Reason in Religion, has been the principal Engine that
Heretics and Enthusiasts have used against the Faith; and that which lays us
open to infinite follies and impostures. Thus the Arrians quarrelled with
(...), because it was deduced by consequence, but not expressed in Scripture.
The Apollinarists would by no means allow of Reason; And St. Austin says of
the Donatists, that they did calumniate, and decry It, to raise prejudice
against the Catholic Faith; and elsewhere, Doctores vestri Hominem dialecticum
fugiendum potius, and cavendum, quam refellendum censuerunt. The Vbiquitarians
defend their Errors, by denying the judgment of Reason; and the Macedonians
would not have the Deity of the Holy Ghost proved by Consequence. The later
Enthusiasts in Germany, and other places, set up loud and vehement outcries
against Reason; and the Lunaticks among us (that agree in nothing else) do yet
sweetly accord in opposing this Carnal Reason; and this indeed is their common
Interest. The impostures of Men's Phansies must not be seen in too much light;
and we cannot dream with our eyes open. Reason would discover the nakedness of
Sacred Whimsies, and the vanity of Mysterious Nonsense; This would disparage
the Darlings of the Brain, and cool the pleasant heats of kindled Imagination:
And therefore Reason must be decryed, because an enemy to madness; and Fancy
set up, under the Notion of Faith and Inspiration. Hence Men had got the trick
to call every thing that was Consequent, and Reasonable, Vain Philosophy; and
every thing that was Sober, Carnal Reasoning. Religion is set so far above
Reason, that at length it is put beyond Sobriety and Sense; and then 'twas fit
to be believed, when 'twas impossible to be proved, or understood. The way to
be a Christian, is first to be a Brute; and to be a true Believer, in this
Divinity, is to be fit for Bedlam. Men have been taught to put out their eyes,
that they might see; and to hoodwink themselves, that they might avoid the
Precipices. Thus have all Extravagancies been brought into Religion, beyond the
Imaginations of a Fever, and the Conceits of Midnight: Whatever is phansied, is
certain; and whatever is vehement, is Sacred; every thing must be believed,
that is dreamed; and every thing that is absurd, is a Mystery. And by this way,
Men in our days have been prepared to swallow every thing, every thing but what
is sober: whatever is wild, will be sucked in like the Air; but what is
reasonable, will be fled like Infection. So that if a Man would recommend any
Doctrine for his life, to those Enemies of Reason, it must be some odd
nonsense, in the clothing of Imagination; and he that can be the Author of a
new kind of Madness, shall lead a Party. Thus has Religion, by the
disparagement of Reason, been made a Medley of Fantastic Trash, spiritualized
into an heap of Vapors, and formed into a Castle of Clouds; and exposed to
every Wind of Humor and Imagination.

(3.) By the same way great advantage is given to the Church of Rome: Which is
well known by those that adhere unto it. And therefore Perronius, Gonterius,
Arnoldus, Veronius, and other Jesuits, have loudly declaimed against Reason;
and the last mentioned, Veronius, presented the World with a Method to
overthrow Heretics, (meaning those of the Protestant Faith) which promised
more than ordinary; And that was, to deny and renounce all Principles of Reason
in Affairs of Faith, absolutely and roundly; and not to vouchsafe an Answer to
any Argument against Transubstantiation, or the other Articles of their new
Faith; but point blank to deny whatever Reason says in such Matters. And he
affirms, that even these Principles of Reason, viz. Non entis non sunt
Attributa; omne quod est, quando est, necesse est esse; and such like, which
are the Foundations of all Reasoning, are dangerous to the Catholic Faith, and
therefore not to be heeded. This Man speaks out, and affirms directly and
boldly, what the other Enemies of Reason mean, but will not own. This is a
Method to destroy Heretics in earnest; but the mischief is, all Christians,
and all other Religions, and all other Reasonings are cut off by the same
Sword. This Book and Method of Veronius was kindly received by the Pope,
privileged by the King of Spain, approved by Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops,
and all the Gallick Clergy, as solid, and for the advantage of Souls; and the
Sorbone Doctors gave it their approbation, and recommended it as the only way
to confute us, and all the other Adversaries of their corrupted Faith and
Religion. Did these know what they did? And did they, think we, understand the
Interest of the Roman Church? If so, we kindly serve their ends, and promote
their Designs in the way, which they account best, while we vilify and
disparage Reason. If this be renounced in Matters of Religion, with what face
can we use it against the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, or any other Points
of the Roman Creed? Would it not be blameless and irreprovable for us to give
up our Understandings implicitly to the Dictates and Declarations of that
Church? May we not follow blindly whatever the Infallible Man at Rome and his
Councils say? And would it not be vain self-contradiction to use Arguments
against their Decrees, though they are never so unreasonable? Or to allege
Consequences from Scripture against any of their Articles, though never so
contrary to the Holy Oracles? How easily may they rejoyn, when we dispute
against them; You argue from Reason, and by Consequences; But Reason is dull
and carnal, and an enemy to the things of the Spirit, and not to be heard in
the high Matters of Religion? And what can we say next, if allow of the
Accusation? I say, by this way, we perfectly disable, or grossly contradict our
selves, in most of our Disputes against the Romanists: And we are very
disingenuous in our dealings, while we use Reason against them, and deny it,
when it is urged against our selves by another sort of Adversaries; which
implies, that when we say, Reason is not to be heard, we mean, it is not to be
heard against us; But it must against the Church of Rome, or any others we can
oppugn by it. So that our denying Reason in Religion is either very humoursom
and partial, or it is a direct yielding up our Cause to our Enemies; and doing
that our selves, which is the only thing they desire, to undo us; and to
promote their own Interests upon our Ruins.

And thus I have represented some of the Mischiefs that arise from the
disparagement of Reason; we see they are great ones, big of many others, and
such as are destructive to all Government, and all the Interests of the sober
part of Mankind. This is properly Fanaticism, and all that we call so, grows
upon it. Here the Enemies of our Church and Government began; upon this they
insisted still, and filled their Books, and Pulpits, and private Corners, with
these Cantings. This was the Engine to overthrow all sober Principles, and
Establishments; with this the People were infutuated, and credit was reconciled
to Gibberish, and Folly; Enthusiasms, and vain Impulses. This is the Food of
Conventicles to this day; the root of their Matter, and the burden of their
Preachments. Let Reason be heard, and tie them to Sense, and most of their
Holders-forth have no more to say. Their spirituality, for which they are
admired, is besides Reason, and against it, rather than above it; And while
this Principle of the enmity between Reason and Religion stands, the People
will think them the more Spiritual Preachets, because they are the less
reasonable: And while they are abused by such a belief, 'twill be impossible
for sober Men to have any success in their endeavors to convince them.

AGAINST Modern Sadducism In the Matter of Witches and Apparitions: Essay VI.

Essay VI. AGAINST MODERN SADDUCISM In the Matter of Witches and Apparitions.
IF any thing were to be much admired in an Age of Wonders, not only of Nature,
(which is a constant Prodigy) but of Men and Manners; it would be to me matter
of astonishment, that Men, otherwise witty and ingenious, are fallen into the
Conceit that there is no such thing as a Witch, or Apparition, but that these
are the Creatures of Melancholy and Superstition, fostered by Ignorance and
Design; which, comparing the confidence of their disbelief, with the evidence
of the things denied, and the weakness of their Grounds, would almost suggest,
that themselves are an Argument of what they deny; and that so confident an
Opinion could not be held upon such inducements, but by some kind of
Witchcraft, and Fascination in the Fancy. And perhaps that evil Spirit, whose
Influences they will not allow in Actions ascribed to such Causes, has a
greater hand and interest in their Proposition than they are aware of. For that
subtle Enemy of Mankind (since Providence will not permit him to mischief us
without our own concurrence) attempts that by stratagem and artifice, which he
could never effect by open ways of acting; and the success of all wiles
depending upon their secrecy, and concealment, his influence is never more
dangerous than when his agency is least suspected. In order therefore to the
carrying on the dark and hidden Designs he manageth against our Happiness, and
our Souls, he cannot expect to advantage himself more, than by insinuating a
belief, That there is no such thing as Himself, but that Fear and Fancy make
Devils now, as they did Gods of old. Nor can he ever draw the assent of Men to
so dangerous an Assertion, while the standing sensible Evidences of his
Existence in his practices by and upon his Instruments, are not discredited and
removed.

It Is doubtless therefore the interest of this Agent of Darkness, to have the
World believe, that the Notion they have of Him, is but a Phantome and Conceit;
and in order thereunto, That the stories of Witches, Apparitions, and indeed
every thing that brings tidings of another World, are but melancholic Dreams,
and pious Romances. And when Men are arrived thus far, to think there are no
Diabolical Contracts or Apparitions, their belief that there are such Spirits,
rests only upon their Faith, and reverence to the Divine Oracles; which we have
little reason to apprehend so great in such Assertors, as to command much from
their assent; especially in such things in which they have corrupt Interests
against their evidence. So that he that thinks there is no Witch, believes a
Devil gratis, or at least upon Inducements, which he is like to find himself
disposed to deny when he pleases. And when Men are arrived to this degree of
Disfidence and Infidelity, we are beholden to them if they believe either
Angel, or Spirit, Resurrection of the Body, or Immortality of Souls. These
things hang together in a Chain of Connection, at least in these Men's
Hypothesis; and it is but an happy chance, if he that has lost one Link, holds
another. So that the Vitals of Religion being so much interessed in this
Subject, it will not be unnecessary employment particularly to discourse it.

And in order to the proof that there have been, and are unlawful Confederacies
with evil Spirits, by virtue of which the hellish Accomplices perform things
above their natural Powers; I must premise, that this being matter of Fact, is
only capable of the evidence of Authority and Sense: And by both these, the
being of Witches and Diabolical Contracts, is most abundantly confirmed. All
Histories are full of the Exploits of those Instruments of Darkness, and the
Testimony of all Ages, not only of the rude and barbarous, but of the most
civilized and polished World, brings tidings of their strange performances. We
have the Attestation of thousands of Eye and Ear-witnesses, and those not of
the easily deceivable Vulgar only, but of wise and grave Discerners; and that,
when no Interest could oblige them to agree together in a common Lie: I say, we
have the light of all these Circumstances to confirm us in the belief of things
done by Persons of despicable Power and Knowledge, beyond the reach of Art, and
ordinary Nature. Standing public Records have been kept of these well-attested
Relations: and Epocha's made of those unwonted Events; Laws in many Nations
have been enacted against those vile practices; Those among the Jews, and our
own, are notorious: such Cases have been often determined near us, by Wise and
Reverend Judges, upon clear and convictive Evidence: and multitudes in our
Nation have suffered death for their vile Compacts with Apostate Spirits. All
these I might largely prove in their particular Instances, but that it is not
needful, since those that deny the being of Witches, do it not out of ignorance
of these Heads of Argument, of which probably they have heard a thousand times;
But from an apprehension that such a belief is absurd, and the things
impossible. And upon these presumptions they contemn all Demonstrations of this
nature, and are ha^dned against Conviction. And I think, those that can believe
all Histories are Romances, that all the wiser World have agreed together to
juggle Mankind into a common belief of ungrounded Fables; that the sound Senfes
of multitudes together may deceive them; and Laws are built upon Chymera's;
that the gravest and wisest Judges have been Murderers; and the sagest Persons
Fools, or designing Impostors: I say, those that can believe this heap of
Absurdities, are either more credulous than those whose credulity they
reprehend; or else have some extraordinary evidence of their Persuasion, viz.
That it is absurd and impossible there should be a Witch or Apparition. And I am
consident, were those little appearances removed, which Men have formed in
their Fancies against the belief of such things; their own Evidence would make
the way to Men's assent, without any more Arguments than what they know already
to enforce it. There is nothing then necessary to be done, in order to the
establishing the belief I would reconcile to Men's minds; but to endeavor the
removal of those Prejudices they have received against it: the chief of which I
shall particularly deal with. And I begin with that bold Assertion, That

I.
(I.) THe NOTION of a Spirit is impossible and contradictious; and consequently
so is that of Witches, the belief of which is founded on that Doctrine.

To which Objection I Answer,

(1.) If the Notion of a Spirit be absurd, as is pretended; that of a GOD, and
a SOUL distinct from Matter, and Immortal, are likewise Absurdities. And then,
That the World was jumbled into this elegant and orderly Fabric by chance; and
that our Souls are only parts of Matter, that came together we know not whence,
nor how; and shall again shortly be dissolved into those loose Atoms that
compound them; That all our Conceptions are but the thrusting of one part of
Matter against another; and the Idea's of our Minds mere blind and casual
Motions: These, and a thousand more the grossest Impossibilities and
Absurdities (consequents of this Proposition, That the Notion of a Spirit is
absurd) will be sad Certainties and Demonstrations. And with such Assertors I
would cease to discourse about Witches and Apparitions, and address my self to
obtain their assent to Truths infinitely more Sacred.

And yet (2.) though it should be granted them, that a Substance immaterial is
as much a contradiction as they can fancy; yet why should they not believe that
the Air, and all the Regions above us, may have their invisible intellectual
Agents of Nature like unto our Souls, be that what it will; and some of them at
least as much degenerate as the vilest and most mischievous among Men. This
Hypothesis will be enough to secure the possibility of Witches and Apparitions.
And that all the upper Stories of the Universe are furnished with Inhabitants,
it is infinitely reasonable to conclude from the Analogy of Nature; Since we see
there is nothing so contemptible and vile in the World we reside in, but has
its living Creatures that dwell upon it; the Earth, the Water, the inferior
Air; the Bodies of Animals, the Flesh, the Skin, the Entrails; the Leaves, the
Roots, the Stalks of Vegetables; yea, and all kind of Minerals in the
Subterrancous Regions: I say, all these have their proper Inhabitants; yea, I
suppose this Rule may hold in all distinct kinds of Bodies in the World, That
they have their peculiar Animals. The certainty of which I believe the
improvement of Microscopical Observations will discover. From whence I infer,
That since this little Spot is so thickly peopled in every Atom of it, '^is
weakness to think that all the vast spaces above, and hollows under Ground, are
desert and uninhabited. And if both the superior and lower Continents of the
Universe have their Inhabitants also, it is exceedingly improbable, arguing from
the same Analogy, that they are all of the mere sensible Nature, but that there
are at least some of the Rational and Intellectual Orders. Which supposed,
there is good foundation for the belief of Witches, and Apparitions; though the
Notion of a Spirit should prove as absurd and unphilosophical, as I judge the
Denial of it. And so this first Objection comes to nothing. I descend then to
the second Prejudice, which may be thus formed in behalf of the Objectors.

II.
(II.) THere are Actions in most of those Relations ascribed to Witches, which
are ridiculous and impossible in the nature of things; such are (1.) their
flying out of Windows, after they have anointed themselves, to remote places.
(2.) Their transformation into Cats, Hares, and other Creatures. (3.) Their
feeling all the hurts in their own Bodies, which they have received in those.
(4.) Their raising Tempests, by mattering some nonsensical words, or performing
Ceremonies alike impertinent, as ridiculous. And (5.) their being sucked in a
certain private place of their Bodies by a Familiar. These are presumed to be
actions inconsistent with the nature of Spirits, and above the powers of those
poor and miserable Agents. And therefore the Objection supposes them performed
only by the Fancy; and that the whole mystery of Witchcraft is but an illusion
of crasie Imagination.

To this aggregate Objection I return,

(1.) In the general: The more absurd and unaccountable these Actions seem the
greater confirmations are they to me of the truth of those Relations, and the
reality of what the Objectors would destroy. For these Circumstances being
exceeding unlikely, (judging by the measures of common belief) it is the greater
probability they are not fictitious: For the contrivers of Fictions use to form
them to as near a conformity as they can to the most unsuspected Realities,
endeavoring to make them look as like Truth, as is possible in the main
Supposals, though withal they make them strange in the Circumstance. None but a
Fool, or Madman, would relate, with a purpose of having it believed, that he
saw in Ireland, Men with Horns on their Heads, and Eyes in their Breasts; or,
if any should be so ridiculously vain, as to be serious in such an incredible
Romance, it cannot be supposed that all Travelers that come into those parts
after him should tell the same Story. There is a large Field in Fiction; and is
all those Relations were Arbitrary Compositions; doubtless the first Romancers
would have framed them more agreeable to the common Doctrine of Spirits; at
least, after these supposed Absurdities had been a thousand times laughed at,
People by this time would have learned to correct those obnoxious
Extravagancies; and though they have not yet more Veracity than the Ages of
Ignorance and Superstition, yet one would expect they should have got more
Cunning. This supposed Impossibility then of these Performances, seems to me a
probable Argument that they are not wilful, and designed Forgeries. And if they
are Fancies, it is somewhat strange, that Imagination, which is the most various
thing in all the World, should infinitely repeat the same Conceits in all Times
and Places.

BUT again (2.) the strange Actions related of Witches, and presumed to be
impossible, are not ascribed to their own Powers, but to the Agency of those
wicked Confederates they employ: And to affirm that those evil Spirits cannot
do that, which we conceit impossible, is boldly to stint the powers of
Creatures, whose Natures and Faculties we know not; and to measure the world of
Spirits by the narrow Rules of our own impotent Beings. We see among our selves
the Performances of some out-go the Conceits and Possibilities of others; and
we know many things may be done by the Mathematics, and Mechanic Artifice,
which common Heads think impossible to be effected by the honest ways of Art
and Nature. And doubtless, the subtilties and powers of those mischievous
Fiends, are as much beyond the reach and activities of the most knowing Agents
among us, as theirs are beyond the wit and ability of the most rustic and
illiterate. So that the utmost that any Man's Reason in the World can amount to
in this particular, is only this, That he cannot conceive how such things can
be performed; which only argues the weakness and imperfection of our Knowledge
and Apprehensions; not the impossibility of those Performances: and we can no
more from hence form an Argument against them, than against the most ordinary
Effects in Nature. We cannot conceive how the F^ is formed in the Womb; nor as
much as how a Plant springs from the Earth we tread on; we know not how our
Sou^s move the Body; nor how these distant and extreme Natures are united; as I
have shown elsewhere. And if we are igno^t of the most obvious things about us,
and the most considerable within our selves, it is then no wonder that we know
not the Constitution and Powers of the Creatures, to whom we are such
strangers. Briefly then, Matters of Fact well proved ought not to be denied,
because we cannot conceive how they can be performed. Nor is it a reasonable
method of Inference, first to presume the thing impossible, and thence to
conclude that the Fact cannot be proved: On the contrary, we should judge of the
Action by the Evidence, and not the Evidence by our Fancies about the Action.
This is proudly to exalt our own Opinions above the clearest Testimonies, and
most sensible Demonstrations of Fact: and so to give the Lie to all Mankind,
rather than distrust the Conceits of our bold Imaginations. But yet further,

(3.) I think there is nothing in the Instances mentioned, but what may as well
be accounted for by the Rules of Reason and Philosophy, as the ordinary Affairs
of Nature. For in resolving Natural Phenomenon, we can only assign the probable
Causes, showing how things may be, not presuming how they are: And in the
particulars under our Examen, we may give an account how it is possible, and not
unlikely, that such things (though somewhat varying from the common road of
Nature) may be acted. And if our narrow and contracted Minds can furnish us
with apprehensions of the way and manner of such Performances, (though perhaps
not the true ones) it is an argument that such things may be effected by
Creatures, whose Powers and Knowledge are so vastly exceeding ours. I shall
endeavor therefore briefly to suggest some things that may render the
possibility of such performances conceivable, in order to the removal of this
Objection, that they are Contradictions, and impossible.

For the first then, That the Confederate Spirit should transport the Witch
through the Air to the place of general Rendezvous, there is no difficulty in
conceiving it; and if that be true which great Philosophers affi^, concerning
the real separability of the Soul from the Body without Death, there is yet
less; for then it is easy to apprehend, that the Soul, having left its gross
and sluggish Body behind it, and being clothed only with its immed^e Vehicle of
Air, or more subtle Matter, may be quickly conducted to any place, by those
officious Spirits that attend it. And though I adventure to affirm nothing
concerning the truth and certainty of this Supposition, yet I must needs say,
it does not seem to me unreasonable. Our experience of Apoplexies, Epilepsies,
Ecstasies, and the strange things Men report to have seen during those
Deliquiums, look favorably upon this Conjecture; which seems to me to
contradict no Principle of Reason or Philosophy, since Death consists not so
much in the actual separation of Soul and Body, as in the indisposition and
unfitness of the Body for Vital Union, as an excellent Philosopher has made
good: On which Hypothesis, the Witch's anointing her self before she takes her
flight, may perhaps serve to keep the Body tenantable, and in fit disposition
to receive the Spirit at its return. These things, I say, we may conceive,
though I affirm nothing about them; and there is not any thing in such
Conceptions but what has been owned by Men of Worth and Name, and may seem
fair and accountable enough to those who judge not altogether by customary
Opinions. There Is a saying of the great Apostle that seems to countenance this
Platonic Notion; what is the meaning else of that Expression, [ Whether in the
Body, or out of the Body, I cannot tell] except the Soul may be separated from
the Body without death? Which if it be granted po^sible, it is sufficient for my
purpose. And

(2.) The Transformations of Witches into the shapes of other Animals, upon the
same supposal is very conceivable, since then it is easy to apprehend, that the
Power of Imagination may form those passive and pliable Vehicles into those
shapes, with more ease than the Fancy of the Mother can the stubborn Matter of
the Foetus in the Womb, as we see it frequently does in the Instances that
occur of Signatures, and monstrous Singularities; and perhaps sometimes the
confederate Spirit puts tricks upon the Senses of the Spectators, and those
Shapes are only Illusions.

But then (3.) when they feel the Hurts in their gross Bodies, that they
receive in their Aerie Vehicles, they must be supposed to have been really
present, at least in these latter; and it is no more difficult to apprehend how
the hurts of those should be translated upon their other Bodies, than how
Diseases should be inflicted by the Imagination, or how the Fancy of the Mother
should wound the Foetus, as several credible Relations do attest.

And (4.) for their raising Storms and Tempests; They do it not by their own,
but by the power of those Evil Spirits that reside in the Air; and the
Ceremonies that are enjoined them, are doubtless nothing else but
Entertainments for their Imaginations, and likely designed to persuade them,
that they do those strange things themselves.

(Lastly,) For their being sucked by the Familiar, I say, (1.) we know so
little of the nature of Demons and Spirits, that it is no wonder we cannot
certainly divine the Reason of so strange an Action. And yet (2.) we may
conjecture at some things that may render it less improbable; For some have
thought that the Genii (whom both the Platonical and Christian Antiquity
thought embodied) are recreated by the Reeks and Vapors of Humane Blood, and
the Spirits that proceed from them: Which supposal (if we allow them Bodies) is
not unlikely, every thing being refreshed and nourished by its Like. And that
they are not perfectly abstract from all Body and Matter (besides the Reverence
we owe to the wisest Antiquity) there are several considerable Arguments I
could allege to render exceeding probable. Which things supposed, the Devil's
sucking the Sorceress is no great wonder, nor difficult to be accounted for. Or
perhaps (3.) this may be only a Diabolical Sacrament, and Ceremony to confirm
the Hellish Covenant. To which I add, (4.) That the Familiar does not only suck
the Witch, but in the Action infuseth some poisonous Ferrnent into Her, which
gives her Imagination and Spirits a Magical Tincture, whereby they become
mischievously influential; and the word V^nesica intimates some such Matter.
Now that the Imagination has a mighty power in Operation, is feen in the
just-now mentioned Signatures, and Diseases that it causes; and that the Fancy
is modified by the Qualities of the Blood and Spirits, is too evident to need
proof. Which things supposed, it is plain to conceive that the Evil Spirit
having breathed some vile Vapor into the Body of the Witch, it may taint her
Blood and Spirits with a noxious Quality, by which her infected Imagination,
heightened by Melancholy, and this worse Cause, may do much hurt upon Bodies
that are obnoxious to such Influences. And it is very likely that this Ferment
disposes the Imagination of the Sorceress to cause the mentioned (...), or
separation of the Soul from the Body, and may perhaps keep the Body in fit
temper for its reentry; as also it may facilitate transformation, which, it may
be, could not be effected by ordinary and unassisted Imagination.

Thus we see, it is not so desperate to form an apprehension of the manner of
these odd Performances; and though they are not done the way I have described,
yet what I have said may help us to a conceit of the Possibility, which
suffices for my purpose. And though the Hypothesis I have gone upon will seem
as unlikely to some, as the things they attempt to explain are to others; yet I
must desire their leave to suggest, that most things seem improbable
(especially to the conceited, and opinionative) at first proposal: And many
great Truths are strange and odd, till Custom and Acquaintance have reconciled
them to our Fancies. And I Will presume to add on this occasion, (though I love
not to be confident in affirming) that there is none of the Platonical
Supposals I have used, but what I could make appear to be indifferently fair
and reasonable.

III.
(III.) A Another Prejudice against the being of Witches, is, That it is very
improbable that the Devil, who is a Wise and Mighty Spirit, should be at the
beck of a poor Hag, and have so little to do, as to attend the Errands and
impotent Lusts of a sil'y old Woman.

To which I might answer, (1.) That it is much more improbable that all the
World should be deceived in Matters of Fact, and Circumstances of the clearest
Evidence and Conviction; than that the Devil, who is wicked, should be also
unwise; and that He that persuades all his Subjects and Accomplices out of
their Wits, should himself act like his own Temptations and Persuasions. In
brief, there is nothing more strange in this Objection, than that Wickedness is
Baseness and Servility; and that the Devil is at leisure to serve those whom he
is at leisure to tempt, and industrious to ruin. And (2.) I see no necessity
to believe that the Devil is always the Witches Confederate; but perhaps it may
fitly be considered, whether the Familiar be not some departed Humane Spirit,
forsaken of God and Goodness, and swallowed up by the unsatiable desire of
Mischief and Revenge; which possibly by the Laws, and capacity of its State, it
cannot execute immediately. And why we should presume that the Devil should
have the liberty of wandering up and down the Earth and Air, when he is said to
be held in the Chains of Darkness; and yet that the separated Souls of the
Wicked, of whom no such thing is affirmed in any Sacred Record, should be
thought so imprisoned, that they cannot possibly wag from the Place of their
Confinement, I know no shadow of Conjecture. This Conceit I Am confident has
prejudiced many against the belief of Witches and Apparitions, they not being
able to conceive that the Devil should be so ludicrous, as Appearing Spirits
are sometimes reported to be in their Frolicks; and they presume, that Souls
departed never revis^ the free and open Regions; which confidence, I know
nothing to justify: For since good Men in their state of separation are said
to be (...), why the wicked may not be supposed to be (...) in the worst sense
of the word, I know nothing to help me to imagine. And if it be so supposed
that the Imps of Witches are sometimes wicked Spirits of our own Kind and
Nature, and possibly the same that have been Sorcerers and Witches in this
Life: This Supposal may give a fairer and more probable account of many of the
Actions of Sorcery and Witchcraft, than the other Hypothesis, that they are
always Devils. And to this Conjecture, Pleadventure to subjoin another, which
also has its probability, viz. (3.) That it is not impossible but that the
Familiars of Witches are a vile kind of Spirits, of a very inferior
Constitution and Nature, and none of those that were once of the highest
Hierarchy, now degencrated into the Spirits we call Devils. The common division
of Spirits is in my Opinion much too general; and why may we not think, there
is as great a variety of Intellectual Creatures in the Invisible World, as of
Animals in the Visible? And that all the Superior, yea, and Inferior Regions,
have their several kinds of Spirits differing in their natural Perfections; as
well as in the Kinds and Degrees of their Depravities? Which if we suppose,
it is very probable that those of the basest and meanest Orders are they, who
submit to the mentioned Servilities: And thus the Sagess, and grandeur of the
Prince of Darkness need not be brought in question on this Occasion.

IV.
But (IV.) the Opinion of Witches seems to some to accuse Providence; and to
suggest that it has exposed Innocents to the fury and malice of revengeful
Fiends; yea, and supposes those most obnoxious, of whom we might most
reasonably expect a more special care and protection; most of the cruel
practices of those presumed Instruments of Hell, being upon Children, who as
they least deserve to be deserted, by that Providence that superintends all
things, so they most need its Guardian Influence.

To this so specious an Objection, I have these things to answer.

(1.) Providence is an unfathomable Depth; and if we should not believe the
Phenomenon of our Senses, before we can reconcile them to our Notions of
Providence, we must be grosser Scepticks than ever yet were extant. The
miseries of the present Life, the unequal distributions of Good and Evil, the
ignorance and barbarity of the greatest part of Mankind, the fatal
disadvantages we are all under, and the hazard we run of being eternally
miserable and undone; these, I say, are things that can hardly be made
consistent with that Wisdom and Goodness that we are sure has made, and
mingled it self with all things. And yet we believe there is a beauty, and
harmony, and goodness in that Providence, though we cannot unriddle it in
particular Instances; nor, by reason of our ignorance and imperfection, clear
it from contradicting Appearances; and consequently, we ought not to deny the
being of Witches and Apparitions, because they will create us some difficulties
in our Notions of Providence. (2.) Those that believe that Infants are Heirs of
Hell, and Children of the Devil as soon as they are disclosed to the World,
cannot certainly offer such an Objection; for what is a little trifling pain of
a moment, to those eternal Tortures; to which, if they die as soon as they are
born, according to the tenor of this Doctrine, they are everlastingly exposed?
But however the case stands as to that, it is certain, (3.) That Providence has
not secured them from other violences they are obnoxious to, from cruelty and
accident; and yet we accuse It not, when a whole Townful of Innocents fall a
Victim to the rage and ferity of barbarous Executioners in Wars and Massacres.
To which I add, (4.) That it is likely the mischief is not so often done by the
evil Spirit immediately, but by the malignant influence of the Sorceress, whose
power of hurting consists in the forementioned Ferment, which is infused into
her by the Familiar. So that I am apt to think there may be a power of real
Fascination in the Witches Eyes and Imaginations, by which for the most part
she acts upon tender Bodies. Nescio quis teneros oculus -- For the Pestilential
Spirits being darted by a spightful and vigorous Imagination from the Eye, and
meeting with those that are weak and passive in the Bodies which they enter,
will not fail to infect them with anoxious Quality, that makes dangerous and
strange Alterations in the Person invaded by this poisonous Influence: which
way of acting by subtle and invisible Instruments, is ordinary and familiar in
all natural Efficiencies. And it is now past question, that Nature for the most
part acts by subtle Streams and Aporrhaea's of Minute Particles, which pass
from one Body to another. Or however that be, this kind of Agency is as
conceivable as any of those Qualities, which our Ignorance has called Sympathy
and Antipathy; the reality of which we doubt not, though the manner of Action
be unknown. Yea, the thing I speak of is as easy to be apprehended, as how
Infection should pass in certain tenuious Streams through the Air, from one
House to another; or, as how the biting of a mad Dog should fill all the Blood
and Spirits with a venomous and malign Ferment; the application of the Virtue
doing the same in our Case, as that of Contact does in this. Yea, some kinds of
Fascination are performed in this grosser and more sensible way, as by
striking, giving Apples, and the like, by which the contagious Quality may be
transmitted, as we see Diseases often are by the touch. Now in this way of
conjecture, a good account may be given why Witches are most powerful upon
Children and timorous Persons, viz. because their Spirits and Imaginations
being weak and passive, are not able to resist the fatal Influence; whereas Men
of bold Minds, who have plenty of strong and vigorous Spirits are secure from
the Contagion; as in pestilential Airs clean Bodies are not so liable to
Infection as other tempers. Thus we see it is likely enough, that, very often,
the Sorceress her self does the mischief; and we know, de facto, that
Providence does not always secure us from one another Injuries; And yet I must
confess, that many times also the Evil Spirit is the Mischievous Agent; though
this Confession draw on me another Objection, which I next propose;

V.
(V.) IT may be said, that if Wicked Spirits can hurt as by the Direction, and
at the desire of a Witch, one would think they should have the same power to do
us injury without instigation or compact; and if this be granted, it is a wonder
that we are not always annoyed and infested by them. To which

I Answer, (1.) That the Laws, Liberties, and Restraints of the Inhabitants of
the other World are to us utterly unknown; and in this way, we can only argue
our selves into confessions of our Ignorance, which every Man must acknowledge
that is not as immodest, as ignorant. It must be granted by all that own the
Being, Power, and Malice of Evil Spirits, that the security we enjoy is
wonderful, whether they act by Witches or not; and by what Laws they are kept
from making us a Prey, to speak like Philosophers, we cannot tell: Yea, why
they should be permitted to tempt and ruin us in our Souls, and restrained
from touching or hurting us in our Bodies, is a Mystery not easily accountable.
But (2.) though we acknowledge their Power to vex and torment us in our Bodies
also; yet a reason may be given why they are less frequent in this kind of
mischief, viz. because their main Designs are levelled against the interest and
happiness of our Souls, which they can best promote, when their Actions are
most sly and secret; whereas did they ordinarily persecute Men in their Bodies,
their Agency and wicked Influence would be discovered, and make a mighty noise
in the World, whereby Men would be awakened to a suitable and vigorous
opposition, by the use of such means as would engage Providence to rescue them
from their rage and cruelties; and at last defeat them in their great purposes
of undoing us eternally. Thus we may conceive that the security we enjoy may
well enough consist with the power and malice of those Evil Spirits; and upon
this account may suppose that Laws of their own may prohibit their unlicenc'd
Injuries; not from any goodness there is in their Constitutions, but in order
to the more successful carrying on the projects of the Dark Kingdom; as
Generals forbid Plunder, not out of love to their Enemies, but in order to
their own success. And hence (3.) we may suppose a Law of Permission to hurt us
at the instance of the Sorceress, may well stand with the polity of Hell, since
by gratifying the wicked Person, they encourage her in malice and revenge, and
promote thereby the main ends of their black Confederacy, which are to
propagate Wickedness, and to ruin us in our eternal Interests. And yet (4.)
it is clear to those that believe the History of the Gospel, that Wicked Spirits
have vexed the Bodies of Men, without any instigation that we read of; and at
this day it is very likely that many of the strange Accidents and Diseases that
befall us, may be the infliction of Evil Spirits, prompted to hurt us only by
the delight they take in mischief. So that we cannot argue the improbability of
their hurting Children and others by Witches, from our own security and freedom
from the Effects of their Malice, which perhaps we feel in more Instances than
we are aware of.

VI.
(VI.) ANother Prejudice against the belief of Witches, is, a presumption upon
the enormous force of Melancholy and Imagination; which without doubt can do
wonderful Things, and beget strange Persuasions; and to these Causes some
ascribe all the Effects of Sorcery and Witchcraft. To which I reply briefly;
and yet I hope sufficiently,

(1.) That to resolve all the clear Circumstances of Fact, which we find in
well-attested, and confirmed Relations of this kind, into the power of
deceivable Imagination, is to make Fancy the greater Prodigy; and to suppose,
that it can do stranger Feats than are believed of any other kind of
Fascination. To think that Pins and Nails, for instance, can, by the power of
Imagination be conveyed within the Skin; or that Imagination should deceive so
many as have been Witnesses in Objects of Sense, in all the Circumstances of
Discovery: This, I say, is to be infinitely more credulous than the Assertors
of Sorcery, and Demoniack Contracts. By the same reason it may be believed,
that all the Battles and strange Events of the World, which our selves have not
seen, are but Dreams and fond Imaginations, and like those that are fought in
the Clouds, when the Brains of the deluded Spectators are the only Theater of
those fancied Transactions. And (2.) to deny evidence of Fact, because their
Imagination may deceive the Relators, when we have no reason to think so, but a
bare presumption, that there is no such thing as is related, is quite to
destroy the Credit of all Humane Testimony, and to make all Men liars in a
larger sense than the Prophet concluded in his haste. For not only the
Melancholic and the Fanciful, but the Grave and the Sober, whose Judgments we
have no reason to suspect to be tainted by their Imaginations, have from their
own knowledge and experience made reports of this Nature. But to this it will
possibly be rejoined, and the Reply will be another prejudice against the
belief for which I contend, viz.

VII.
(VII.) THat it is a suspicious circumstance that Witchcraft is but a Fancy,
since the Persons that are accused, are commonly poor and miserable old Women,
who are overgrown with discontent and melancholy, which are very imaginative;
and the Persons said to be bewitched, are for the most part Children, or People
very weak, who are easily imposed upon, and are apt to receive strong
Impressions from nothing: whereas were there any such thing really, it is not
likely, but that the more cunning and subtle Desperado's, who might the more
successfully carry on the mischievous Designs of the Dark Kingdom, should be
oftener engaged in those black Confederacies; and also one would expect Effects
of the Hellish Combination upon others than the Innocent and the Ignorant.

To which Objection it might perhaps be enough to return, (as has been above
suggested) that nothing can be concluded by this and suchlike arguings, but
that the policy and menages of the Instruments of Darkness are to us altogether
unknown, and as much in the dark as their Natures; Mankind being no more
acquainted with the Reasons and Methods of Action in the other World, than poor
Cottagers and Mechanics are with the Intrigues of Government, and Reasons of
State. Yea, peradventure (2.) it is one of the great Designs, (as it is certainly
the Interest) of those wicked Agents and Machinators, industriously to hide
from us their influences and ways of acting, and to work, as near as is
possible, incognito; upon which supposal it is easy to conceive a reason, why
they most commonly work by, and upon the weak and ignorant, who can make no
cunning Observations, or tell credible Tales to detect their Artifice. Besides
(3.) it is likely a strong Imagination, that cannot be weakened or disturbed by
a busy and subtle Ratiocination, is a necessary requisite to those wicked
Performances; without doubt an heightened and obstinate Fancy has a great
influence upon impressible Spirits; yea, and as I have conjectured before, on
the more passive and susceptible Bodies: And I am very apt to believe, that
there are as real Communications and Intercourses between our Spirits, as there
are between Material Agents; which secret Influences, though they are unknown
in their Nature, and ways of acting, yet they are sufficiently felt in their
Effects: For Experience attests, that some by the very majesty and greatness of
their Spirits, discovered by nothing but a certain noble Air that accompanies
them, will bear down others less great and generous, and make them sneak before
them; and some, by I know not what stupifying virtue, will tie up the Tongue,
and confine the Spirits of those who are otherwise brisk and voluble. Which
thing supposed, the influences of a Spirit possessed of an active and enormous
Imagination, may be malign and fatal where they cannot be resisted; especially
when they are accompanied by those poisonous Reaks that the Evil Spirit breaths
into the Sorceress, which likely are shot out, and applied by a Fancy heightened
and prepared by Melancholy and Discontent. And thus we may conceive why the
Melancholic and Envious are used upon such occasions, and for the same reason
the Ignorant, since Knowledge checks and controuls Imagination; and those that
abound much in the Imaginative Faculties, do not usually exceed in the
Rational. And perhaps (4.) the Demon himself uses the Imagination of the
Witch so qualified for his purpose, even in those Actions of mischief which are
more properly his; for it is most probable, that Spirits act not upon Bodies
immediately, and by their naked Essence, but by means proportionate and suitable
Instruments that they use; upon which account likely it is so strictly required,
that the Sorceress should belive, that so her Imagination might be more at the
Devotion of the mischievous Agent: And for the same reason also Ceremonies are
used in Enchantments, viz. for the ^egetting this Diabolical Faith, and
heightning the Fancy to a degree of strength and vigor sufficient to make it a
fit Instrument for the designed performance. These I think are Reasons of
likelihood and probability, why the Hellish Confederates are mostly the
Ignorant and the Melancholic.

VIII.
(VIII.) THe frequent Impostures that are met with in this kind, beget in some
a belief, that all such Relations are Forgeries and Tales; and if we urge the
evidence of a Story for the belief of Witches or Apparitions, they will produce
two as seemingly strong and plausible, which shall conclude in Mistake or
Design; inferring thence, that all others are of the same quality and credit.
But such Arguers may please to consider,

(1.) That a single Relation for an Affirmative, sufficiently confirmed and
attested, is worth a thousand Tales of forgery and imposture, from whence an
Universal Negative cannot be concluded. So that though all the Objector's
Stories be true, and an hundred times as many more such Deceptions; yet one
Relation, wherein no fallacy or fraud could be suspected for our Affirmative,
would spoil any Conclusion could be erected on them. And

(2.) It seems to me a belief sufficiently bold and precarious, that all these
Relations of Forgery and Mistake should be certain, and not one among all those
which attest the Affirmative Reality, with Circumstances as good as could be
expected or wished, should be true; but all fabulous and vain. Certainly they
have no reason to object Credulity to the Assertors of Sorcery and Witchcraft,
that can swallow so large a Morsel. And I desire such Objectors to consider,

(3.) Whether it be fair to infer, that because there are some Cheats and
Impostors, that therefore there are no Realities. Indeed frequency of deceit
and fallacy will warrant a greater care and caution in examining; and
scrupulosity and shiness of assent to things whereing fraud has been
practiced, or may in the least degree be suspected: But, to conclude, because
that an old Woman's Fancy abused her, or some knavish Fellows put tricks upon
the ignorant and timorous, that therefore whole Assizes have been a thousand
times deceived in judgment upon Matters of Fact, and numbers of sober Persons
have been forsworn in things wherein Perjury could not advantage them; I say,
such Inferences are as void of Reason, as they are of Charity and good Manners.

IX.
(IX.) IT may be suggested further, That it cannot be imagined what design the
Devil should have in making those solemn Compacts, since Persons of such
dehauch'd and irreclaimable Dispositions as those with whom he is supposed to
confederate, are pretty securely his antecedently to the Bargain, and cannot be
more so by it, since they cannot put their Souls out of possibility of the
Divine Grace, but by the Sin that is unpardonable; or if they could so dispose
and give away themselves, it will to some seem very unlikely, that a great and
mighty Spirit should oblige himself to such observances, and keep such a-do to
secure the Soul of a silly Body, which 'twere odds but it would be His, though
He put himself to no further trouble than that of his ordinary Temptations.

To which Suggestions 'twere enough to say, that it is sufficient if the thing
be well proved, though the Design be not known: and to argue negatively a fine,
is very unconclusive in such Matters. The Laws and Affairs of the other World
(as has been intimated) are vastly differing from those of our Regions, and
therefore it is no wonder we cannot judge of their Designs, when we know nothing
of their Menages, and so little of their Natures. The ignorant looker-on cannot
imagine what the Limner means by those seemingly rude Lines and Scrawls which
he intends for the Rudiments of a Picture; and the Figures of Mathematick
Operation are nonsense, and dashes at a venture to one un-instructed in
Mechanics: We are in the dark to one another Purposes and Intendments; and
there are a thousand Intrigues in our little Matters, which will not presently
confess their Design, even to sagacious Inquisitors. And therefore it is folly
and incogitancy to argue any thing one way or other from the designs of a sort
of Beings, with whom we so little communicate; and possibly we can no more aim,
or guess at their Projects and Designments, than the gazing Beast can do at
ours, when they see the Traps and Gins that are laid for them, but understand
nothing what they mean. Thus in general.

But I attempt something more particularly, in order to which I must premise,
That the Devil is a name for a Body Politic, in which there are very different
Orders and Degrees of Spirits, and perhaps in as much variety of place and
state, as among our selves; so that it is not one and the same Person that makes
all the Compacts with those abused and seduced Souls, but they are diverse, and
those it is like of the meanest and basest quality in the Kingdom of Darkness;
which being supposed. I offer this account of the probable Design of those
wicked Agents, viz. That having none to rule or tyrannize over within the
Circle of their own Nature and Government, they affect a proud Empire over us
(the desire of Dominion and Authority being largely spread through the whole
circumference of degenerated Nature, especially among those, whose pride was
their original transgression) every one of these then desires to get Vassals to
pay him homage, and to be employed like Slaves in the services of his Lusts and
Appetites; to gratify which desire, it is like it may be allowed by the
constitution of their State and Government, that every wicked Spirit shall have
those Souls as his property, and particular Servants and Attendants, whom he
can catch in such Compacts; as those wild Beasts that we can take in hunting
are ours, by the allowance of our Laws; and those Slaves that a Man has
purchased, are his peculiar Goods, and the Vassals of his Will. Or rather those
deluding Fiends are like the seducing Fellows we call Spirits, who inveigle
Children by their false and flattering Promises, and carry them away to the
Plantations of America, to be servilely employed there in the Works of their
Profit and Advantage. And as those base Agents will humor and flatter the
simple unwary Youth, till they are on Shipboard, and without the reach of
those that might rescue them from their hands: In like manner the more
mischievous Tempter studies to gratify, please, and accommodate those he deals
with in this kind, till Death has lan^h'd them into the Deep, and they are
past the danger of Prayers, Repentance, and Endeavors; and then He uses them
as pleases Him. This account I think is not unreasonable, and 'twill fully
answer the Objection. For though the Matter be not as I have conjectured, yet
'twill suggest a way how it may be conceived, which destroys the Pretense, That
the Design is inconceivable.

X.
But (X.) we are still liable to be questioned, how it comes about that those
proud and insolent Designers practice in this kind upon so few, when one would
expect, that they should be still trading this way, and everywhere be driving
on the Project, which the vileness of Men makes so feisable, and would so much
serve the interest of their Lusts.

To which, among other things, that might be suggested, I return,

(1.) That we are never liable to be so betrayed and abused, till by our vile
Dispositions and Tendencies we have forfeited the care and oversight of the
better Spirits; who, though generally they are our guard and defense against
the malice and violence of Evil Angels, yet it may well enough be thought, that
sometimes they may take their leave of such as are swallowed up by Malice,
Envy, and desire of Revenge, qualities most contrary to their Life and Nature;
and leave them exposed to the invasion and solicitations of those Wicked
Spirits, to whom such hateful Attributes make them very suitable. And if there
be particular Guardian Angels, (as it is not absurd to fancy) it may then well
be supposed, that no Man is obnoxious to those Projects and Attempts, but only
such whose vile and mischievous Natures have driven from them their protecting
Genius. Against this dereliction to the power of Evil Spirits, it is likely
enough what some affirm, that the Royal Psalmist directs that Prayer, Psalm. 71.
9, 10. Cast me not off in the time of old Age; forsake me not when my strength
fails. For -- They that keep my Soul [(...), as the LXX and the Vulgar Latin,
Qui custodiunt animam meam] they take counsel together, saying, God has
forsaken him, persecute him and take him, for there is none to deliver him.
(2.) It Is very probable, that the stare wherein they are, will not easily
permit palpable Intercourses between the bad Genii, and Mankind, since it is
probable that their own Laws and Government do not allow their frequent
excursions into this World. Or, it may with as great likelihood be supposed,
that it is a very hard and painful thing for them, to force their thin and
tenuious Bodies into a visible consistence, and such Shapes as are necessary
for their designs in their correspondencies with Witches. For in this Action
their Bodies must needs be exceedingly compressed, which cannot well be without
a painful sense. And this is perhaps a reason why there are so few Apparitions,
and why Appearing Spirits are commonly in such have to be gone, viz. that they
may be delivered from the unnatural pressure of their tender Vehicles, which I
confess holds more in the Apparitions of Good, than of Evil Spirits; most
Relations of this kind, describing their discoveries of themselves as very
transient, (though for those the Holy Scripture records, there may be peculiar
reason why they are not so) whereas the Wicked Ones are not altogether so quick
and hasty in their Visits: The reason of which probably is, the great subtilty
and tenuity of the Bodies of the former, which will require far greater degrees
of compression, and consequently of pain, to make them visible; whereas the
latter are more feculent and gross, and so nearer allied to palpable
Consistencies, and more easily reduceable to Appearance and Visibility.

At this turn, I have again made use of the Platonic Hypothesis, That Spirits
are embodied, upon which indeed a great part of my Discourse is grounded: And
therefore I hold my self obliged to a short account of that supposal. It seems
then to me very probable from the Nature of Sense, and Analogy of Nature. For
(1.) we perceive in our selves, that all Sense is caused and excited by Motion
made in Matter; and when those Motions which convey sensible Impressions to the
Brain, the Seat of Sense, are intercepted, Sense is lost: So that, if we
suppose Spirits perfectly to be disjoined from all Matter, it is not conceivable
how they can have the sense of any thing; For how material Objects should any
way be perceived, or felt without Vital Union with Matter, it is not possible to
imagine. Nor does it (2.) seem suitable to the Analogy of Nature, which uses
not to make precipitious leaps from one thing to another, but usually proceeds
by orderly steps and gradations: whereas were there no order of Beings between
Us, (who are so deeply plunged into the grossest Matter) and pure, unbodied
Spirits, 'twere a mighty jump in Nature. Since then the greatest part of the
World consists of the finer portions of Matter, and our own Souls are
immediately united unto these, it is exceeding probable, that the nearer orders
of Spirits are vitally joined to such Bodies; and so, Nature by degrees
ascending still by the more refined and subtle Matter, gets at last to the
pure (...) or immaterial Minds, which the Platonists made the highest Order of
Created Beings. But of this I have discoursed elsewhere, and have said thus
much of it at present, because it will enable me to add another Reason of the
unfrequency of Apparitions and Compacts, viz.

(3.) Because it is very likely, that these Regions are very unsuitable, and
disproportioned to the frame and temper of their Senses and Bodies; so that
perhaps the Courser Spirits can no more bear the Air of our World, than Bats
and Owls can the brightest Beams of Day: Nor can the Purer and Better any more
endure the noysom Steams, and poisonous Reeks of this Dunghill Earth, than the
Delicate can bear a Confinement in nasty Dungeons, and the foul squalid Caverns
of uncomfortable Darkness. So that it is no more wonder, that the better Spirits
no oftener appear, than that Men are not more frequently in the Dark Hollows
underground. Nor is it any more strange that evil Spirits so rarely visit us,
than that Fishes do not ordinarily fly in the Air, (as it is said one sort of
them does) or that we see not the Batt daily fluttering in the Beams of the
Sun. And now by the help of what I have spoken under this Head, I am provided
with some things wherewith to disable another Objection, which I thus propose:

XI.
(XI.) IF there be such an intercourse between Evil Spirits and the Wicked; How
comes it about that there is no correspondence between Good Angels, and the
Virtuous; since without doubt these are as desirous to propagate the Spirit and
Designs of the Upper and better World, as those are to promote the Interest of
the Kingdom of Darkness?

Which way of arguing is still from our Ignorance of the State and Government
of the other World, which must be confessed, and may, without prejudice to the
Proposition I defend. But particularly, I say, (1.) That we have ground enough
to believe, that Good Spirits do interpose in, yea, and govern our Affairs. For
that there is a Providence reaching from Heaven to Earth, is generally
acknowledged; but that this supposes all things to be ordered by the immediate
influence, and interposal of the Supreme Deity, some think, is not very
Philosophical to suppose; since, if we judge by the Analogy of the Natural
World, all things we see are carried on by the Ministry of Second Causes, and
Intermediate Agents. And it does not seem so Magnificent and Becoming an
apprehension of the Supreme Numen, to fancy his immediate Hand in every trivial
Management. But it is exceeding likely to conjecture, that much of the
Government of us, and our Affairs, is committed to the better Spirits, with a
due subordination and subserviency to the Will of the chief Rector of the
Universe. And it is not absurd to believe, that there is a Government that runs
from Highest to Lowest, the better and more perfect orders of Being still
ruling the inferior and less perfect. So that some one would fancy that
perhaps the Angels may manage us, as we do the Creatures that God and Nature
have placed under our Empire and Dominion. But however that is, That God rules
the Lower World by the Ministry of Angels, is very consonant to the Sacred
Oracles. Thus, Deuteronomy. 32. 8, 9. When the Most High divided the Nations their
Inheritance, when he separated the Sons of Adam, he set the Bounds of the
People, (...), according to the number of the Angels of God, as the Septuagint
renders it; the Authority of which Translation, is abundantly credited and
asserted, by its being quoted in the New Testament, without notice of the
Hebrew Text; even there where it differs from it, as Learned Men have observed.
We know also that Angels were very familiar with the Patriarchs of old; and
Jacob's Ladder is a Mystery; which imports their ministering in the Affairs of
the Lower World. Thus Origin and others understand, that to be spoken by the
Presidential Angels, Jer. 51. 9. We would have healed Babylon, but she is not
healed: forsake her, and let us go. Like the Voice heard in the Temple before
the taking of Jerusalem by Titus, (...). And before Nebuchadnezzar was sent to
learn Wisdom and Religion among the Beasts, He sees a Watcher, according to the
LXX, an Angel, and an Holy One come down from Heaven, Dan. 4. 13. who
pronounces the sad Decree against Him, and calls it the Decree of the
Watchers, who very probably were the Guardian Genii of of Himself and his
Kingdom. And that there are particular Angels that have the special Rule and
Government of particular Kingdoms, Provinces, Cities, yea and of Persons, I
know nothing that can make improbable: The instance is notorious in Daniel, of
the Angels of Persia and Graecia, that hindered the other that was engaged for
the Concerns of Judaea; yea, our Savior himself tells us, that Children have
their Angels; and the Congregation of Disciples supposed that St. Peter had
his: Which things, if they be granted, the good Spirits have not so little to
do with Us, and our Matters, as is generally believed. And perhaps it would not
be absurd, if we referred many of the strange Thwarts, and unexpected Events,
the Disappointments and lucky Coincidences that befall us, the unaccountable
Fortunes and Successes that attend some lucky Men, and the unhappy Fates that
dog others that seem born to be miserable; the Fame and Favor that still waits
on some without any conceivable Motive to allure it, and the general neglect of
others more deserving, whose worth is not acknowledged; I say, these and
suchlike odd things, may with the greatest probability be resolved into the
Conduct and Menages of those Invisible Supervisors, that preside over, and
govern our Affairs.

But if they so far concern themselves in our Matters, how is it that they
appear not to maintain a visible and confessed Correspondence with some of the
better Mortals, who are most fitted for their Communications and their
Influence? To which I have said some things already, when I accounted for the
unfrequency of Apparitions; and I now add what I intend for another return to
the main Objection, viz.

(2.) That the Apparition of Good Spirits is not needful for the Designs of the
better World, whatever such may be for the Interest of the other. For we have
had the Appearance and Cohabitation of the Son of God; we have Moses and the
Prophets, and the continued Influence of the Spirit, the greatest Arguments to
strengthen Faith, the most powerful Motives to excite our Love, and the noblest
Encouragements to quicken and raise our Desires and Hopes, any of which are
more than the Apparition of an Angel; which would indeed be a great
gratification of the Animal Life, but 'twould render our Faith less noble and
less generous, were it frequently so assisted: Blessed are they that believe,
and yet have not seen. Besides which, the Good Angels have no such Ends to
prosecute, as the gaining any Vassals to serve them, they being Ministering
Spirits for our good, and no self-designers for a proud and insolent Dominion
over us. And it may be perhaps not impertinently added, That they are not
always evil Spirits that appear, as is, I know not well upon what grounds,
generally imagined; but that the extraordinary detections of Murders, latent
Treasures, falsified and unfulfill'd Bequests, which are sometimes made by
Apparitions, may be the courteous Discoveries of the better, and more benign
G^nii. Yea, it is not unlikely, that those Warnings that the World sometimes
has of approaching Judgments and Calamities by Prodigies, and sundry odd
Phenomenon, are the kind Informations of some of the Inhabitants of the Upper
World. Thus was Jerusalem forewarned before its sacking by Antiochus, by those
Aerie Horsemen that were seen through all the City for almost forty days
together, 2 Mac. 5. 2, 3. And the other Prodigious Portents that fore-ran its
Destruction by Titus: which I mention, because they are notorious Instances.
And though, for mine own part, I scorn the ordinary Tales of Prodigies, which
proceed from superstitious Fears, and unacquaintance with Nature, and have been
used to bad Purposes by the Zealous and the Ignorant; Yet I think that the
Arguments that are brought by a late very Ingenious Author, to conclude against
such Warnings and Predictions in the whole kind, are short and inconsequent,
and built upon too narrow Hypotheseis. For if it be supposed, that there is a
sort of Spirits over us, and about us, who can give a probable guess at the
more remarkable Futurities, I know not why it may not be conjectured, that the
kindness they have for us, and the appetite of foretelling strange things, and
the putting the World upon expectation, which we find is very grateful to our
own Natures, may not incline them also to give us some general notice of those
uncommon Events which they foresee. And I yet perceive no reason we have to
fancy, that whatever is done in this kind, must needs be either immediately
from Heaven, or from the Angels, by extraordinary Commission and Appointment.
But it seems to me not unreasonable to believe, that those officious Spirits
that oversee our Affairs, perceiving some mighty and sad Alterations at hand,
in which their Charge is much concerned, cannot choose, by reason of their
affection to us, but give us some seasonable hints of those approaching
Calamities; to which also their natural desire to foretell strange things to
come, may contribute to incline them. And by this Hypothesis, the fairest
Probabilities, and strongest Ratiocinations against Prodigies, may be made
unserviceable. But this only by the way.

I desire it may be considered further,

(3.) That God himself assords his Intimacies, and converses to the better
Souls, that are prepared for it; which is a privilege infinitely beyond
Angelical Correspondence.

I confess the proud and fantastic Pretenses of many of the conceited
Melancholists in this Age, to Divine Communion, have prejudiced diverse
intelligent Persons against the belief of any such happy vouchsafement; so that
they conclude the Doctrine of Immediate Communion with the Deity in this Life
to be but an high flown Notion of warm Imagination, and over-lushious
self-flattery; and I acknowledge I have my self had thoughts of this nature,
supposing Communion with God to be nothing else but the exercise of Virtue, and
that Peace, and those Comforts which naturally result from it.

But I have considered since, that God's more near and immediate imparting
himself to the Soul that is prepared for that happiness by Divine Love,
Humility, and Resignation, in the way of a vital Touch and Sense, is a thing
possible in it self, and will be a great part of our Heaven; That Glory is
begun in Grace, and God is pleased to give some excellent Souls the happy
Ante-past; That Holy Men in ancient Times have sought and gloried in this
Enjoyment, and never complain so sorely as when it was withheld, and
interrupted; That the Expressions of Scripture run infinitely this way, and the
best of Modern good Men, do from their own experience attest it; That this
spiritualizeth Religion, and renders its Enjoyments more comfortable and
delicious; That it keeps the Soulunder a vivid Sense of God, and is a grand
security against Temptation; That it holds it steady amid the Flatteries of a
Prosperous State, and gives it the most grounded Anchorage, and support amid
the Waves of an adverse Condition; That it is the noblest encouragement to
virtue, and the biggest assurance of an happy Immortality; I say, I considered
these weighty things, and wondered at the carelessness, and prejudice of Thoughts
that occasioned my suspecting the reality of so glorious a Privilege; I saw how
little reason there is in denying Matters of inward Sense, because our selves
do not feel them, or cannot form an apprehension of them in our Minds: I am
convinced that things of gust and relish must be judged by the sentient and
vital Faculties, and not by the noetical Exercises of speculative
Understandings: And upon the whole, I believe infinitely that the Divine Spirit
affords its sensible Presence, and immediate Beatihck Touch to some rare Souls,
who are divested of carnal Self, and mundane Pleasures, abstracted from the
Body by Prayer and Holy Meditation; spiritual in their Desires, and calm in
their Affections; devout Lovers of God, and Virtue, and tenderly affectionate
to all the World; sincere in their Aims, and circumspect in their Actions;
enlarged in their Souls, and clear in their Minds: These I think are the
dispositions that are requisite to fit us for Divine Communion; and God
transacts not in this near way, but with prepared Spirits who are thus disposed
for the manifestation of his Presence, and his Influence: And such I believe he
never fails to bless with these happy foretasts of Glory.

But for those that are Passionate and Conceited, Turbulent and Notional,
Confident and Immodest, Imperious and Malicious; That dote upon Trifles, and
run fiercely in the ways of a Sect; that are lifted up in the apprehension of
the glorious Prerogatives of themselves and their Party, and scorn all the
World besides; For such, I say, be their Pretensions what they will, to Divine
Communion, Illapses, and Discoveries, I believe them not; Their Fancies abuse
them, or they would us. For what Communion has Light with Darkness, or the
Spirit of the Holy One with those, whose Genius and Ways are so unlike him: But
the other excellent Souls I described, will as certainly be visited by the
Divine Presence, and Converse, as the Chrystaline Streams are with the Beams of
Light, or the fitly prepared Earth, whose Seed is in it self, will be actuated
by the Spirit of Nature.

So that there is no reason to Object here the want of Angelical
Communications, though there were none vouchsafed us, since good Men enjoy the
Divine, which are infinitely more satisfactory and indearing.

And now I may have leave to proceed to the next Objection, which may be made
to speak thus:

XII.
(XII.) THe belief of Witches, and the wonderful things they are said to
perform by the help of the Confederate Demon, weakens our Faith, and exposes
the World to Infidelity in the great Matters of our Religion. For if they by
Diabolical Assistance, can inflict and cure Diseases, and do things so much
beyond the comprehension of our Philosophy, and activity of common Nature; What
assurance can we have, that the Miracles that confirm our Gospel were not the
Effects of a Compact of like nature, and that Devils were not cast out by
Beelzebub? If Evil Spirits can assume Bodies, and render themselves visible in
humane Likeness; What security can we have of the reality of the Resurrection
of Christ? And if, by their help, Witches can enter Chambers invisibly through
Key-holes, and little unperceived Crannies, and transform themselves at
pleasure; What Arguments of Divinity are there in our Savior's showing himself
in the midst of his Disciples, when the Doors were shut, and his
Transfiguration in the Mount? Miracles are the great Inducements of Belief; and
how shall we distinguish a Miracle from a Lying Wonder; a Testimony from
Heaven, from a Trick of the Angels of Hell; if they can perform things that
astonish and confound our Reasons, and are beyond all the Possibilities of
Humane Nature? To this Objection I reply;

(1.) The Wonders done by Confederacy with Wicked Spirits, cannot derive a
suspicion upon the undoubted Miracles that were wrought by the Author and
Promulgers of our Religion, as if they were performed by Diabolical Compact,
since their Spirit, Endeavors, and Designs, were notoriously contrary to all
the Tendencies, Aims, and Interests of the Kingdom of Darkness. For, as to the
Life and Temper of the Blessed and Adorable JESUS, we know there was an
incomparable sweetness in his Nature, Humility in his Manners, Calmness in his
Temper, Compassion in his Miracles, Modesty in his Expressions, Holiness in all
his Actions, Hatred of Vice and Baseness, and Love to all the World; all which
are essentially contrary to the Nature and Constitution of Apostate Spirits,
who abound in Pride and Rancour, Insolence and Rudeness, Tyranny and Baseness,
Universal Malice, and Hatred of Men: And their Designs are as opposite, as
their Spirit and their Genius. And now, Can the Sun borrow its Light from the
Bottomless Abyss? Can Heat and Warmth flow in upon the World from the Regions
of Snow and Ice? Can Fire freeze, and Water burn? Can Natures, so infinitely
contrary, communicate, and jump in Projects, that are destructive to each
others known Interests? Is there any Balsam in the Cockatrices Egg? or, Can the
Spirit of Life flow from the Venom of the Asp? Will the Prince of Darkness
strengthen the Arm that is stretched out to pluck his Usurped Scepter, and his
Spoils from him? And will he lend his Legions, to assist the Armies of his
Enemy against him? No, these are impossible Supposals; No intelligent Being
will industriously and knowingly contribute to the Contradiction of its own
Principles, the Defeature of its Purposes, and the Ruin of its own dearest
Interests. There is no fear then, that our Faith should receive prejudice from
the acknowledgement of the Being of Witches, and Power of Evil Spirits, since
it is not the doing wonderful things that is the only Evidence that the Holy
JESUS was from God, and his Doctrine True; but the conjunction of other
Circumstances, the Holiness of his Life, the Reasonableness of his Religion,
and the Excellency of his Designs, added credit to his Works, and strengthened
the great Conclusion, That he could be no other than the Son of God, and
Savior of the World. But besides, I say,

(2.) That since Infinite Wisdom and Goodness rules the World, it cannot be
conceived, that they should give up the greatest part of Men to unavoidable
deception. And if Evil Angels, by their Confederates are permitted to perform
such astonishing things, as seem so evidently to carry God's Seal and Power
with them, for the confirmation of Falsehoods, and gaining credit to Impostors,
without any Counter-evidence to disabuse the World; Mankind is exposed to sad
and fatal Delusion: And to say that Providence will suffer us to be deceived in
things of the greatest Concernment, when we use the best of our Care and
Endeavors to prevent it, is to speak hard things of God; and in effect to
affirm, That He has nothing to do in the Government of the World, or does not
concern himself in the Affairs of poor forlorn Men: And if the Providence and
Goodness of God be not a security unto us against such Deceptions, we cannot be
assured, but that we are always abused by those mischievous Agents, in the
Objects of plain Sense, and in all the Matters of our daily Converses. If One
that pretends he is immediately sent from God, to overthrow the Ancient Fabric
of Established Worship, and to erect a New Religion in His Name, shall be born
of a Virgin, and honored by a Miraculous Star; proclaimed by a Song of seeming
Angels of Light, and Worshipped by the Wise Sages of the World; Revered by
those of the greatest Austerity, and admired by all for a Miraculous Wisdom,
beyond his Education and his Years: If He shall feed Multitudes with almost
nothing, and fast himself beyond all the possibilities of Nature: If He shall
be transformed into the appearance of extraordinory Glory, and converse with
departed Prophets in their visible Forms: If He shall Cure all Diseases without
Physic or Endeavor, and raise the Dead to Life after they have stunk in their
Graves: If He shall be honored by Voices from Heaven, and attract the
Universal Wonder of Princes and People: If he shall allay Tempests with a Beck,
and cast out Devils with a Word: If he shall foretell his own Death
particularly, with its Tragical Circumstances, and his Resurrection after it:
If the Veil of the most famous Temple in the World shall be Rent, and the Sun
darkened at his Funeral: If He shall, within the time foretold, break the Bonds
of Death, and lift up his Head out of the Grave: If Multitudes of other
departed Souls shall arise with Him, to attend at the Solemnity of his
Resurrection: If He shall, after Death, visibly Converse, and Eat, and Drink
with diverse Persons, who could not be deceived in a Matter of clear Sense, and
ascend in Glory in the presence of an astonished and admiring Multitude: I say,
if such a One as this should prove a Diabolical Impostor, and Providence should
permit him to be so credited and acknowledged; What possibility were there then
for us to be assured, that we are not always deceived? yea, that our very
Faculties were not given us only to delude and abuse us? And if so, the next
Conclusion is, That there is no God that judges in the Earth; and the best,
and most likely Hypothesis will be, That the World is given up to the
Government of the Devil. But if there be a Providence that superviseth us, (as
nothing is more certain) doubtless it will never suffer poor helpless Creatures
to be inevitably deceived, by the craft and subtilty of their mischievous
Enemy, to their undoing; but will without question take such care, that the
Works wrought by Divine Power for the confirmation of Divine Truth, shall have
such visible Marks and Signatures, if not in their Nature, yet in their
Circumstances, Ends, and Designs, as shall discover whence they are, and
sufficiently distinguish them from all Impostures and Delusions; And though
wicked Spirits may perform some strange things that may excite wonder for a
while, yet He has, and will so provide, that they shall be basfled and
discredited; as we know it was in the Case of Moses and the Egyptian Magicians.

These things I count sufficient to be said to this last, and shrewdest
Objection; Though some, I understand, except, that I have made it stronger than
the Answer I have applied. That I have urged the Argument of Unbelievers home,
and represented it in its full strength, I suppose can be no matter of just
reproof; For to triumph over the weakness of a Cause, and to overlook its
strength, is the trick of shallow and interessed Disputers, and the worst way
to defend a Good Cause, or confute a Bad One. I have therefore all along urged
the most cogent Things I could think of, for the Interest of the Objectors,
because I would not impose upon my Reader or my self; and the stronger I make
their Premises, the more shall I weaken their Conclusion, if I answer them;
which whether I have done, or not, I refer my self to the Judgments of the
Ingenious and Considerate; from whom I should be very glad to be informed in
what particular Points my Discourse is defective; General Charges are no
Proofs, nor are they easily capable of an Answer. Yet, to the mentioned
Exception, I say,

That the strength of the Objection is not my fault, for the Reasons alleged;
and for the supposed incompetency of my return, I propose, that if the
Circumstances of the Persons, Ends, and Issues be the best Notes of Distinction
between true Miracles and Forgeries, Divine and Diabolical Ones, I have then
said enough to secure the Miracles of our Savior, and the Holy Men of Ancient
Times. But if these Objectors think they can give us any better, or more
infallible Criteria, I desire them to weigh what I have offered about Miracles
in some of the following Leaves, before they enter that Thought among their
Certainties. And if their other Marks of Difference will hold, notwithstanding
those Allegations, I suppose the inquisitive believing World would be glad to
know them; and I shall have particular Obligations to the Discoverer, for the
strength with which he will thereby assist my Answer.

But till I see that, I can say nothing stronger; or if I saw it, which I shall
not in haste expect, I should not be convinced but that the Circumstances of
Difference which I have noted, are abundantly sufficient to disarm the
Objection; and to show, that though Apparitions, Witchcraft, and Diabolical
Wonders are admitted: yet none of these can fasten any Slu^, or ground of
dangerous Doubt upon the miraculous performances of the H. Jesus and his
Apostles. If the dissatisfied can show it, I shall yield my self an humble
Proselite to their Reasons; but till I know them, the General Suggestion will
not convince me.

Now, besides what I have directly said to the Main Objection, I have this to
add to the Objectors, That I could wish they would take care of such
Suggestions; which, if they overthrow not the Opinion they oppose, will
dangerously affront the Religion they would seem to acknowledge. For he that
says, That if there are Witches, there is no way to prove that Christ Jesus
was not a Magician, and Diabolical Impostor, puts a deadly Weapon into the
hands of the Infidel, and is himself next door to the Sin against the Holy
Ghost: of which, in order to the persuading greater tenderness and caution in
such Matters, I give this short account.

THe Sin against the Holy Ghost is said to be Unpardonable; by which sad
Attribute, and the Discourse of our Savior, Mat. 12. from the 22 to the 33
Verse, we may understand its Nature. In order to which we consider, That since
the Mercies of God, and the Merits of his Son, are infinite, there is nothing
can make a Sin unpardonable, but what makes it incurable; and there is no Sin
but what is curable by a strong Faith, and a vigorous Endeavor: For all things
are possible to him that believes. So that, That which makes a Sin incurable,
must be somewhat that makes Faith impossible, and obstructs all means of
Conviction. In order to the finding which, we must consider the Ways and
Methods the Divine Goodness has taken, for the begetting Faith, and cure of
Infidelity: which it attempted, first, by the Prophets, and Holy Men of Ancient
Times, who, by the excellency of their Doctrine, the greatness of their
Miracles, and the holiness of their Lives, endeavored the Conviction and
Reformation of a stubborn and unbelieving World. But though few believed their
report, and Men would not be prevailed on by what they did, or what they said;
yet their Infidelity was not hitherto incurable, because further means were
provided in the Ministry of John the Baptist, whose Life was more severe, whose
Doctrines were more plain, pressing and particular: and therefore 'twas
possible that He might have succeeded. Yea, and where He failed, and could not
open Men's Hearts and Eyes, the Effect was still in possibility, and it might be
expected from Him that came after, to whom the Prophets and John were but the
Twilight and the Dawn. And though His miraculous Birth, the Song of Angels, the
Journey of the Wise Men of the East, and the correspondence of Prophesies, with
the Circumstances of the first appearance of the Wonderful Infant: I say,
though these had not been taken notice of, yet was there a further provision
made for the cure of Infidelity, in his astonishing Wisdom, and most excellent
Doctrines; For, He spoke as never Man did. And when these were despised and
neglected, yet there were other Means toward Conviction and Cure of Unbelief,
in those mighty Works that bore Testimony of Him, and wore the evident Marks of
Divine Power in their Foreheads. But when after all, These clear and
unquestionable Miracles which were wrought by the Spirit of God, and had
eminently his Superscription on them, shall be ascribed to the Agency of Evil
Spirits, and Diabolical Compact, as they were by the malicious and spightful
Pharisees; when those great and last Testimonies against Infidelity, shall be
said to be but the Tricks of Sorcery, and Complotment with Hellish
Confederates; This is Blasphemy in the highest, against the Power and Spirit of
God, and such as cuts of all means of Conviction, and puts the Unbeliever
beyond all possibilities of Cure. For Miracles are God's Seal, and the great
and last Evidence of the truth of any Doctrine. And though, while these are
only dis-believed as to the Fact, there remains a possibility of Persuasion;
yet, when the Fact shall be acknowledged, but the Power Blasphemed, and the
Effects of the Adorable Spirit maliciously imputed to the Devils; such a
Blasphemy, such an Infidelity is incurable, and consequently unpardonable. I
say, in sum, the Sin against the Holy Ghost seems to be a malicious imputation
of the Miracles wrought by the Spirit of God in our Savior to Satanical
Confederacy, and the Power of Apostate Spirits; Then which, nothing is more
blasphemous, and nothing is more like to provoke the Holy Spirit that is so
abused to an Eternal Dereliction of so Vile and so Incurable an Unbeliever.

This account, as it is clear and reasonable in it self, so it is plainly lodged
in the mentioned Discourse of our Savior. And most of those that speak other
things about it, seem to me to talk at random, and perfectly without Book.

I Have thus endeavored to remove the Main Prejudices against the belief of
Witches and Apparitions; and I Am sure I have suggested much more against what
I defend, than ever I heard or saw in any that opposed it, whose Discourses,
for the most part, have seemed to me inspired by a lofty scorn of common
belief, and some trivial Notions of Vulgar Philosophy. And in despising the
Common Faith about Matters of Fact, and fondly adhering to it in things of
Speculation, they very grossly and absurdly mistake: For in things of Fact, the
People are as much to be believed, as the most subtle Philosophers and
Speculators; since here, Sense is the Judge. But in Matters of Notion and
Theory, They are not at all to be heeded, because Reason is to be Judge of
these, and this they know not how to use. And yet thus it is with those wise
Philosophers, that will deny the plain Evidence of the Senses of Mankind,
because they cannot reconcile Appearances to the fond Fancies of a Philosophy,
which they lighted on in the Highway by Chance, and will adhere to at
adventure. So that I profess, for mine own part, I never yet heard any of the
confident Declaimers against Witchcraft and Apparitions, speak any thing that
might move a Mind, in any degree instructed in the generous kinds of
Philosophy, and Nature of things. And for the Objections I have recited, they
are most of them such as rose out of mine own Thoughts, which I obliged to
consider what might be to be said upon this occasion.

For though I have examined Scot's Discovery, sancying that there I should find
the strong Reasons of Men's dis-belief in this Matter: Yet I met not with any
thing in that Farrago that was considerable. For the Author does little but
tell odd Tales, and silly Legends, which he confutes and laughs at, and
pretends this to be a Confuration of the Being of Witches and Apparitions. In
all which, His Reasonings are Trifling and Childish; and when He ventures at
Philosophy, He is little better than absurd: So that I should wonder much if
any but Boys and Buffoons should imbibe Prejudices against a Belief so
infinitely confirmed, from the loose and impotent Suggestions of so weak a
Discourser.

But however observing two things in that Discourse that would pretend to be
more than ordinary Reasons, I shall do them the civility to examine them. It is
said,

(1.) THat the Gospel is silent, as to the Being of Witches; and it is not
likely, if there were such, but that our Savior or his Apostles had given
intimations of their Existence. The other is,

(2.) MIracles are ceased, and therefore the prodigious things ascribed to
Witchcraft, are supposed Dreams and Impostures.

For Answer to the First in order, I consider, (1.) That though the History of
the New Testament were granted to be silent in the Business of Witches and
Compacts, yet the Records of the Old have a frequent mention of them. The Law,
Euod. 22. 18. against permitting them to live, is famous. And we have another
remarkable prohibition of them, Deuteronomy. 18. 10. 11. There shall not be found
among you any one, that makes his Son or his Daughter pass through the Fire,
or that uses Divination, or an Observer of Times, or an Enchanter, or (...)
Witch, or a Charmer, or a Consulter with Familiar Spirits, or a Wizard, or a
Necromaneer. Now this accumulation of Names, (some of which are of the same
sense and import) is a plain indication that the Hebrew Witch was one that
practiced by compact with evil Spirits. And many of the same Expressions are
put together in the Charge against Manasses, 2 Chronicles. 33. viz. That he caused
his Children to pass through the Fire, observed Times, used Enchantments, and
Witchcraft, and dealt with Familiar Spirits, and with Wizards. So that though
the Original word which we render Witch and Witchcraft should, as our Sadduces
urge, signify only a Cheat and a Poisoner; yet those others mentioned, plainly
enough speak the thing, and I have given an account in the former
Considerations, how a Witch in the common Notion is a Poisoner. But why mere
poisoning should have a distinct Law against it, and not be concluded under the
general one against Murder; why mere Legerdemain and Cheating should be so
severely animadverted on, as to be reckoned with Enchantments, converse with
Devils, and Idolatrous Practices: I believe the denyer of Witches will find it
hard to give a reason. To which I may add some other Passages of Scripture that
yield sufficient evidence in the Case. The Nations are forbid to hearken to the
Diviners, Dreamers, Inchanters, and Sorcerers, Jer. 27. 9. The Chaldaeans are
deeply threatened for their Sorceries and Enchantments, Isa. 47.9. And we read
that Nebuchadnezzar called the Magicians, Astrologers, Sorcerers, and
Chaldaeans, to tell his Dream. My mention of which last, minds me to say, that
for ought I have to the contrary, there may be a sort of Witches and Magicians
that have no Familiars that they know, nor any express Compact with Apostate
Spirits; who yet may perhaps act strange things by Diabolick Aids, which they
procure by the use of those Forms, and wicked Arts that the Devil did first
impart to his Confederates: And we know not but the Laws of that Dark Kingdom
may enjoin a particular attendance upon all those that practice their
Mysteries, whether they know them to be theirs or not. For a great interest of
their Empire may be served by this Project, since those that find such success
in the unknown Conjurations, may by that be tolled on to more express
Transactions with those Fiends that have assisted them incognito: Or, if they
proceed not so far, yet they run upon a Rock by acting in the Dark, and dealing
in unknown and unwarranted Arts, in which the Effect is much beyond the proper
efficiency of the things they use, and affords ground of more than suspicion
that some Evil Spirit is the Agent in those wondrous Performances.

Upon this account, I say, it is not to me unlikely but that the Devils may by
their own Constitution be bound to attend upon all that use their Ceremonies
and Forms, though ignorantly, and without design of Evil; and so Conjuration
may have been performed by those who are none of the CovenantSorcerers and
Witches. Among those perhaps we may justly reckon Balaam, and the Diviners. For
Balaam, Moncaeus has undertaken to clear him from the Guilt of the greater
Sorcery. And the Diviners are usually distinctly mentioned from those that had
Familiar Spirits. The Astrologers also of Elder Times, and those of Ours, I
take to have been of this sort of Magicians, and some of them, under the color
of that Mystical Science, worse. And I question not, but that things are really
done, and foretold by those pretended Artists, that are much beyond the regular
Possibilities of their Art; which in this appears to be exceedingly uncertain
and precarious, in that there are no less than six ways of erecting a Scheme,
in each of which the Prediction of Events shall be different, and yet every one
of them be justifiable by the Rules of that pretended Science. And the
Principles they go upon, are found to be very Arbitrary, and Unphilosophical,
not by the ordinary Declaimers against it, but by the most profound Inquirers
into things, who perfectly understand the whole Mystery, and are the only
competent Judges.

Now those Mystical Students may in their first Addresses to this Science, have
no other Design, but the satisfaction of their Curiosity to know remote and
hidden things; Yet that in the Progress being not satisfied within the Bounds
of their Art, does many times tempt the Curious Inquirer to use worse means of
Information; and no doubt those mischievous Spirits that are as vigilant as the
Beasts of Prey, and watch all occasions to get us within their envious reach,
are more constant Attenders, and careful Spies upon the Actions and
Inclinations of such, whose Genius and Designs prepare them for their
Temptations.

So that I look on Judicial Astrology as a fair Introduction to Sorcery and
Witchcraft. And who knows but that it was first set on foot by Evil Spirits, as
a Lure to draw the Curios^'s into those snares that lie hid beyond it. And yet,
I believe also, It may be innocently enough studied by those that aim only to
understand what it is, and how far it will honestly go; and are not willing to
condemn any thing which they do not comprehend. But that they must take care to
keep themselves within the Bounds of sober Enquiry, and not indulge irregular
Sollicitudes about the knowledge of Things, which Providence has thought fit
to conceal from us; Which who-ever does, lays himself open to the Designs and
Solicitations of Wicked Spirits; and I believe there are very few among such
as have been addicted to those Arts of Wonder and Prediction, but have found
themselves att^qued by some unknown Sollicitors, and inti^d by them to the more
dangerous Actions and Correspondencies. For as there are a sort of base and
fordid Spirits that attend the Envy and Malice of the Ignorant and viler sort
of Persons, and betray-them into Compacts by Promises of Revenge; So, no doubt,
there are a kind of more Aerie and Speculative Fiends, of an higher rank and
order than those wretched Imps, who apply themselves to the Curious: and many
times prevail with them by offers of the more Recondite Knowledge; as we know
it was in the first Temptation. Yea, and sometimes they are so cautious and
wary in their Conversations with more resined Persons, that they never offer to
make any express Covenants with them. To this purpose I have been informed, by
a very Learned and Reverend Doctor, that one Mr. Edwards, a Master of Arts of
Trin. Coll. in Cambridge, being reclaimed from Conjuration, declared in his
Repentance, that the Demon always appeared to him like a Man of good fashion,
and never required any Compact from him! And no doubt, They sort themselves
agreeably to the State, Port, and Genius of those with whom they converse; Yea,
it is like, as I conjectured, are assistant sometimes to those, to whom they
dare not show themselves in any openness of appearance, lest they should fright
them from those ways of Sin and Temptation. So that we see, that Men may act by
Evil Spirits without knowing that they do so.

And possibly Nebuehadnezzar's Wise Men might be of this fort of Magicians;
which supposal I mention the rather, because it may serve me against some
things that may be objected: For, it may be said, If they had been in
Confederacy with Devils, it is not probable that Daniel would have been their
Advocate, or in such inoffensive terms have distinguished their skill from
Divine Revelation; nor should he, one would think, have accepted the Office of
being Provost over them. These Circumstances may be supposed to intimate a
probability, that the Magi of Babylon were in no professed Diabolical
Complotment, and I grant it. But yet they might, and in all likelihood did use
the Arts and Methods of Action, which obtain Demonaick Cooperation and
Assistance, though without their privity, and so they were a loss criminal sort
of Conjurers; For those Arts were conveyed down along to them from one hand to
another, and the Successors still took them up from those that preceded,
without a Philosophical Scrutiny or Examen. They saw strange Things were done,
and Events predicted by such Forms and such Words; how, they could not tell,
nor it is like did not inquire, but contented themselves with this general
account, That 'twas by the power of their Arts, and were not sollicitous for
any better Reason. This, I say, was probably the case of most of those
Predictors; though, it may be, others of them advanced further into the more
desperate part of the Mystery. And that some did immediately transact with
appearing Evil Spirits in those times, is apparent enough, from express mention
in the Scriptures I have alleged.

And the Story of the Witch of Endor, 1 Samuel 28. is a remarkable Demonstration
of the Main Conclusion; which will appear, when we have considered, and removed
the fancy and glosses of our Author about it, in his Discovery: where to avoid
this Evidence, he affirms, This Witch to be but a Cozener, and the whole
Transaction a Cheat and Imposture, managed by her Self and a Confederate. And
in order to the persuading this, he tells a fine Tale, viz. That she departed
from Saul into her Closet, Where doubtless, says he, she had a Familiar, some
lewd crafty Priest, and made Saul stand at the Door like a Fool, to hear the
cozening Answers. He says, she there used the ordinary words of Conjuration;
and after them, Samuel appears, whom he affirms to be no other than either the
Witch her self, or her Confederate. By this pretty knack and contrivance, he
thinks he has disabled the Relation from signifying to our purpose.

But the Discoverer might have considered, that all this is an Invention, and
without Book. For there is no mention of the Witch's Closet,. or her retiring
into another Room, or her Confederate, or her Form of Conjuration; I say,
nothing of all this is as much as intimated in the History; and if we may take
this large liberty in the Interpretation of Scripture, there is scarce a Story
in the Bible but may be made a Fallacy and Imposture, or any thing that we
please. Nor is this Fancy of his only Arbitrary, but indeed contrary to the
Circumstances of the Text. For it says, Saul perceived it was Samuel, and bowed
himself, and this Samuel truly foretold his approaching Fate, viz. That Israel
should be delivered with him into the hands of the Philistines; and that on the
morrow, He and his Sons should be in the state of the Dead; which doubtless is
meant by the Expression, that [ they should be with him]; Which contingent
Particulars, how could the Cozener and her Confederate foretell, if there were
nothing in it extraordinary and preternatural?

It has indeed been a great Dispute among Interpreters, whether the real
Samuel was raised, or the Devil in his likeness? Most later Writers suppose it
to have been an Evil Spirit, upon the supposition that Good and Happy Souls can
never return hither from their Celestial Abodes; and they are not certainly at
the Beck and Call of an impious Hag. But then those of the other side urge,
that the Piety of the words that were spoke, and the seasonable Reproof given
to despairing Saul, are Indications sufficient that they came not from Hell;
and especially they think the Prophecy of Circumstances very accidental to be
an Argument, that it was not uttered by any of the Infernal Predictors. And for
the supposal that is the ground of that Interpretation, it is judged exceedingly
precarious; for who says that happy departed Souls were never employed in any
Ministeries here below? And those Dissenters are ready to ask a Reason, Why
they may not be sent in Messages to Earth, as well as those of the Angelical
Order? They are nearer allied to our Natures, and upon that account more
intimately concerned in our Affairs; and the example of returning Lazarus, is
evidence of the thing de facto. Besides which, that it was the Real Samuel they
think made probable by the Opinion of Jesus Syrac, Ecclus. 46. 19, 20. who
says of him, That after his death he prophesied and showed the King his end:
which also is likely from the Circumstance of the Woman's Astonishment, and
crying out when she saw him, intimating her surprise, in that the Power of God
had overruled her Enchantments, and sent another than she expected. And they
conceive there is no more incongruity in supposing God should send Samuel to
rebuke Saul for this his last folly, an^ to predict his instant ruin, than in
his interposing Elias to t^ Messengers of Ahazias when he sent to Beelzebub.
Now if it were the Real Samuel, as the Letter expresses, (and the obvious
sense is to be followed when there is no cogent Reason to decline it) he was
not raised by the Power of the Witches Enchantments, but came on that occasion
in a Divine Errand. But yet her Attempts and Endeavors to raise her Familiar
Spirit, (though at that time overruled) are Arguments that it had been her
custom to do so. Or if it were as the other side concludes, the Devil in the
shape of Samuel, her Diabolical Confederacy is yet more palpable.

I Have now done with Scot, and his presumptions; and am apt to fancy, that
there is nothing more needful to be said to discover the Discoverer. But there
is an Author infinitely more valuable, that calls me to consider him, It Is the
great Episcopius; who, though he grants a sort of Witches and Magicians, yet
denies Compacts. His Authority, I confess, is considerable, but let us weigh
his Reasons.

His First is, That there is no Example of any of the Profane Nations that
were in such Compact; whence he would infer, That there are no express
Covenants with Evil Spirits in particular Instances. But I think that both
Proposition and Consequence are very obnoxious. For that there were Nations
that did actually worship the Devil, is plain enough in the Records of Ancient
Times; and some so read that place in the Psalms, The Gods of the Heathen are
Devils; and Satan we know is called the God of this World. Yea, our Author
himself confesses, that the Nation of the Jews were so strictly prohibited
Witchcraft, and all transaction with Evil Spirits, because of their proneness
to worship them. But what need more? There are at this day that pay Sacrifice,
and all Sacred Homage to the Wicked One in a visible Appearance; and it is well
known to those of our own that traffic, and reside in those Parts, that the
Caribbians worship the Devil under the name of Maboya, who frequently shows
himself, and transacts with them; the like Travelers relate concerning diverse
other parts of the Barbarous Indies: and it is confidently reported by sober
intelligent Men that have visited those places, that most of the Laplanders,
and some other Northern People, are Witches. So that it is plain that there are
National Confederacies with Devils; or, if there were none, I see not how it
could be inferred thence, that there are no Personal Ones, no more, than that
there were never any Daemoniacks, because we know of no Nation universally
possessed; nor any Lunaticks in the World, because there is no Country of
Madmen. But our Author reasons again,

(2.) To this purpose; That the profligate Persons, who are obnoxious to those
gross Temptations; are fast enough before; and therefore such a Covenant were
needless, and of no avail to the Tempters Projects.

This Objection I have answered already, in my Remarques upon the IX Prejudice,
and say again here, that if the Designs of those Evil Spirits were only in
general to secure wicked Men to the Dark Kingdom, it might better be pretended
that we cannot give a Reason for their Temptations and Endeavors in this kind;
But it being likely, as I have conjectured, that each of those Infernal
Tempters has a particular property in those he has seduced and secured by
such Compacts, their respective Pride, and tyrannical desire of Slaves, may
reasonably be thought to engage them in such Attempts, in which their so
peculiar Interest is concerned.

But I add what is more direct, viz. That such desperate Sinners are made more
safe to the Infernal Kingdom at large, by such Hellish Covenants and
Combinations; since thereby they confirm and harden their Hearts against God,
and put themselves at greater distance from his Grace, and his Spirit; give the
deepest Wound to Conscience, and resolve to wink against all its Light and
Convictions; throw a Bar in the way of their own Repentance, and lay a Train
for Despair of Mercy: These certainly are sure ways of being undone, and the
Devil we see, has great Interest in a Project, the success of which is so
attended. And we know he made the Assault de facto upon our Savior, when he
tempted him to fall down and worship. So that this Learned Author has but
little Reason to object,

(3.) That to endeavor such an express Covenant, is contrary to the Interests
of Hell; which indeed are this way so mightily promoted. And whereas he
suggests, that a thing so horrid is like to startle Conscience, and awaken the
Soul to Consideration and Repentance; I Reply, That indeed considering Man in
the general, as a Rational Creature, acted by Hopes and Fears, and sensible of
the Joys and Miseries of another World, one would expect it should be so: But
then, if we cast our Eyes upon Man as really he is, sunk into Flesh, and
present Sense; darkened in his Mind, and governed by his Imagination; blinded by
his Passions, and besotted by Sin and Folly; hardened by evil Customs, and
hurried away by the Torrent of his Inclinations and Desires; I say, looking on
Man in this miserable state of Evil, it is not incredible that he should be
prevailed upon by the Tempter, and his own Lusts, to act at a wonderful rate of
Madness, and continue unconcerned and stupid in it; intent upon his present
Satisfactions, without sense or consideration of the dreadfulness and danger of
his Condition; and by this, I am furnished also to meet a fourth Objection of
our Author's, viz.

(4.) That it is not probable upon the Witches part, that they will be so
desperate to renounce God, and eternal Happiness, and so, everlastingly undo
their Bodies and Souls, for a short and trivial Interest; which way of arguing
will only infer, That Mankind acts sometimes at prodigious degrees of
brutishness; and actually we see it in the Instances of every day. There is not
a Lust so base and so contemptible, but there are those continually in our
Eyes, that feed it with the Sacrifice of their Eternity, and their Souls; and
daring Sinners rush upon the blackest Vilanies, with so little remorse or
sense, as if it were their design to prove, that they have nothing left them of
that whereby they are Men. So that naught can be inferred from this Argument,
but that Humane Nature is incredibly degenerate; and the vileness and stupidity
of Men is really so great, that things are customary and common, which one
could not think possible, if he did not hourly see them. And if Men of Liberal
Education, and Acute Reason, that know their Duty and their Danger, are driven
by their Appetites, with their Eyes open, upon the most fatal Rocks, and make
all the haste they can from their God and their Happiness; If such can barter
their Souls for Trifles, and sell Everlasting for a Moment; sport upon the
brink of a Precipice, and contemn all the Terrors of the future dreadful day;
why should it then be incredible, that a brutish vile Person, sotted with
Ignorance, and drunk with Malice, mindless of God, and unconcerned about a
future Being, should be persuaded to accept of present delightful
Gratifications, without duly weighing the desperate Condition?

Thus, I suppose, I have answered also the Arguments of this Great Man, against
the Covenants of Witches; and since a Person of such Sagacity and Learning,
has no more to say against what I defend, and another of the same Character,
the ingenious Dr. Parker, who directed me to him, reckons these the strongest
things that can be objected in the Case, I begin to arrive to an higher degree
of Confidence in this belief; and am almost inclined to fancy, that there is
little more to be said to purpose, which may not by the improvement of my
Considerations be easily answered; and I am yet the more fortified in my
Conceit, because I have, since the former Edition of this Book, sent to several
Acute and Ingenious Persons of my Acquaintance, to beg their Objections, or
those they have heard from others, against my Discourse or Relations that I
might consider them in this: But I can procure none save only those few I have
now discussed, most of my Friends telling me, That they have not met with any
that need or deserve my notice.

By all this it is evident, that there were Witches in Ancient Times under the
Dispensation of the Law; and that there were such in the Times of the Gospel
also, will not be much more difficult to make good. I had a late occasion to
say something about this, in a Letter to a Person of the highest Honor, from
which I shall now borrow some things to my present purpose.

I Say then, (II.) That there were Compacts with Evil Spirits in those times
also, is methinks intimated strongly, in that saying of the Jews concerning
our Savior, That he cast out Devils by Beelzebub. In his return to which, he
denies not the Supposition or possibility of the thing in general; but clears
himself by an appeal to the Actions of their own Children, whom they would not
tax so severely. And I cannot very well understand why those times should be
priviledg'd from Witchcraft and Diabolical Compacts, more than they were from
Possessions, which we know were then more frequent (for ought appears to the
contrary) than ever they were before or since. But besides this, There are
Intimations plain enough in the Apostle's Writings of the Being of Sorcery and
Witchcraft. St. Paul reckons Witchcraft next Idolatry, in his Catalogue of the
Works of the Flesh, Gal. 5. 20. and the Sorcerers are again joined with
Idolaters, in that sad Denunciation, Rev. 21. 8. And a little after, Rev. 22.
15. they are reckoned again among Idolaters, Murderers, and those others that
are without. And methinks the Story of S^non Magus, and his Diabolical
Oppositions of the Gospel in its beginnings, should afford clear Conviction. To
all which I add this more general Consideration,

(3.) That though the New Testament had mentioned nothing of this Matter, yet
its silence in such Cases is not Argumentative. Our Savior spoke as he had
occasion, and the thousandth part of what he did or said is not Recorded; as
one of his Historians intimates. He said nothing of those large unknown Tracts
of America; nor gave any intimations of as much as the Existence of that
Numerous People; much less did he leave Instructions about their Conversion. He
gives no account of the Affairs and State of the other World, but only that
general one, of the Happiness of some, and the Misery of others. He made no
discovery of the Magnalia of Art or Nature; no, not of those, whereby the
propagation of the Gospel might have been much advanced, viz. the Mystery of
Printing, and the Magnet; and yet no one uses his silence in these. Instances,
as an Argument against the Being of things, which are evident Objects of Sense.
I confess, the omission of some of these Particulars is pretty strange, and
unaccountable, and concludes our ignorance of the Reasons and Menages of
Providence; but I suppose nothing else. I thought, I needed here to have said
no more, but I consider, in consequence of this Objection, it is pretended;
That as Christ Jesus drove the Devil from his Temples and his Altars, (as is
clear in the Cessation of Oracles, which dwindled away, and at last grew silent
shortly upon his appearance) so in like manner, it is said, that he banished him
from his lesser holds in Sorcerers and Witches; which Argument is peccant, both
in what it affirms, and in what it would infer. For,

(1.) The coming of the H. Jesus did not expel the Devil from all the greater
Places of his Residence and Worship; for a considerable part of barbarous
Mankind do him public solemn Homage to this day: So that the very Foundation
of the Pretense fails, and the Consequence without any more ado comes to
nothing. And yet besides,

(2.) If there be any credit to be given to Ecclesiastic History, there were
Persons possessed with Devils some Ages after Christ, whom the Disciples cast
out by Prayer, and the Invocation of his Name: So that Satan was not driven
from his lesser Habitations, as soon as he was forced from his more famous
Abodes. And I see no reason

(3.) Why, Though Divine Providence would not allow him publicly to abuse the
Nations, whom he had designed in a short time after for Subjects of his Son's
Kingdom, and to stand up in the Face of Religion in an open affront to the
Divinity that planted it, to the great hindrance of the progress of the Gospel,
and discouragement of Christian Hopes; I say, Though Providence would not allow
this height of insolent Opposition; yet I see not why we may not grant, that
God however permitted the Devil to sneak into some private skulking Holes, and
to trade with the particular more devoted Vassals of his wicked Empire: As we
know that when our Savior had chased him from the Man that was possessed, he
permitted his Retreat into the Herd of Swine. And I might add

(4.) That it is but a bad way of arguing, to set up fancied Congruities against
plain Experience, as is evidently done by those Arguers, who, because they
think that Christ chased the Devil from all his high Places of Worship when he
came; that it is therefore fit he should have forced him from all his other less
notorious Haunts: and upon the imagination of a decency, which they frame,
conclude a Fact, contrary to the greatest Evidence of which the thing is
capable. And once more

(5.) The consequence of this Imagined Decorum, if it be pursued, would be
this, that Satan should now be deprived of all the Ways and Tricks of Cozenage,
whereby he abuses us; and Mankind since the coming of Christ, should have been
secure from all his Temptations; for there is a greater congruity in believing,
that, when he was forced from his haunts in Temples and public Places, he
should be put also from those nearer ones, about us and within us in his daily
temptations of universal Mankind; Then, that upon relinquishing those, he
should be made to leave all professed Communication and Correspondence with those
profligate Persons, whose vileness had fitted them for such Company.

So that these Reasoners are very fair for the denial of all Internal
Diabolical Temptations. And because I durst not trust them, I Will crave leave
here to add something concerning those.

In order to which, that I may obtain the favor of those wary Persons, who are
so coy and shy of their assent, I grant; That Men frequently, out of a desire
to excuse themselves, lay their own guilt upon the Devil, and charge him with
things of which in carnest he is not guilty: For, I doubt not but every Wicked
Man has Devil enough in his own Nature to prompt him to Evil, and needs not
another Tempter to incite him. But yet, that Satan endeavors to further our
wickedness, and our ruin by his Inticements, and goes up and down seeking whom
he may devour, is too evident in the Holy Oracles, to need my Endeavors
particularly to make it good; Only those diffident Men cannot perhaps apprehend
the manner of the Operation, and from thence are tempted to believe, that there
is really no such thing. Therefore I judge it requisite to explain this, and
it is not unsuitable to my general Subject.

In order to it I consider, That Sense is primarily caused by Motion in the
Organs, which by continuity is conveyed to the Brain, where Sensation is
immediately performed; and it is nothing else, but a Notice excited in the Soul
by the impulse of an External Object; thus it is in simple outward Sense: But
Imagination, though caused immediately by material Motion also, yet it differs
from the external Senses in this, That it is not from an Impress directly from
without, but the Prime and Original Motion is from within our selves: Thus the
Soul it self sometimes strikes upon those Strings, whose Motion begets such and
such Phantasms; other-while, the loose Spirits wandering up and down in the
Brain, casually hit upon such Filements and Strings, whose Motion excites a
Conception, which we call a Fancy or Imagination; and if the Evidence of the
outward Senses be shut out by Sleep or Melancholy, in either case, we believe
those Representations to be real and external Transactions, when they are only
within our Heads; Thus it is in Enthusiasms and Dreams. And besides these
Causes of the Motions which stir Imagination, there is little doubt, but that
Spirits, Good or Bad, can so move the Instruments of Sense in the Brain, as to
awake such Imaginations as they have a mind to excite; and the Imagination
having a mighty influence upon the Affections, and they upon the Will and
external Actions, it is very easy to conceive how Good Angels may stir us up to
Religion and Virtue, and the Evil Ones tempt us to Lewdness and Vice, viz. by
Representments that they make upon the Stage of Imagination, which invite our
Affections, and allure, though they cannot compel our Wills.

This I take to be an intelligible account of Temptations, and also of
Angelical Encouragements; and perhaps this is the only way of immediate
Influence that the Spirits of the other World have upon us. And by it, it is
easy to give an account of Dreams, both Monitory and Temperamental,
Enthusiasms, Fanatic Ecstasies, and the like, as I suggested.

This may suffice for an Answer to the first Pretense, viz. the silence of the
Gospel in this Matter. I come to examine the other, That

(2.) MIracles are ceast, thefore the presumed Actions of Witchcraft, are Tales
and Illusions.]

To make a due return to this, we must consider a great and difficult Problem,
which is, What is a Real Miracle? And for answer to this weighty Question, I
think,

(1.) That it is not the strangeness, or unaccountableness of the thing done
simply, from whence we are to conclude a Miracle. For then we are so to account
of all the Magnalia of Nature, and all the Mysteries of those honest Arts which
we do not understand.

Nor (2.) is this the Criterion of a Miracle, That it is an Action or Event
beyond all Natural Powers; for we are ignorant of the Extent and Bounds of
Nature's Sphere and Possibilities: And if this were the character and essential
Mark of a Miracle, we could not know what was so; except we could determine the
extent of natural causalities, and fix their Bounds, and be able to say to
Nature, Hitherto can thou go and no further; And he that makes this his
measure whereby to judge a Miracle, is himself the greatest Miracle of
Knowledge or Immodesty. Besides, though an Effect may transcend really all the
Powers of mere Nature; yet there is a world of Spirits that must be taken into
our Account. And as to them also I say,

(3.) Every thing is not a Miracle that is done by Agents Supernatural. There
is no doubt but that Evil Spirits can make wonderful Combinations of Natural
Causes, and perhaps perform many things immediately which are prodigious, and
beyond the longest Line of Nature: but yet these are not therefore to be called
Miracles; for, they are Saecred Wonders, and suppose the Power to be Divine.
But how shall the Power be known to be so, when we so little understand the
Capacities, and extent of the Abilities of Lower Agents? The Answer to this
Question will discover the Criterion of Miracles, which must be supposed to
have all the former Particulars; viz. They are unaccountable, beyond the Powers
of mere Nature, and done by Agents Supernatural; And to these must be
superadded.

(4.) That they have peculiar Circumstances that speak them of a Divine
Original. Their mediate Authors declare them to be so, and they are always
Persons of Simplicity, Truth, and Holiness, void of Ambition, and all secular
Designs: They seldom use Ceremonies, or Natural Applications, and yet surmount
all the Activities of known Nature: They work those wonders, not to raise
admiration, or out of the vanity to be talked of; but to seal and confirm some
Divine Doctrine or Commission, in which the Good and Happiness of the World is
concerned, I say, by such Circumstances as these, Wonderful Actions are known
to be from a Divine Cause; and that makes and distinguishes a Miracle.

And thus I am prepared for an Answer to the Objection, to which I make this
brief return, That though Witches by their Confederate Spirit do those odd and
astonishing things we believe of them; yet are they no Miracles, there being
evidence enough from the badness of their Lives, and the ridiculous Ceremonies
of their Performances, from their malice and mischievous Designs, that the
Power that works, and the end for which those things are done, is not Divine
but Diabolical. And by singular Providence they are not ordinarily permitted,
as much as to pretend to any new Sacred Discoveries in Matters of Religion, or
to act any thing for confirmation of Doctrinal Impostures. So that whether
Miracles are ceased or not, these are none. And that such Miracles as are only
strange and unaccountable Performances, above the common Methods of Art or
Nature, are not ceased, we have a late great evidence in the famous GREATREX;
concerning whom it will not be impertinent to add the following account, which
I had in a Letter from Dr. G. R. Lord Bishop of D. in the Kingdom of Ireland, a
Person of singular Piery and Virtue, and a great-Philosopher. He is pleased
thus to write.

THe great discourse now at the Coffee-Houses, and everywhere, is about M.G.
the famous Irish Stroker, concerning whom it is like you expect an account from
me. He undergoes various Censures here, some take him to be a Conjurer, and
some an Impostor, but others again adore him as an Apostle. I confess, I think
the Man is free from all Design, of a very agreeable Conversation, not addicted
to any Vice, nor to any Sect or Party; but is, I believe, a sincere Protestant.
I was three weeks together with him at my Lord Conwayes, and saw him, I think,
lay his hands upon a thousand Persons; and really there is something in it more
than ordinary: but I am convinced it is not miraculous. I have seen pains
strangely fly before his hand till he has chased them out of the Body, Dimness
cleared, and Deafness cured by his Touch; twenty Persons at several times in
Fits of the Falling Sickness, were in two or three minutes brought to
themselves, so as to tell where their pain was; and then he has pursued it
till he has driven it out at some extreme part: Running Sores of the KingsEvil
dried up, and Kernels brought to a Suppuration by his hand: grievous Sores of
many months date, in few days healed: Obstructions, and Stoppings removed;
Cancerous Knots in the Breast dissolved, etc.

But yet I have many Reasons to persuade me, that nothing of all this is
Miraculous; He pretends not to give Testimony to any Doctrine; the manner of
his Operation speaks it to be natural; the Cure seldom succeeds without
reiterated Touches, his Patients often relapse, he fails frequently, he can do
nothing where there is any decay in Nature, and many Distempers are not at all
obedient to his Touch. So that I confess, I refer all his Virtue to his
particular Temper and Complexion, and I take his Spirits to be a kind of
Elixir, and Universal Ferment; and that he cures (as Dr. M. expresses it) by a
Sanative Contagion.

This, Sir, was the first Account of the Healer I had from that Reverend
Person, which with me signifies more than the Attestations of multitudes of
ordinary Reporters; and no doubt but it will do so likewise with all that know
that excellent Bishop's singular Integrity and Judgment. But besides this, upon
my inquiry into some other Particulars about this Matter, I received these
further Informations from the same Learned Hand.

As for M.G. what Opinion he has of his own Gift, and how he came to know it?
I Answer, He has a different apprehension of it from yours and mine, and
certainly believing it to be an immediate Gift from Heaven; and it is no wonder,
for he is no Philosopher. And you will wonder less, when you hear how he came
to know it, as I have often received it from his own Mouth. About three or four
years ago he had a strong impulse upon his Spirit, that continually pursued him
from whatever he was about, at his Business, or Devotion, alone, or in
company, that spoke to him by this inward Suggestion, [ I have given thee the
Gift of Curing the Evil.] This Suggestion was so importunate, that he
complained to his Wife, That he thought he was haunted: She apprehending it as
an extravagancy of Fancy; but he told her he believed there was more in it, and
was resolved to try. He did not long want opportunity. There was a Neighbor of
his grievously afflicted with the KingsEvil, He stroked her, and the Effect
fucceeded. And for about a twelvemonth together he pretended to cure no other
Distemper. But then the Ague being very rife in the Neighborhood, the same
Impulse after the same manner spoke within him, [ I have given thee the Gift of
curing the Ague;] and meeting with Persons in their Fits, and taking them by
the Hand, or laying his Hand upon their Breasts, the Ague left them. About half
a year after the accustomed Impulfe became more general, and suggested to him,
[ I have given thee the Gift of Healing;] and then he attempted all Diseases
indifferently. And though he saw strange Effects, yet he doubted whether the
Cause were any Virtue that came from him, or the Peoples fancy: To convince him
of his incredulity, as he lay one night in Bed, one of his Hands was struck
dead, and the usual Impulse suggested to him to make trial of his Virtue upon
himself, which he did, stroking it with his other hand, and then it immediately
returned to its former liveliness. This was repeated two or three Nights (or
Mornings) together.

This is his Relation, and I believe there is so much sincerity in the Person,
that he tells no more than what he believes to be true. To say that this
Impulse too was but a result of his temper, and that it is but like Dreams that
are usually according to Men's Constitutions, does not seem a probable account
of the Phenomenon. Perhaps some may think it more likely, that some Genius who
understood the Sanative Virtue of his Complexion, and the readiness of his
Mind, and ability of his Body to put it in execution, might give him notice of
that which otherwise might have been for ever unknown to him, and so the Gift
of God had been to no purpose.

This is my Learned and Reverend Friend's Relation: I shall say no more about
it but this, That many of those Matters of Fact, have been since critically
inspected and examined by several sagacious and wary Persons of the Royal
Society, and other Very Learned and Judicious Men, whom we may suppose as
unlikely to be deceived by a contrived Imposture, as any others whatsoever.

I Have now done with my Considerations on this Subject, which I could wish
were less seasonable and necessary than I have reason to believe they are: But,
alas! we live in an Age wherein Atheism is begun in Sadducism: And those that
dare not bluntly say, There is no God, content themselves, for a fair step and
Introduction, to deny there are Spirits, or Witches. Which sort of Insidels,
though they are not so ordinary among the mere Vulgar, yet are they numerous in
a little higher rank of Understandings. And those that know any thing of the
World, know, That most of the small Pretenders to Wit, are generally deriders
of the belief of Witches and Apparitions: Which were it only a slight, or mere
speculative Mistake, I should not trouble my self or them about it. But I fear
this Error has a Core in it worse than Heresy: And therefore how little
soever I care what Men believe or teach in Matters of Opinion, I think I have
reason to be concerned in an Affair, that touches so near upon the greatest
Interests of Religion. And really I am astonished sometimes to think into what a
kind of Age we are fallen, in which some of the greatest Impieties are
accounted but Buggs, and terrible Names, Invisible Tittles, Piccadillo's, or
Chimera's. The sad and greatest Instances, are Secriledge, ^ellton, and
^hcrast. For the two former, there are a sort of Men (that are far from being
professed Enemies to Religion) who, I do not know, whether they own any such
Vices. We find no mention of them in their most particular Confessions, n^r
have I observed them in those Sermons that have contained the largest
Catalogues of the Sins of our Age and Nation. 'Twere dangerous to speak of them
as Sins, for fean who should be found guilty. But my Business at present is not
with these, but the other, Witchcraft, which I am sure was a Sin of Elder
Times; and how comes it about that our Age, which so much out-does them in all
other kinds of Wickedness, should be wholly innocent in this? That there may be
Witches and Apparitions in our days, notwithstanding the Objections of the
Modern Sadduce, I believe I have made appear in the foregoing Considerations;
in which I did not primarily intend direct Proof, but Defense.

Against which if it should be Objected, That I have for the most part used
only Supposals, and conjectural Things in the vindication of the Common Belief,
and speak with no point blank assurance, in my particular Answers, as I do in
the General Conclusion. I need only say, That the Proposition I defend is
Matter of Fact, which the Disbelievers impugn by alleging, That it cannot be;
or, it is not likely: In return to which, if I show, how those things may be,
and probable, notwithstanding their Allegations, though I say not downright
that they are in the particular way I offer; yet it is enough for the Design of
Defense, though not for that of Proof: for when one says a thing cannot be,
and I tell him how possibly it may, though I hit not the just manner of it; I
yet defeat the Objection against it, and make way for the evidence of the thing
de Facto.

But after all this, I must confess there is one Argument against me, which is
not to be dealt with, viz. A mighty Confidence grounded upon nothing, that
swaggers, and Huffs, and swears there are no Witches. For such Philosophers as
these, let them enjoy the Opinion of their own Superlative Judgments, and enter
me in the first rank of Fools for crediting my Senses, and those of all the
World, before their sworn Dictates. If they will believe in Scott, Habbs, and
Osborne, and think them more infallible than the Sacred Oracles, the History of
all Ages, and the full experience of our own, who can help it? They must not be
contradicted, and they are resolved not to be persuaded. For this sort of Men,
I never go about to convince them of any thing. If I can avoid it, I throw
nothing before them, lest they should turn again and rend me. Their Opinions
came into their Heads by chance, when their little Reasons had no notice of
their entrance, and they must be let alone to go out again of themselves the
fame way they entered. Therefore not to make much noise to disturb these
infallible Huffers, (and they cannot hear a little for their own) I softly step
along, leaving them to believe what they think.

I have only this further to add, That I appear thus much concerned for the
justification of the belief of Witches, because it suggests palpable and
current Evidence of our Immortality. For though we have reasonable Evidence
enough from the Attributes of God, the Phenomenon of Providence, and the Nature
of our Souls, to convince any, but those who will stupidly believe, that they
shall die like Beasts, that they may live like them: Yet the Philosophic
Arguments that are produced for the Article, though very cogent, are many of
them speculative and deep, requiring so great an attention and sagacity, that
they take no hold upon the whifling Spirits that are not used to Consider, nor
upon the common fort that cannot reach such Heights: But they are both best
convinced by the Proofs that come nearest the Sense, which indeed strike our
Minds fullest, and leave the most lasting Impressions; whereas high
Speculations being more thin and subtle, easily slide off, even from
Understandings that are most capable to receive them. This is one of the Main
Reasons that engaged me on this Argument, because it affords considerable
Evidence of that great Truth, which every Christian ought to be solicitous to
have made good.

And really if we compute like Men, and do not suffer our selves to be abused
by the Flatteries of Sense, and the deceitful Gayeties that steal us away from
God, and from our selves, there is nothing can render the thoughts of this odd
Life tolerable, but the expectation of another: And Wise Men have said, That
they would not have a Moment, if they thought they were not to live again. This
perhaps some may take to be the discontented Paradox of a Melancholic, vexed
and mean Condition, that is pinched by the straightness of Fortune, and envies
the Heights of others Felicity and Grandeur; But by that time those that judge
so, have spent the Heats of Frolic Youth, and have past over the several
Stages of Vanity; when they come to sit down, and make sober reflections upon
their Pleasures and Pursuits, and sum up the Account of all that is with them,
and before them, I doubt not but their considering Thoughts will make Solomon's
Conclusion, and find, that it is but a misery to live, if we were to live for
nothing else. So that if the content of the present Life were all I were to
have for the hopes of Immortality, I should even upon that account be very
unwilling to believe that I was mortal: For certainly the Pleasures that result
from the Thoughts of another World in those, that not only see it painted in
their Imaginations, but feel it begun in their Souls, are as far beyond all the
titillations of Sense, as a real lasting Happiness is beyond the delusive
Images of a Dream. And therefore they that think to secure the enjoyment of
their Pleasures, by the infamy of our Natures, in the overthrow of our future
Hopes, endeavor to damm up the Fountain of the fullest and cleanest Delights;
and seek for limped Waters in the Sinks and Puddles of the Streets.

But this would afford Matter for another Discourse, into which I must not
digress, but here make an end of this.

Anti-fanatical Religion, AND Free Philosophy. In a Continuation of the NEW
ATLANTIS: Essay VII.

Essay VII. The Sum of My Lord Bacon's NEW ATLANTIS.
WE parted from Peru, with design to pass to China and Japan by the South Sea:
and after we had been long driven up and down by contrary Winds, and wandered in
the greatest Wilderness of Waters in the World, without the least hopes of
making any Land, in that immense undiscovered Abyss, that was beyond both the
Old World, and the New; it pleased God to bring us into the Harbor of a most
Angelical Country, that lay hid in the greatest Ocean in the Universe.

We found there a People of singular Goodness and Humanity, who received us
with most affectionate kindness, and provided for us with a Parent-like Care
and Indulgence: We were lodged in a fair Pile of Buildings, called the
Strangers House, appointed for such Occasions, and there we had all things,
both for our Whole and Sick, that belonged to Charity and Mercy. The Governor
of that House (a most obliging and benign Person) acquainted some of our number
with diverse remarkable Matters concerning the Kingdom of BENSALEM (so it was
called); Particularly, with the strange entrance and beginning of Christianity
there, and the excellent Foundation of SOLOMON's House, a Royal Society erected
for Enquiries into the Works of God: After we had been there a little while,
one of the Fathers of that House came to the Town where we were. He entered in
State; and within few days having had notice of us, he ordered that one of our
Company should be brought to him: The rest chose me to wait on the great Man,
which I did, and was received by him with much goodness; He gave me a
particular account of the Foundation of Solomon's House, and the State of
Philosophy in Bensalem, granting permission it should be declared to the World.
Accordingly it was published by Verulamius, in his History called the NEW
ATLANTIS; and thus far his Account went.

But now I shall enter upon a Relation of things, of which yet there has been
no News from Bensalem.

On the third day after I had been with the Father of Solomon's House, a
Servant came to me from the Governor of ours, just as we had dined, to desire
me to spend the Afternoon with him: I received the invitation with a cheerful
respect, and went immediately with the Officer to attend his Lordship; He led
me through the Garden of our House into another, the largest and most beautiful
I ever saw; It was encompast with a lofty Stone-Wall; The Stone were blue,
naturally streakt with green. It had Mounts, Grotto's, and Summer-Houses, very
pleasant and magnificent; The Walks were large, planted with Ever-greens, and
the Fruit Trees (of all sorts that we have, and many that we have not) set in
the old Quincuncial, Lozenge Figures, after the manner of the ancient hanging
Gardens of Babylon; It had Wildernesses, Ponds, Aviaries, and all things else
that can render such a place agreeable. I could have dwelt in this Paradise;
but the Servant led me on into a square Cloistered Court, having handsome
Buildings on all sides, fenced on the South with a tall Grove of Cedar: The
Cloisters were paved with red and green Marble, and supported with pollisht
Pillars of a speckled Stone, very clear and shining; Hence we went into a fair
spacious Hall adorned with large Maps of all sorts; here were some Servants
decently clad, they were playing at Chess; as soon as I entered, they arose, and
saluted me very civilly with a modest sweetness in their looks, that seemed
very obliging. My Guide conducted me up Stairs into a noble Gallery, hung with
most excellent Pictures of Famous Men, and Philosophers; and, at which I was
much surprised, of some that I had seen. He left me here, to give the Governor
notice that I was come; and presently I saw him enter, with a mild
cheerfulness, mixed with a manly gravity in his Countenance: He had on a long
Robe of Purple Silk, and a kind of Turban on his Head of the same color, which
had a Star of Gold wrought on it, worn just before: He embraced me with much
affection, expressing great satisfaction in the opportunity of entertaining me
alone: He enquired after the welfare of our People, and whether we wanted any
Accommodation, either for our Whole or Sick; I bowed with a low reverence, and
answered, That we wanted nothing, but an occasion to speak our acknowledgments
of the Bounty and Humanity of that blessed Place; and particularly to express
how much we were obliged to his Lordships generous favors: He replied
smiling, That Complements were not in use in Bensalem; and taking me by the
hand, he led me into an handsome square Chamber wainscotted with Cedar, which
filled the Room with a very grateful odor: It was richly painted, gilt, and
full of Inscriptions in Letters of Gold: He sat him down on a Couch of Green
Velvet, and made me take my place by him.

After some more particular inquiry into the condition of our Sick, of whom I
gave him an account, he told me, That the Father of Solomon's House commanded
him to acquaint me with the state of Religion in Bensalem, as himself had with
the condition of Philosophy there; and that he would have done this too, but
that the urgent Business of the Public State, which lay upon him, would not
afford him time; I rose up at these words, and answered with a low submission,
That I knew not in what terms to express my sense of the Father's Condescension
and Goodness; and that his excellent Relation of the state of Philosophy, and
its ways of improvement in that Kingdom, had inflamed me with desire to know
what I might, concerning the Affairs of its Religion, since the so miraculous
plantation of Christianity in it; And particularly, Whether it had kept its
ancient Purity, and Simplicity in that Realm; which was lost in most other
places? This Question, replied He, (making me sit down again by him) I shall
fully answer in the things I have to say to you; and having paused a little to
settle his Thoughts, he began his Narrative in this manner.

AFTER the Conversion of this Land by the Evangelism of St. Bartholomew, (of
which you have heard) Religion underwent some Revolutions, that I shall not
mention; But take my ground from the last, which happened no very long time
since: For the understanding which, you must know, That upon the South-West of
this place, in the unknown Ocean also, lies an Island, famous for the rise it
gave to a very spreading Sect in Religion: From this unfortunate Country, came
certain Zealous Persons hither, that pretended to extraordinary Illuminations,
and to more purity, strictness, and Spirituality, than other Christians; They
taught, That our Rites and Government were Superstitious and Antichristian;
That we wanted Pure Ordinances, and Gospel Worship; That our Good Works; and
Christian Virtues, were nothing worth; That the best of our People were but
Formalists and mere moral Men; That our Priests were uninlightned, strangers to
the Power of Godliness, and Mysteries of Religion; and that there was a
necessity of a through Godly Reformation of our Government, and Worship.

The Men at first were only gazed upon by our People, as strange Persons; But
at length, by the vehemence of their Zeal, and glory of their Pretenses, they
began to make impression on some, who had more Affection than Judgment: By
them, and the continuance of their own restless Importunities, they wrought
upon others; And in process of time and endeavor, through the secret Judgment
and Permission of God, prevailed so far, that the great Body of the People,
especially of those that were of warm and Enthusiastic Tempers, was leavened
(more or less) with their Spirit and Doctrines.

Here he stopped a little, and then said; It Is wonderful to consider how some
Ages and Times are disposed to changes; some to one sort of alteration, and
some to another: In this Age, one Sect and Genius spreads like Infection, as if
the public Air were poisoned with it; and again, in that those same Doctrines
and Fancies will not thrive at all, but die in the hands of their Teachers;
while a contrary, or very different sort, flies and prevails mightily: There is
something extraordinary in this, the contemplation of which would be noble
Exercise, but not for our present purpose: It Is enough to note, That the Age at
the coming of those Seducers hither, was inclined to Innovation, and to such
particular sorts of it: So that in few years the generality of the Zealous, and
less considerate, were tainted with those new and gay Notions; And so p^ssest
they were with the conceit of the divineness and necessity of their Fancies and
Models, that they despised and vilified the Ecclesiastical Government, and
Governors, and vehemently assaulted our most excellent SALOMONA, the King of
this Realm, with continual Petitions and Addresses, to establish them by Law,
and to change the whole Constitution of Religion, in compliance with their
Imaginations: But he was a Wise and Religious Prince; He saw the folly and
danger of such Alterations, and endeavored, by all the ways of Lenity and
Goodness, to allay the heat of their unreasonable Prosecutions: But they being
the more emboldned by this moderate Course, and provoked by the little
inclination the good King showed to their New Models, broke out, after some
less violent struglings, into downright Rebellion, which after many
Revolutions, too long to be mentioned now, succeeded so far at last, that the
Pious Prince was deposed and murdered; the Government usurped by the prevailing
Tyrants: And, not to mention the disorders of the Civil State that followed,
the Ecclesiastical was most miserable. For now, all the Sects that have a Name
in History in any part of the known World, started up in this Church, as if
they had all been transplanted hither: They arose as it were out of the Earth,
which seemed to bring forth nothing but Monsters, full grown at their Birth,
with Weapons in their hands ready for Battle; and accordingly they fell one
upon another with strange rage and fierceness. For having torn and destroyed
the Ancient Doctrine and Government, every one contended to set up its own, and
to have its beloved Opinions and Models, entertained and worshipped, as the
infallible Truths and Ways of God: So that all places were filled with New
Lights, and those Lights were so many Wild-Fires, that put all into Combustion.
We saw nothing of Religion but glaring Appearances, and Contention about the
Shells and Shadows of it. It seemed to run out wholly into Chaff and Straw;
into Disputes and Vain Notions; which were not only unprofitable, but
destructive to Charity, Peace, and every pious Practice. All was Controversy
and Dissension, full of Animosity and Bitterness; For though they agreed in
some common Falsehoods and Follies, yet that made no Union; every dissent in
smallest Matters was ground enough for a Quarrel and Separation. But these
things were common to them.

All hated the former Constitutions; All cried up their own Clan, as the only
Saints, and People of God: All vilified Reason as Carnal, and Incompetent, and
an Enemy to the things of the Spirit: All had confident, false, and perverse
Notions of the Divine Attributes, and Counsels; All decry'd Virtue and Morality
as a dull thing, that was nothing in the account of God. All filled their
Discourses with the words of Light, Faith, Grace, the Spirit; and all talked in
set Phrases, phancifully and ignorantly about them: All pretended to great
Heights in Knowledge, though that consisted in nothing but an ability to repeat
those Phrases of their Sect, like Parrots: All talked of their extraordinary
communion with God, their special Experiences, Illuminations, and Discoveries;
and accordingly all demeaned themselves with much sawciness and irreverence
toward God, and contempt of those that were not of the same fantastical
Fashion: All were zealous in their proper set of Doctrines and Opinions; and
all bitterly opposed and vilified every different Judgment. These are some of
the main things that made up the common Nature of the Parties: In particulars,
as I have said, they were infinitely at variance.

While things were in this condition, some of our Missionaries in Foreign
Parts returned, and among the other Books, and Rarities from the World, they
brought the Works of some of your Episcopal Divines, and other Learned Men,
particularly those of Hammondus, Taylorus, Grotius, etc. Such

of them that were written in English, they translated into Latin, the rather
because they judged those Discourses very seasonable and proper to obviate the
Evil Genius of the unhappy Age. As soon as they came abroad in the general
Language, they were read by the sober sort of our Divines with great
approbation and acceptance; and from them they had Light and Advantage for the
detecting the Follies and Extravagancies of the Times.

For my part, I was then a Student in the University, and therefore shall choose
to relate what effect those Writings had there, and particularly upon diverse of
my mine own Acquaintance, who are now very considerable in this Church, and
have done great Service in it.

It was one Advantage that the Young Academians had from that unhappy Season,
that they were stirred up by the general Fermentation that was then in Men's
Thoughts, and the vast variety that was in their Opinions, to a great activity
in the search of sober Principles, and Rules of Life. I shall not undertake to
describe the Spirit and Temper of all the Theologues and Students of those
Times, but shall give you an account of some that I knew, who have been very
useful to the Church in confuting and exposing the Fanatical Principles and
Genius, and who derived much of their Spirit and Doctrines from those excellent
Authors of your Country.

Here I told the Governor that things had been lately also in our parts much
after the manner he had described the Condition of theirs; and that therefore I
was very desirous to know by what Ways and Doctrines the People were reduced to
a better temper. I said also, that I had relation to one of our Universities,
and on that account likewise was sollicitous to understand how those Academical
Divines were formed; and what they did when they came abroad.

He answered, that he was ready to gratify my desires; but then, said he, I
would not have you think that I magnify the Persons I shall describe to you,
or their Learning and Performances, above all our other Clergy: No, thanks be
to God, we have numbers of Excellent Men, famous for their Piety, Learning, and
Usefulness in the Church: of whom, by reason of my distance, and constant
Employments in this place, I have no personal knowledge; and therefore I choose
to speak only of those that were bred in the University about mine own Time;
and the rather, that you may observe the Providence of God in raising Men so
serviceable to his Church in the very worst of Days. Having premised which, he
fell immediately to an account of their Preparations in the University, and
thence to a Relation of their Performances after. Of the former he spoke thus;

THose Divines, of whom I have undertaken to say something, went through the
usual course of Studies in the University, with much applause and success: But
did not think themselves perfect, as soon as they were acquainted with the
knowledge contained in Systems: No, they past from those Institutions, to
converse with the most Ancient and Original Authors in all sorts of profitable
Learning. They begun at the top, with the Philosophers of the Eldest Times,
that were before the days of Aristotle: They perused the Histories of their
Lives and Doctrines, and then read all the remains of them that are extant:
They considered their Principles, only as Hypotheseis, with Minds free and
untainted: They studied, them to know the several Scheams of their Opinions,
without passing Judgments yet, upon their Truth, or Falsehood. They read Plato,
and conversed much with that Divine Philosopher: They acquainted themselves
with Aristotle, his great Scholar; and by his Original Writings, they found how
much he had been misrepresented and abused by his Commentators, (especially by
those of later Times) and saw how different a thing Aristotelian Philosophy was
in his own Works, from that which they had met in compendiums, and the
Disputing Books that pretended to it: They made themselves intimate with
Plutarch and Cicero: And dealt much with the other chief Writers, both Greeks
and Romans: By which means, they were well instructed in the History of
Philosophy, and the various Thoughts and Opinions of the greatest Men among the
Ancients.

But yet, notwithstanding this Conversation with those Sages, They were not so
pedantically, and superstitiously fond of Antiquity, as to sit down there in
contempt of all later

Helps and Advancements. They were sensible, That Knowledge was still
imperfect, and capable of further growth, and therefore they looked forward
into the Moderns also, who about their time, had employed themselves in
discovering the Defects of the Ancients, in reviving some of their neglected
Doctrines; and advancing them by new Thoughts and Conceptions: They read, and
considered all sorts of late Improvements in Anatomy, Mathematics, Natural
History, and Mechanics, and acquainted themselves with the Experimental
Philosophy of Solomon's House, and the other Promoters of it. So that there was
not any valuable Discovery made, or Notion started in any part of Real
Learning, but they got considerable knowledge of it. And by this Universal way
of proceeding, They furnished their Minds with great variety of Conceptions,
and rendered themselves more capable of judging of the Truth, or likelihood of
any proposed Hypothesis. Nor did they content themselves with Reading, and the
knowledge of Books, but joined Contemplation, and much thoughtfulness with it:
They exercised their Minds upon what they read; They considered, compared, and
inferred: They had the felicity of clear and distinct thinking, and had large
compass in their Thoughts. By reading they rendered their Understandings full;
and by Meditation they kept that fullness from being disorderly and confused.

Being thus prepared, They addressed themselves to the more close, particular,
and through study of Divinity: They thought it not enough to read a few Systems,
and bundles of Novel Opinions, to understand the current Orthodoxy of the
Times, or to gain the faculty of speaking to the People in the taking T^ and
Phrase, (things that made up the Divines of that Age): But enquired into the
state of Religion in former days: They read the Histories of the Church, and
applied themselves to a careful perusal of the Fathers of the three first
Centuries: In them they looked for the Doctrine and Practices that were in the
beginning: They considered, that Religion was most pure in those Primitive
Times of Holiness and Matyrdom; and that by knowing what was the belief and use
then, they might be enabled to judge better of the more Modern Ways and
Opinions: That though other Knowledge grew, and was much advanced by Time, yet
Divinity was in its perfectoon, in the days of the Apostles, and nearest Ages
to them; and had still been degenerating (more or less) in following Times.
That it was therefore best to enquire after the old Ways, and to take the
Measures of Faith and Practice, from Primitive Doctrine and Usage; and
accordingly they endeavored to form theirs. They conversed with the Works of
your Excellent Writers, whom I mentioned, and other Learned Men, whom
Providence raised about that Season, to direct the World to those eldest, best
Patterns. They read also the Histories, and observed the growth of Sects: They
examined the Books of the chief reputed Heretics, and considered the Arguments
wherewith they endeavored to establish their Opinions. They descended even to
the Wild Scribbles and Contentions of the several Parties in our distracted
Land; They acquainted themselves thoroughly with their Spirit, Principles,
Phrases, and ways of Reasoning; as judging, that none could deal effectually in
the exposing and confuting any Sect, but those who well understood it. Besides
all this, They directed their Studies (many of them) to the Jewish Learning,
That they might be instructed in the Rites, Opinions, and Usages of that
People, for the better understanding of many things in the Scripture that
relate unto them. They enquired into the Reasonableness of the great Principles
of Religion, and particularly of the Christian; and provided themselves thereby
to deal with Atheists, Infidels, and Enthusiasts, with which that Age abounded.
I could say much more, but this is enough to show that these Men were qualified
to do something in the World.

Here I interrupted the Relation a little, and said, That it seemed to me that
such Preparations should have taken up the better part of their Lives, and not
have left much time for Action. He answered, That Diligence, Meditation, and a
right Method of Studies would go very far, and do mighty Matters in an
indifferent Time; and that he who knew the shortest cut, and went constantly
on, would pass over a considerable Desert in a few days, while another that
loyter'd, or was ignorant of the way, might wander all his Life in it to little
purpose. That those Men took the direct Course, and had the best Guides, the
choice Books of all sorts; one another excellent Company, and improving
Converse. That they spent no unprofitable time, among the Voluminous Triflers;
and in the confused Rubbish of Learning. That they went straight on toward
their end, without diverting to bie and impertinent Matters. They that made
even their most common Conversations to serve them, in their study of Humane
Nature, the Inclinations and Passions of Men: And even the wildness and humors
of Sects afforded them instruction in the nature of Enthusiasm, and
Superstitions of all kinds. So that their Understandings and Observations were
advanced far, while their years were not many; and they had the happy
Conjunction of the Judgment of Ripe Age, with the vigor of Youth. I bowed to
declare my satisfaction, and He went on.

IT will be time now, after the Discourse of their Preparations, to let you
know what they did; and what were the Effects of these promising beginnings.
This I shall do, By representing

(1.) Some things that were more general. (2.) Their particular Endeavors in
the Affairs of Religion. (3.) A more full account of their Genius, and
Thoughts, in some main Parts of Learning.
I BEGIN with their more General Actions and Declarations of their Thoughts.

ONe of the first things they did, was, to deliver their own Minds (and to
endeavor the same for others) from the Prepossessions, and Prejudices of
Complexion, Education, and implicit Authority; Asserting the Liberty of
Enquiry, and thereby freeing their Reasons from a base and dishonorable
Servitude, and vindicating this just Right of Humane Nature. For though they
knew, That Green Youth, and Vulgar Inquirers, ought not pragmatically to call
their Teachers to account for their Doctrines, or to venture upon deep
Speculations without assistance; Yet they thought, that Men who were bred in
the way of Study, had first submisly heard the Opinions of their Instructors,
and been well acquainted with their Dictates, who were arrived to maturity of
Understanding, and a good capacity to seek after Truth; might at length be
permitted to judge for themselves; that so they might choose, like reasonable
Creatures, and not have their Principles brutishly obtruded on them. This they
saw was a natural Right, and that the Tyrannical Custom of overruling and
suppressing it, had held the greatest part of Mankind in fatal Chains of
Ignorance and Error.

Here, I say, They begun, and taught, That all lovers of Truth, whose
Judgments were competently matur'd, ought to free their Minds from the
Prejudices of Education, and usurping Authorities; that is, so far, as not to
conclude any thing certainly true, or false, merely on the account of those
Impressions: But to try all things, as Scripture and Reason require, and
encourage us; and to suspend the giving up our full, and resolved assent to the
Doctrines we have been taught, till we have impartially considered and examined
them our selves. That in our Researches, we ought to retain a Reverence for
Antiquity, and venerable Names; but not blindly to give up our Understandings
to them, against clear Evidence of the Divine Oracles, or Impartial Reason.
That when other Considerations, on both sides, were equal, the Inducements of
old Belief, and reverend Authorities ought to determine us to a probable assent
on that side: But when God's Word, or our Faculties stood on the other, we
ought not to be inclined.

Thus they modestly asserted the Liberty of Judgment, and bounded it with so
much Caution, that no Prejudice could arise to Legal Establishments from that
freedom: For they allowed it not to immature Youth; or to illiterate or
injudicious Men, who are not to be trusted to conclude for themselves in things
of difficult Theory: But advised such, to submit to their Instructors, and so
practice the plain things they are taught, without busy intermedling in
Speculative Opinions, and things beyond their reach. Such a Liberty of Judgment
as this they taught, and such was necessary for the Age, in which the Minds of
Men were inthrall'd by the Masters of Sects, and the Opinions then styled
Orthodox, from which it was accounted Heresy and Damnatiou to recede. So that
nothing could be done, to set them at large from those vain Fancies and Ways,
till they were persuaded to examine them with freedom and indifference, and to
conclude according to the Report of their Faculties. They knew, That Truth
would have the advantage, could it but procure an impartial Trial: That the
False Doctrines, and Fanatical Practices of the Times would be detected and
shamed, were it not for the superstitious straightness that suppressed all
Enquiry; and that those Old Truths that were exploded with so much abhorrence,
would, in all likelihood, gain upon the Judgments and Assents of all that were
free, and durst to be inquisitive. On such accounts they pressed the Liberty of
Judgment; and in a time when it was very seasonable, and no hurt could directly
arise from it. Since

(2.) They taught, and urged much modesty together with it; and allowed not
Dogmatical Affirmations, but in things that were most fundamental and certain:
They considered, That our Understandings, at best, are very weak; and that the
search of Truth is difficult; that we are very liable to be imposed on by our
Complexions, Imaginations, Interests, and Affections. That whole Ages, and
great Kingdoms, and Christian Churches, and Learned Counsels, have joined in
Common Errors; and obtruded false and absurd Conceits upon the World with great
severity, and flaming Zeal; That much Folly, and great Nonsense have many
times generally obtained, and been held for certain, and Sacred; That all
Mankind are puzzled, and bafled in the disquisition of the seeming, plainest,
and most obvious things, In the Objects of Sense, and Motions of our own Souls:
That (in earnest) we cannot tell, How we speak a Word, or move a Finger; How
the Soul is united to the Body; or the Parts of Bodies to one another; how our
own were framed at first; or how afterward they are nourished. That these
nearest things, and a thousand more, are hid from our deepest Enquiries.

Thus they considered often, and filled their Thoughts with a great sense of
the narrowness of humane Capacity, and the Imperfections of our largest
Knowledge; which they used not to any purposes of unwarrantable Skepticism, or
absolute neutrality of Judgment, but to engage their Minds to a greater
wariness in Enquiry, and more shiness of Assent to things not very clear and
evident; to more reservedness in their Affirmations, and more modesty in their
Arguings.

After this manner they practiced themselves, and thus they discoursed to
others, and nothing could be more proper for those times, in which everyone
(almost) was immoderately confident of his own way, and thereby rendered
insolent in his Dictates, and incurable in his Errors; scornful to opposite
Judgments, and ready to quarrel all Dissenters; So that the World was hereby
filled with Animosity and Clamours; whereas modesty in Opinions would have
prevented those Mischiefs; and it was taught by those Men as the likelyest way
of Cure. For there is no hopes, either of Truth or Peace, while every one of
the divided, thinks himself infallible: But when they come to grant a
possibility of their being out in their Beloved Tenants, there is something
then to work upon toward their better Information.

But (3.) there was still less danger in the Liberty they promoted: for as much
as they practiced and persuaded much prudence to be used in the publishing of
their Tenants; They allowed not any declaration of private Sentiments, when
such a Declaration might tend to the disgrace or dissettlement of Legal
Appointments, or any Articles of the Established Religion; provided there were
no Idolatry, or direct Heresy in the things enjoined: But believed, and
taught, That Men ought to content themselves with their own Satisfactions, in
the Supposed Truths they have discovered, without clamorous Disputes, or
Wranglings. And though in the large compass of Enquiry they took, and the
Considerations they had of all sorts of Idaea's, that enter into the various
Minds of thinking Men, it could not be, but that they should have several
Apprehensions, different from vulgar Thoughts; Yet they were very cautious in
discovering their Conceptions among the illiterate and unqualified; They had no
delight in speaking strange things, or in appearing to be singular and
extraordinary: They were not so fond of their own Opinions, as to think them
necessary for all others: Nor were they infected with the Common Zeal, to
spread and propagate every Truth they thought they knew: No, they considered,
there were Truths which the World would not bear, and that some of the greatest
would be received here with the bitterest contempt and derision: So that to
publish, would be but to expose them to popular scorn, and themselves also:
Their main Design was, to make Men good, not notional, and knowing; and
therefore, though they concealed no practical Verities that were proper and
seasonable, yet they were sparing in their Speculations, except where they
tended to the necessary vindication of the Honor of God, or the directing the
Lives of Men: They spoke of other Matters of Notion only among their known
Friends, and such as were well prepared, able to examine, and disposed to
pardon or receive them: Among these they discoursed the greatest, freest
Speculations, with as much liberty in their Words, as in their Thoughts; and
though they differed in many Notions, yet those Differences did nothing but
serve the pleasure of Conversation, and exercise of Reasoning: They begot no
estrangements or distasts, no noise or trouble abroad.

Such was the prudence that They practiced and taught; and this also was very
proper for those Times, when every Man vented his Conceits for Articles of
Faith, and told his Dreams for Revelations, and then pretended he was
extraordinarily enlightened, and strove to make Proselites, and quarreled with
all that did not embrace his Fancies, and separated from the Communion of the
Church, and endeavored to involve the World in Hurries and Distractions; and
all this, for the sake of a few pitiful, needless, senseless Trifles: In such a
time, this prudent Spirit and Practice was singularly seasonable and useful.

But though they were thus cauteous and wary about Theories more remote, and
not necessary; yet they were not altogether indifferent to what Men believed
and thought: No, They were concerned, and zealous against the Fanatic Conceits
and Humors of the Age, which were the occasions of so much Folly,
Irregularity, and Disturbance: And my next Business is to declare in some great
Instances, how they demeaned Themselves in opposing of them. This was the
second thing I undertook to relate; namely, Their particular endeavors in the
Affairs of Religion.

But before I fall on it; I must declare to you, That They had not any Religion
different from that of other Catholic Christians, but were faithful adherers
to the old acknowledged Christianity, as it was taught by the Church of
Bensalem: To this Church they conformed heartily; though they were
distinguishable from some others of her Sons, by the application of their
Genius and Endeavors: I have told you, They grew up among the Sects; They were
Born and Bred in that Age, which they could not help; But as they ordered the
Matter, it was no hurt to the Church, or them, that they were educated in bad
times: They had the occasion thence, of understanding the Genius, Humor, and
Principles of the Parties, which, those that stood always at distance from
them, could not so thoroughly and inwardly know: By that means they had great
advantage for providing, and applying the Remedies, and Confutations that were
proper and effectual; And by daily Converse, and near Observation, they settled
in their Minds a dislike of those ways, that was greater and juster than the
Antipathy of some others who saw only their outsides, that in many things were
specious and plausible. They studied in the Places where some of the chief of
the Sects governed, and those that were ripe for the Service, preached
publicly, as other Academical Divines did. This they scrupled not, because
they were young, and had been under no explicit engagements to those Laws, that
were then unhappily overruled: But in those, and in their other
Vniversity-Exercises, they much served the Interest of the Church of Bensalem,
by undermining the Ataxites, (so the Sectaries are here called) and propagating
the Anti-fanatical Doctrines, which they had entertained and improved: So that
I cannot look upon that Spirit otherwise, than as an Antidote that Providence
then seasonably provided against the deadly Infection of those days: On which
account, they were by some, called the Anti-fanites, because of their peculiar
opposition of the Fans, or Fanites, (as the Ataxites were sometimes named): And
though some Persons thought fit to judge, and spoke of Them as a new Sort of
Divines; Yet they were not to be so accounted, in any sense of disparagement;
since the new Things they taught, were but contradictions of the new Things
that were introduced; and new Errors and Pretenses, will occasion new ways of
Opposition and Defense.

I have now (I doubt) said the Governor, almost tired you with prefacing, but
these things were fit to be premised: I expressed my self well-pleased, both with
the Matters he related, and the order which he thought convenient to declare
them in; and so he proceeded to the second main Head; Their particular
Principles and Practices.

I MUST tell you then, said He, first, That they took notice of the loud
Outcries and Declamations that were among all the Sects, against Reason; and
observed, how by that means all Vanities and Phanatick Devices were brought
into Religion: They saw, There was no likelihood any stop should be put to
those Extravagancies of Fancy that were impudently obtruding themselves upon
the World; but by vindicating and asserting the use of Reason in Religion; and
therefore, their private Discourses, and public Exercises ran much this way;
to maintain the sober use of our Faculties, and to expose and shame all vain
Enthusiasms: And as Socrates of old, first began the Reformation of his Age,
and reduced Men from the wildness of Fancy, and Enthusiastic Fegaries, with
which they were overgrown, by pleading for Reason, and showing the necessity
and Religion that there is in harkening to its Dictates; So They, in order to
the cure of the madness of their Age, were zealous to make Men sensible;

That Reason is a Branch and Beam of the Divine Wisdom; That Light which he
has put into our Minds, and that Law which he has writ upon our Hearts: That
the Revelations of God in Scripture, do not contradict what he has engraven
upon our Natures: That Faith it self, is an Act of Reason, and is built upon
these two Reasonable Principles, That there is a God; and, That what he says
is true: That our Erroneous Deductions are not to be called Reason, but
Sophistry, Ignorance, and Mistake: That nothing can follow from Reason, but
Reason; and that what so follows, is as true and certain as Revelation: That
God never disparageth Reason, in Scripture, but that the vain Philosophy, and
Wisdom of this World there spoken against, were Worldly Policies, Jewish
Genealogies, Traditions, and the Notional Philosophy of some Gentiles: That
Carnal Reason is the Reason of Appetite and Passion; and not the Dictates of
our Minds: That Reason proves some Main and Fundamental Articles of Faith, and
defends all, by proving the Authority of Holy Scripture: That we have no cause
to take any thing for an Article of Faith, till we see Reason to believe that
God said it, and in the sense wherein we receive such a Doctrine: That to
decry, and disgrace Reason, is to strike up Religion by the Roots, and to
prepare the World for Atheism.

According to such Principles as these, They managed their Discourses about
this Subject: They stated the Notions of Faith and Reason clearly, and
endeavored to deliver the Minds of Men from that confusedness in those
Matters, which blind Zeal had brought upon them; that so they might not call
Vain Sophistry by the name of Humane Reason, and rail at this, for the sake of
Fallacy, and the Impostures of Ignorance and Fancy. Hereby they made some
amends for the dangerous rashness of those inconsiderate Men, who having heard
others defame Reason as an Enemy to Faith, set up the same Cry, and filled
their Oratories with the terrible noise of Carnal Reason, Vain Philosophy, and
such other misapplyed words of reproach, without having ever clearly or
distinctly considered what they said, or whereof they affirmed: And this they
did too at a time when the World was posting a-pace into all kinds of madness;
as if they were afraid the half-distracted Religionists would not run fast
enough out of their Wits, without their Encouragement and Assistance: And as if
their Design had been to credit Frenzy and Enthusiasm, and to disable all
proof that could be brought against them. This I believe many of those
well-meaning Canters against Reason did not think of, though what they did had
a direct tendency that way: And accordingly it succeeded; For the conceited
People hearing much of Incomes, Illuminations, Communions, Lights, Discoveries,
Sealings, Manifestations, and Impressions, as the Heights of Religion; and
then, being told, that Reason is a low, Carnal Thing, and not to judge in these
Spiritual Matters; That it is a Stranger to them, and at enmity with the Things
of God: I say, the People that were so taught, could not choose but be taken
with the wild Exstatical Enthusiasts, who made the greatest boasts of these
glorious Privileges; nor could they easily avoid looking upon the glarings of
their own Imaginations, and the warmths and impulses of their Melancholy, as
Divine Revelations, and Illapses. To this dangerous pass thousands were brought
by such Preachments, and had so well learned to apply the Doctrines they had
been taught, that he that should endeavor to undeceive them, was sure to hear
what an Enemy this Reason, this Carnal Reason, this Vain Philosophy, was to
Free Grace and Faith; and how little able to judge of those Rich, those
Precious, those Spiritual Enjoyments.

'Twas time now, in such an Age as this, to assert the sober use of Reason, and
to rescue Religion by it. And They did this happily, and shamed all false
pretenses to the Spirit, showing,

That there was nothing but Nature and Complexion in the Illuminations,
Incomes, Raptures, Prophesies, New Lights, fluency of Expression,
mysteriousness of Phrase, and other wonderful things of the Enthusiasts, which
were ignorantly taken to be Divine Communications, to the great abuse of
Religion, and the Souls of Men: Perceiving (I say) that this dangerous
Phanatick Spirit was the evil Genius of the Age, they bent all their force
against it, and detected the imposture, and labored zealously to disabuse the
credulous People, who were exceeding apt to be taken with such glorious
Nothings. (But of this, I shall have another occasion to speak more.)

ANd because the wildness of Enthusiasm, and reproaches of Reason, had exposed
Christianity it self to the Suspicions of some, and Contempts of others, as if
it were a precarious unreasonable thing, that depended only upon Men's Fancies;
Therefore here They labored also, with very pious pains, to demonstrate the
Truth and Reasonableness of the Christian Religion; The Being of God; The
Immortality of Humane Souls; And Authority of Scripture; which they did with
much Zeal, and much Judgment: And these Doctrines were too seasonable and
necessary in that Age, in which the most glorious Professors laid the whole
stress of Religion upon Fancies, and thereby undermined the Foundations of
Faith, and Truth; and by many Vanities, and endless Divisions, had made so many
Infidels, and unhappily disposed so many others to go the same way: Against
these therefore They bent their strength, and rescued multitudes, especially
those of the springing Generation, from the hands, both of the Enthusiast and
the Infidel; Answering and discrediting all the new Pretensions and Objections,
both of the one and the other: And their Endeavors here were very needful,
because the Ancient Books of those kinds were despised and neglected by the
concerned Parties; and they were not so suitable to the Guize and Fashion of
our Age; and many Exceptions were started anew, and many other vain things
boasted of, to which those elder Discourses did not apply their force: But
these new Defenders of the Christian Truths met them all, and spoke the things
that were suitable, as well as those that were strong and true: By these means
the reasonable sober Spirit began to propagate; and the Enthusiast, who took
notice of it, and knew it would destroy his Glorious Imaginations, raised a
loud clamor against these Men as Socinians, and advancers of Proud Reason,
above Free Grace and Faith.

From this envious and foolish Charge, they sufficiently justified themselves
by several Sermons, and public Determinations in their Academical Solemnities,
against the chief Principles of Socinianism, sirenously asserting the Deity of
Christ, and Immortality of Humane Souls, etc. and vigorously opposing the main
Socinian Tenants: In consequence of which, they showed the sure and safe ways
to destroy those Opinions, without hurting the Catholic Doctrines, which many
had wounded to do them spite; and in this Design some of them appeared in
public with great success.

HAving thus asserted the Honor of our Faculties, and maintained the
Fundamental Interests of Religion, They took notice, what unworthy and
dishonorable Opinions were published abroad concerning God, to the
disparagement of all his Attributes, and discouragement of virtuous Endeavors,
and great trouble and dejection of many pious Minds; and therefore here they
appeared also to assert and vindicate the Divine Goodness and love of Men in
its freedom and extent, against those Doctrines, that made his Love, Fondness;
and his Justice, Cruelty; and represented God, as the Eternal Hater of the far
greatest part of his reasonable Creatures, and the designer of their Ruin, for
the exaltation of mere Power, and arbitrary Will: Against these sour and dismal
Opinions They stood up stoutly, in a time when the Assertors of the Divine
Purity and Goodness, were persecuted bitterly with nicknames of Reproach, and
popular Hatred. They gave sober Accounts of the Nature of God, and his
Attributes, suitable to those Declarations of himself he has made by the
Scriptures, and our Reasons: They showed continually how impossible it was that
Infinite Goodness should design or delight in the misery of his Creatures: That
God never acts by mere arbitrary Will, but by a Will directed by the
Perfections of his Nature: That to act arbitrarily is Imperfection and
Impotence: That he is tied by the excellency of his Being, to the Laws of
Right, and Just, and that there are independent Relations of True and Good
among things, antecedent to all Will and Understanding, which are indispensible
and eternal: That Goodness is the Fountain of all his Communications and
Actions ad extra: That to glorify God, is rightly to apprehend and celebrate
his Perfections, by our Words, and by our Actions: That Goodness is the chief
moral Perfection: That Power without Goodness is Tyranny; and Wisdom without
it, is but Craft and Subtilty; and Justice, Cruelty, when destitute of
Goodness: That God is not pleased with our Praises, otherwise than as they are
the suitable Actings of his Creatures, and tend to make them love him, in order
to their being happy in him.

By such Principles as These, which are wonderfully fertile, and big of many
great Truths, they undermined, and from the bottom overthrew the fierce and
churlish Reprobatarian Doctrines; And those Truths they proved from the
Scripture, and the Nature of God, and Reason of Things, with all possible
clearness, and strength of Evidence.

OBserving further, That Faith was preached up as the whole of Religion; and
that represented variously, phantastickly, and after an unintelligible manner,
dressed up in Metaphors and Phrases, and dangerous Notions, that prescinded it
from Good Works, and made them unnecessary: Here they appeared also, and
detected the vanity and canting of this Airy Divinity; Stating the Notion of
Faith plainly and clearly, and stripping it out of its Chymerical clothing,
Teaching,

That Faith in the general is the Belief of a Proposition affirmed; and Divine
Faith, the belief of a Divine Testimony; and Evangelical, Saving Faith, such a
Belief as works on the Will and Affections, and produces the Works of
Righteousness: So that the Faith that is said to justify, (in the forensick
sense) is a complex thing, and takes in an Holy Life, and all the Graces of the
Spirit, which are called by the name of Faith, because that is the Root of all
the rest. Thus they asserted the necessity of a real, inward Righteousness,
against the Solifidian and Antinomian Heresies, which had poisoned the whole
Body of the then Current Theology, and was counted the only Spiritual Doctrine.

In those days Men were taught, that we are justified only by the Jmputed
Righteousness of Christ, by which they said, we are formally Righteous; That
Faith justified only as it laid hold of that, (as they phrased it) and that
Inherent Righteousness was to be renounced, and had nothing to do here. These
were the great dear Mysteries of their Theology, that seasoned all their
Doctrines and Instructions, which by this means also were rendered exceedingly
fanciful and dangerous: Therefore in this likewise, those Divines interposed
and demonstrated the vanity and mischief of such fulsome and groundless
Conceits; They stated the true and warrantable sense in which Christ's
Righteousness is imputed, viz. Metonymically, and as to Effects; That is, That
for the sake of his Righteousness, God was pleased to pardon Penitents, and to
deal with them upon their Faith, and sincere Obedience, as if they had been
Righteous themselves: Not as if he past false, and mistaken Judgments, and
looked on Christ's Righteousness as really and properly theirs; but that for
his sake He pardoned their sins, and accepted of their personal imperfect
righteousness, as if it had been perfect. They showed that this account was
agreeable to Scripture, and the Analogy of sound Faith, and Practice; and that
the other sense was nowhere delivered in the holy Oracles, but was a mere
imagination contrary to the Attributes of God, and to the Doctrines, and
designs of the Gospel, and exceedingly pernicious to Christian Life, and
Virtue: They alleged that Christ's Righteousness is nowhere in Scripture said
to be imputed: That he is no otherwise made Righteousness to us then he is made
Sanctification, and Redemption; that is, He is the great Author and procurer of
them; and that in that sense he is the Lord our Righteousness. They took notice
how that by this odd Fanatic principle, Personal Righteousness was undermined,
and disparaged; and one of the first things the people were taught, was, to
renounce their own Righteousness, without restriction, or limitation, in which
Counsel there is much show of humility; but much nonsense and much danger, if
it be not delivered, and taken in a cautious sense: For the Apostles, and
primitive Believers never renounced any Righteousness, but that of the Mosaical
dispensation, in which some of them had gloried much before their conversion;
But after it, were convinced, It was nothing worth, and counted it as dross,
and dung in respect of that Righteousness that Christ taught: They never
disparaged real, inward Righteousness: Yea they took ground of confidence, and
rejoicing from it, viz. from the simplicity and sincerity of their
conversation, from their having a good Conscience in all things; from their
stedfastness amidst Tribulations, and patience in their Sufferings; and they
plainly tell us, That Religion was doing Righteousness, and consisted in
visiting the Widow and Fatherless, and being unspotted with the World; in
denying all ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and living soberly, righteously,
and Godly; They warn us to beware of those deceivers that would persuade a man
may be righteous; without doing righteously; yea they declare the promises to
be entailed upon those, that by patient continuance in well-doing seek for
Glory, and Immortality.

But said He, I forget my self, and run out too far into this Discourse, in
which I suppose I need not inform you, the Scriptures being so full in it.

Here I took liberty to move a Question, and asked him, Whether those Divines
did teach, or allow Men's relying, and depending on their own inward Virtues, or
outward Works? To this he said, They had not the least imagination, that there
was either Merit, or Perfection in our qualifications, or performances; but
that in those respects they renounced their own righteousness, and obedience:
That they acknowledged, and declared that our highest, best services could
never deserve the divine notice, or acceptance by any worthiness in them; But
then, added He, They said also, that Christ's obedience was Perfect, and
Meritorious, and that God was so well satisfied with it, that for his sake he
promised to pardon the failings of our duties, and to accept of Sincerity
instead of Perfection: That on this account, our short, defective righteousness
was received, as if it had been adaequate, and complete; we being through
Christ, under a Covenant of Grace, and Pardon, and our obedience not judged
according to strict measures, and proportions, but by the rules of mercy, and
favor. Thus they stated that matter clearly, and struck at the root of
Antinomian follies, and impostures.

ANd because Morality was despised by those elevated Fantasticks, that talked
so much of Imputed Righteousness, in the false sense; and accounted by them, as
a dull, and low thing; therefore those Divines labored in the asserting and
vindicating of this: Teaching the necessity of Moral Virtues; That Christianity
is the highest improvement of them; That the mere first-table Religion is
nothing, without the works of the second; That Zeal, and Devoutness, and
delight in Hearing, Prayer, and other externals of worship, may be in very evil
men: That Imitation, and Custom, and Pride, and Selflove may produce these:
That these are no more then the Forms of Godliness: That the power of it
consists in subduing self-will, and ruling our passions, and moderating our
appetites, and doing the works of real Righteousness toward God, and our
Neighbor.

And because there was a Religion that had got into credit, that did not make
Men better, but worse in all relations, worse Governors, and worse Subjects,
and worse Parents, and worse Neighbors; more sower, and morose, and fierce,
and censorious; Therefore, They pressed Men to consider, That the design of
Religion was to perfect humane Nature; To restore the empire of our minds over
the will, and affections; To make them more temperate, and contented in
reference to themselves, and more humble, meek, courteous, charitable and just
toward others. On such things as these, performed sincerely, by the
assistance, and encouragement of Faith in Christ, and from a desire to be ruled
by his Laws, they laid the whole stress.

ANd being the Age was unhappily disposed to place much Religion in their
conceited Orthodoxy, and Systems of Opinion, to the destruction of Charity, and
Peace; To the dissetlement of Religion, and great hinderance of real Godliness:
They therefore zealously decryed this superstition of Opinions, and smartly
reproved Disputings, and eagerness of contest about Notions, and lesser Truths:
Showing the inconveniences, and mischiefs of that spirit, and it is
inconsistency with Charity, and the peace of Mankind: They persuaded modestly
in all extraessential Doctrines, and suspense of judgment in things that were
not absolutely certain; and readiness to pardon the mistakes of those that
differ from us in matters of speculation.

In order hereunto, They made this one of their main Doctrines; That The
principles which are necessary to Salvation are very few, and very plain, and
generally acknowledged among Christians: This they taught, and were earnest in
it, because they saw it would secure Charity to dissenters, and prevent all
vehemencies of captious dispute, all schisms, and unnecessary separations, and
many Wars, and Persecutions upon the account of Religion: For if the things in
which Men differ, be not Religion, be not Faith, and Fundamental; If this be
true, and this truth acknowledged, All these would want pretense; and so Peace
and Unity would possess the spirits of Men. They saw that Religion, which was
shaken by divisions, and rendered suspected of uncertainty through the mixture
of uncertain things, would stand safe, and firm when 'twas laid only upon the
plain, infallible, undoubted propositions: That holiness would thrive, when
Men's zeal was taken off from talking, and disputing against others, and
directed inwards to the government of themselves, and the reformation of their
own hearts, and lives: That Papism, which in those times of distraction began
to spread even here, would drop to the ground, if it were believed, That the
necessary principles of Religion were few, and plain, and those agreed on: For
then there would be no need of an Infallible Interpreter, and Judge: I say,
They were sensible, that all the great Interests of Religion, and Mankind might
be served by the acknowledgment of this one Reasonable Principle; which they
saw was the only way to bring us to stability, and consistence; ^o Peace, and
Union.

In Consequence of this Spirit, and Doctrine, they discoursed the things
wherein they differed from others, with mildness, and modesty, without anger,
and damning sentences; and afforded their converses to all sorts of good Men,
though they believed them mistaken: They never expressed rage in their
conversations, or discourses against bare errors, and mistakes of judgment:
But for the pride, and confidence, censoriousness and groundless separations,
that are the frequent attendants of different opinions; These sometimes moved
them to anger, and expression of just resentment; because they looked on them
as great Immoralities, and very pernicious sins: And on the occasion of these
spiritual vices, they were warmed with zeal, against the Sectaries, and Bigots;
for the taking down of whose pride, and confidence, They thought it necessary
to detect the Impostors, and to expose their vanities; which they did
successfully, and showed:

That their Divinity consisted most in Phrases; and their boasted spirituality,
in fond affections: That their new lights were but freakish fancies; and old
Heresies revived; and the precious Mysteries of their Theology, but conceited
absurdities, and nonsense in a fantastic dress: They happily drew the
parallel between our Separatists, and those ancient ones, the Pharisees; and
proved that the same spirit acted the Ataxites, that governed those Jewish
Fanatics: And because their pretenses were taking, and specious, and had
caught great numbers of the easy, well meaning people of Bensalem; Therefore,
to disabuse them, they labored much to show the shortness of their kind of
Godliness; and the danger of placing all Religion in Praying, Hearing, Zeal,
Rapture, Mysteries, and Opinions.

Accordingly they declared, and proved, That 1. Fluency, and Pathetick
eloquence in sudden Prayer may proceed, and does, many time, from excited
passion, and warm imagination; from a peculiar temper, and heated melancholy:
That these are no sign that a man prays by the spirit, nor do they argue him to
be one jot the better, then those that want the faculty, or any whit the more
accepted of God for it: That to pray by the spirit is to pray with Faith,
Desire, and Love; and that a Man may pray by the spirit, and with a Form.

2. That people may delight to hear from other causes, then conscience, and a
desire to be directed in the government of their Lives: That hearing is very
grateful to some, because it feeds their opinions, and furnishes their
tongues, and inables them to make a great show of extraordinary Saint-ship:
They represented that mere animal Men, and fond lovers of themselves may be
much taken with hearing of the Gracious promises, and Glorious privileges of
the Gospel; when at the same time, they are told they are all theirs, and
theirs peculiarly, and exclusively to the rest of Mankind: That pride, and
vanity, and self-love will recommend, and indear such preaching; That it is
most luscious to fond, and conceited men, to hear how much better, and more
precious they are then their Neighbors; how much dearer to God, and more
favored by him; what an interest they have in free, distinguishing Grace, and
how very few have a share in it, besides themselves: How their enemies are
hated of God, and how sad a condition they are in, who differ from them in
practices, and opinions: To dote on such preaching, and admiringly to follow
such Preachers, They showed, was but to be in love with flattery, and
self-deceit: That it was no sign of Godliness, but an evident argument of
pride, malice, and immoderate selfishness; That these are the true causes of
the zeal, and earnestness of many after Sermons; and of the pleasure that they
have in hearing, though they would persuade others, and believe themselves,
that the love of Religion, and sense of duty are the only motives that prevail
with them.

3. Concerning zeal, They taught; That zeal in it self is indifferent, and made
good, or bad, as it is objects, and incentives are; That mere education, and
custom, natural conscience, and particular complexion, do sometimes make Men
very zealous about things of Religion: That though the fervours of the Ataxites
for their Doctrines, and ways, were not all feigned; but real and sincere; Yet
their zeal was nothing worth, being but mere natural passion, kindled by a fond
delight in their own self chosen practices, and opinions; That their coldness
to the great known necessary duties of Justice, Charity, Obedience, Modesty,
and Humility was an evident sign, that their heat for pretended Orthodox
tenants, and modes of worship, had nothing Divine in it: That true zeal begins
at home with self-reformation; and that where it was employed altogether about
amendments of external Religion, and public Government, it was pernicious, not
only to the World, but to a Man's self also.

4. And because the heights of zeal ran up sometimes into raptures, and
exstacies, which were looked on as wonderful appearances of God in the thus
transported persons; Therefore, here also They undeceived the people (as I said
in the general before) by showing,

That these alienations may be caused naturally, by the power of a strong
fancy, working upon violent affections: That they together may, and do, often,
produce deliquiums of sense; That the Imagination working then freely, and
without contradiction, or disturbance from the external senses, and being
wholly employed about Religious matters may form to it self strange Images of
extraordinary apparitions of God, and Angels; of Voices, and Revelations; which
being forcibly impressed on the fancy, may beget a firm belief in the exstaticall
person, that all these were divine manifestations, and discoveries; and so he
confidently thinks himself a Prophet, and an inspired Man, and vents all his
conceits for Seraphick truths, and holy Mysteries: And by the vehemence of his
affirmations, and the strange effects of his distemper, others are persuaded
into the same vain opinion of him, that he has of himself, to the great
disparagement of Religion, and deception of the simple.

This whole mystery of vanity, and delusion They laid open to the World, and
showed, that all was but a natural disease, and far enough from being sacred,
or supernatural: That very evil Men, and even the Heathen Priests have felt all
those effects, and pretended to the same wonder^ and were as much inspired, and
divinely acted, as those exstatical Dreamers:

5. And whereas those high flown Enthusiasts talked much of mysteries; and the
Sects, (generally contending which should, outdo the other here) made up their
schemes of divinity of absurdities, and strange, unintelligible fancies; and
then counted their groundless belief of those wild freaks, a great sign and
exercise of Faith, and spirituality; The Divines (of whom I am speaking)
employed themselves worthily to detect this taking imposture also; They gave
the true senses in in which the Gospel is a mystery, viz. A secret, hid in the
councils of God, and not discoverable by reason, or humane enquiries till he
was pleased, in the fullness of time, to unfold it clearly, and explicitly by
his Son, and by his Spirit, who revealed the mystery that had been hid from
ages: That Religion may yet be called a mystery, as it is an Art that has
difficulty in the practice of it: And though all it is main, necessary Articles
are asserted so clearly, that they may be known by every sincere Inquirer, and
in that respect have no darkness, or obscurity upon them; Yet They asserted,
that some of those propositions may be styled mysterious being inconceiveable
as to the manner of them: Thus the Immaculate Conception of our Savior, for
instance, is very plain as to the thing, being revealed clearly, That it was;
Though unexplicable, and unreveal'd as to the mode, How: They said, That our
Faith is not concerned in the manner, which way this, or that is, except where
it is expressly, and plainly taught in Scripture; but that the belief of the
simple Article is sufficient: So that we are not to puzzle our selves with
contradictions, and knots of subtilty, and fancy, and then call them by the
name of mysteries. That to affect these is dangerous vanity, and to believe
them, is silliness, and credulity: That by, and on the occasion of such
pretended mysteries, The simplicity of the Gospel has been destroyed, the
minds of Men infatuated, sober Christians despised, the peace of the Church
disturbed, the honor of Religion exposed, the practice of holiness and virtue
neglected, and the World disposed to Infidelity, and Atheism it self.

6. And since the being Orthodox in Doctrine, and sound in their new conc^ed
Faith, was in those times a great matter, and one mark of Saint-ship; as error
on the other hand was of unregeneracy, and Reprobation; They showed, That bare
knowledge of points of Doctrine was nothing worth, in comparison of Charity,
Humility, and Meckness; That it did not signify in the divine esteem without
these, and such other concomitant Graces: That a man was never the better for
being in the right opinion, if he were proud, contentious, and ungovernable
with it: That ignorance, and mistake in lesser things when joined with modesty,
and submission to God, and our Governors, was much to be preferred before empty
turbulent, and conceited Orthodoxy: That errors of judgment are truly
infirmities, that will not be imputed, if there be no corrupt, and vicious
mixture with them: That they are not hurt to him whom they do not seduce, and
mislead; nor do they make any alteration in our state: That God pardons them in
us, and we ought to overlook and pass them by in one another.

By such ways and representations as these They disabl'd the main works whereby
the fond Ataxites concluded themselves to be the Godly; and destroyed the chief
grounds on which they built their proudest pretenses. So that their wings being
clipped, they came down to the ordinary level with other mortals; leaving the
title of Godliness, and Saint-ship to be made out by quiet devotion, and
self-government, by Meekness, and Charity, Justice, and Patience, Modesty, and
Humility, Universal Obedience to Gods Commands, Reverence to Superiors, and
Submission to Governors; and not by the other fantastical, and cheap things,
consisting but of imaginations, and phrases, and mystical nothings.

ANd for as much as each Sect confined the Church, Saintship, and Godliness to
it self, and entailed the Promises, and Privileges of the Gospel upon it is own
People; Therefore here They stood up, and reproved the Antichristian pride and
vanity of that cruel, and unjust humor; Showing, That the Church consists of
all those that agree in the profession, and acknowledgment of the Scripture,
and the first comprehensive, plain Creeds, however scattered through the World,
and distinguished by names of Nations, and Parties, under various degrees of
light, and diverse particular models, and forms of Worship, as to circumstance,
and order: That every lover of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity,
who lives according to the few, great acknowledged Doctrines, and Rules of a
virtuous and holy life, is a true Christian, and will be happy; though he be
ignorant of many points that some reckon for Articles of Faith, and err in
some, which others account sacred, and fundamental: By which Catholic
principle, foundation is laid for universal Charity, and Union; and would
Christian men be persuaded to govern themselves according to it, all
unnecessary Schisms, and Separations would be prevented, and those Hatreds, and
Animosities cured, that arise from lesser disagreements.

AGain, whereas as the Ataxites had made Religion a fantastic, and
unintelligible thing, (as I have told you) and dressed it up in an odd, mumming,
and ridiculous disguise; Those Divines labored much to reduce it to it is
native plainness, and simplicity; purging it from senseless phrases, conceited
mysteries, and unnecessary words of Art; Laying down the genuine notions of
Theology, and all things relating to Faith, or Practice, with all possible
perspicuity, and plainness: By which means many scandals were removed, and vain
disputes discredited, divisions stopped, Religious practice promoted, and the
peace of the Church at last established. They told the Ataxites that though
they talked much of closing with Christ, getting in to Christ, rolling upon
Christ, relying upon Christ, and having an interest in Christ; and made silly
people believe that there was something of Divine Mystery, or extraordinary
spirituality under the sound of these words; That yet, in good earnest, either
they understood not what they said, and mean'd nothing at all by them; or else
the sense of them was but believing Christ's Doctrines, obeying his Laws, and
depending upon his Promises; plain, and known things: They showed that all the
other singular phrases, which they used, and which the people were so taken
with, were either nonsense, and falsehood; or but some very common, and
ordinary matter at the bottom: That they had generally silly, and fantastic
conceptions of Free Grace, Gospel-liberty, Saving knowledge, Pure Ordinances,
The motions of the Spirit, Workings of Corruption, Powerful preaching, Liberty
of Conscience, Illuminations, and Indwellings: That their Admirers generally
talked those words by rote, without knowing the meaning of them; and that the
Teachers themselves understood them in a false and erroneous sense: That bating
such words, and the talk of Outgoings, Incommings, Givings-in, Dawnings,
Refinings, Withdrawings, and other Metaphors, there was nothing extraordinary
in their whole Divinity, but the nonsense, and absurdities of it: Thus They
declared freely against the Gibberish of that Age, and stated the right Notion
of those points of Religion, which the others had so transformed, and abused.

FUrther: Whereas the Sects kept up loud cries against the Church of Bensalem,
as guilty of Superstition, Will Worship, undue Impositions, and Persecution;
They took them to task here also and declared,

That Superstition in the properest sense of it, imports, An over-timerous, and
dreadful apprehension of God, which presents him as rigid, and apt to be angry
on the one hand; and as easy to be pleased with flattering devotions on the
other; so that Superstition works two ways, viz. by begetting fears of things,
in which there is no hurt; and fondness of such, as have no good in them: on
both which accounts they declared the Ataxites to be some of the most
superstitious people in the World: They showed, That their dreadful notions of
God, which represented him as one that by peremptory, unavoidable decrees had
bound over the greatest part of men to everlasting Torments, without any
consideration of their sin, only to show the absoluteness of his power, over
them; I say, They declared that those black thoughts of Him, were the Fountain
of numerous superstitions: That their causless fears of the innocent Rites, and
usages of the Church of Bensalem, which were only matters of order, and
decency, appointed by the Governors of the Church, and not pretending any
thing, in particular, to divine Institution, was very gross, and silly
superstition: That they were very superstitious in being afraid, and bogling at
prescribed Forms of Prayer; kneeling at the holy Sacrament, the Cross in
Baptism, and the like becoming, and decent Institutions: That 'twas Ignorance,
and Superstition to fly off with such dread from a few enjoined Ceremonies,
because (forsooth) they were symbolical, and significant; That the Ceremonies
that are not so, are vain, and impertinent: That the Ruling Powers may appoint
such, for the visible instruction, and edification of the People, and for the
more reverence, and solemnity of Worship: That the current principle among
them, [That Nothing is to be done in the Worship of God, but what is
particularly commanded, and prescribed in Scripture] is a foolish, groundless
conceit, and the occasion of many Superstitions: That though this is always
pretended, and said, yet it was never proved: That to observe the Church in
such appointments, without any opinion of their antecedent necessity, is a due
act of obedience to it; But to fly from them as sinful, and Antichristian, is
great Superstition.

These things they declared, and proved against the negative Superstitions of
Taste not, Touch not, handle not:

And They showed also, how justly chargeable the Ataxites were with many
Positive ones; in that they doated upon little, needless, foolish things, and
laid a great stress of Religion upon them: That the keeping such stir about
pretended Orthodox opinions, and the placing them in their Creeds, among the
most sacred and fundamental Doctrines, was a dangerous and mischievous
Superstition: That it was very superstitious to dignify private conceits, or
uncertain tenants, with the style of Gospel Light, Gods Truths, precious
Truths, and the like expressions of admiration, and fondness: That to entitle
the Spirit of God to the effects of our imaginations, and the motions of
natural passions, was Superstition; and that so was the opinion of the
necessity, and spirituality of sudden conceived prayer: That there was much
Superstition in their Idolizing their particular ways of Worship, and models of
Discipline, as the pure Ordinances, and Christ's Government, and Scripture
Rules: And that in these, and many other respects they that talked so much
against Superstition, were themselves most notoriously guilty of it.

As to Will Worship They taught, (after your most learned Hammondus) That the
Apostle in the only place where it is mentioned, Col. 2. does not speak of it,
in an evil sense; But that (...) imports a free, and unconstrained worship,
which is the more acceptable for being so: That Sacrifices before the Law;
Free-will-offerings under it; The feasts of Purim, and Dedication, David's
design of building the Temple; the Austerities of the Rechabites; and St.
Paul's refusing hire, for his labor among the Corinthians, were of this sort.
That men are not to be blamed for Will Worship, except they would impose it
without Authority, as necessary. That when they thus teach for Doctrines their
own Traditions, and grow so proud, and conceited with them, as to separate from
the public Communion, upon the fancy that they are more pure, and holy then
others; That this their Will Worship is sinful, and Pharisaical; which was the
case of the Ataxites, who therefore were Will-worshippers in the evil sense;
But the Anti-fanites showed, that the pious Institutions of just Authority were
no way liable to any such imputation:

That such might impose particular Circumstances, and Decencies, and that those
Impositions were no way contrary to Gospel Liberty: That that was only Freedom
from the Jewish yoke, from the bondage of sin, and power of Satan: not Liberty
from the Injunctions and Appointments of Civil, or Ecclesiastical Governors:
That all, or the chief power of these, conconsisted in fixing, and appointing
circumstances of order, and decorum, that were left undetermined, and not
prescribed in Scripture: That if they may not do this, they are in a manner
useless: That the Church of Bensalem imposed nothing that was grievous, or
prohibited: They minded the Ataxites that themselves were great Imposers, That
they imposed Oaths; and Ceremonies in that part of Religious Worship, a form of
words, the lifting up of the hand; and That they would have imposed numerous,
doubtful, and false opinions, to have been subscribed as a necessary Confession
of Faith; making thereby their own private tenants of equal moment, and
certainty with the great fundamental Articles, which is proper imposing upon
the Conscience: That they would not, by any means, allow Liberty of Conscience,
when they were in power; that this then was the great Abomination, and the most
accursed thing in the world: That they persecuted the Bensalemites for their
Consciences with wonderful inhumanity; That when other power is taken from
them, they are grievous persecutors with their Tongues, and are continually
shooting the Arrows of bitter, scornful words against all that are of different
judgment.

Thus Those Divines disabled all the charges, and pretenses of the Fanites; and
turned the points, and edge upon themselves. And they managed their Rebukes of
these self-condemned men, with much judgment, and wit, without any thing of
fierceness, or scurrility: They showed them the Immorality of their spirit, and
it is contradictions, and antipathy to the genius, and temper of the Gospel; and
urged, That though they hated debauchery, and some gross Carnal sins, as the
Pharisees did the Publicans, Yet they were given up to many other sorts of
wickedness, to spiritual Pride, Malice, Envy, Avarice, Stubbornness,
Disingenuity, and Disobedience: That they harbored, and kept warm these, under
their pretenses of Christ's Righteousness, and their specious forms of
Godliness: That though they were always confessing sin, in the general, with
much seeming remorce, and trouble of spirit, yet they seldom, or never, made
acknowledgements of these. That though they loved to hear the sins of
Drunkenness, and Profaneness vehemently declaimed against; Yet they could not
endure to have these thoroughly detected, and reproved: That even their own
Teachers durst not touch here, and that when others did it, though without
naming parties or pointing out persons, they called it Railing and Persecution;
and made no other use of those just rebukes: That though they showed great
seeming tenderness of Conscience in other smaller matters of Mint, Annise, and
Cummin; Yet they seldom appeared sensible, or troubled at their transgressions
in those greater matters of the Law.

ANd because these people were always making complaints, and sad mo^ns of their
sins, without endeavoring to amend; Those Divines represented to them, that
such complaints were but forms, and a fashion that they followed: That sad
looks, and whinings, were but a show of Humility, and Repentance: That if they
were sensible of their sins indeed, they would use the Grace of God to overcome
them, till at last they arrived at victory; and not still continue in a state
of whimpering, and complaining: That these men cousened themselves into a false
opinion of their penitence, and were persuaded, that this was enough without
conquest, and true reformation of heart, and life, that their remaining sins
were but infirmities, and the spots of Gods children, which were covered with
Christ's Righteousness, and not seen in the Elect: By which they deluded
themselves into dangerous presumption, and security. These our Divines
endeavored to destroy, and to pluck away the fig leaves of all their false,
and imperfect marks of Godliness; and showed that their usual complaints, were
but like the noise of Parrots, without an inward sense; That when men were only
sensible, and sorry, they were yet but under the Law, and a state of bondage:
That the Gospel aims at Liberty, and Victory, and that we are but just entered,
and are yet very imperfect, till we have attained some considerable measure of
that: That the great mark of sincerity, is, to be proceeding, and going
forwards, and toward the conquest of sinful habits and inclinations: That we
are not to look on these, as failings, and infirmities, and so sit down
contented with some tears, and customary confessions under the power of them:
That Infirmities are but single acts, and such too as have not the will in
them: That God has afforded us sufficiency of means, and helps enough to
subdue all the evils of our natures; and that if we neglect to use those aids,
and live at rest under any sinful appetites and passions, we are Hypocrites,
and our boasted Faith, and spiritualities will signify nothing to us.

HEre the Governor made a little stop, and then said; I have run over these
things as they offered themselves to my mind; I might have set them in a better
order, and have added many other particulars, but as to method, there is no
great need of curiosity in it in such a relation: By the things I have told
you, you may gather what was the Genius of those Divines in many others, which
for brevity I omit.

I said, that though one might collect the opinion of many matters more, by
what he had been pleased to represent to me; yet there were two things which I
had a desire to be informed in further, viz. Their Notion of Free Grace; and
Justification by Faith.

Their Doctrines about these, answered He, might in great part be gathered from
some of those principles I have mentioned; but however I shall gratify you with
a short account of them:

For Free Grace, it was ever in the mouths of the Ataxites, and they seemed to
be transported, and ravished in the admiration of it: But their notion was very
perverse, and false: For they made it an arbitrary kindness, bestowed upon some
very few persons, for no reason in the world; Not for the sake of any virtue,
or divine qualifications, but only for mere, uncountable will, and pleasure:
And said, That God from this Free Grace (as they called it) changed the hearts
of the Elect by an immediate, irresistible power; and created Faith, and other
Graces in them, in the same way of omnipotent operation.

Against these dangerous conceits, they taught, That God loves Virtue, and
Holiness, and is no fond Respecter of Persons: That those are the proper
objects of his special kindness: That there was a general Grace which had
appeared unto all men, in the light of Reason, the Laws written upon our
hearts, and common aids of the Spirit: That it is freedom, consisted in it is
universal diffusion through the world without let, or impediment; and in the
spontaneity of it: This said he may seem somewhat a hard word; but I have no
plainer to express the fullness of my sense by; and I never use a difficult
term, when the thing can be spoke as well in one that is more easy and
familiar. I answered, that I understood it very well, and that he meant that
Gods Grace was willing, and unforced; flowing from the benignity of his nature;
still communicating it self to all Subjects that were capable: You apprehend me
right, continued the Governor, and thus he has imparted himself to all
Mankind: But then added He, There is a Grace, more special, that concerns
Christians only, without us; the declaration of the Gospel: and within us;
those divine virtues that are wrought by them, and therefore called Graces: He
said, The Gospel persuades without force, and God works upon us by it, in a
way proper, and suitable to reasonable Creatures, by our Reasons, and our
Interests, by our Hopes, and our Fears: assisting all good desires, and
endeavors by the operation of his holy Spirit.

This, said he, acts as a General Cause, according to the dissposition of the
Subject: our endeavors would be weak and fruitless without it; And yet, It
never works alone by mere omnipotence, without our endeavors: They operate in
conjunction, as the Sun, and moisture of the earth, and seminal principles do
in the production of Plants, and Flowers; each cause doing what is proper to
it: The Dictates of the Spirit are contained in the Gospel, and the Spirit
enlightneth, and teaches by that. And so he came to the great Doctrine of

Justification by Faith: Here he called to my mind what he had related before
concerning Faith, and the false notions of it among the Fanites: and then said,

Justification is either taken for the making us just, or the dealing with us
as if we were such: And that Faith is taken as a single Grace, viz. The belief
of the Gospel; or complexly, as it comprehends all the rest, viz. The whole
body of Holiness. Having premised which necessary distinctions, He told me,
That Faith in the single acception of it, was the great instrument of the
Gospel, to make us just; and so justified in the proper, Physical sense; But
that as it compriseth the other Graces, it justifies in the forensick, and less
proper sense, viz. That God deals with the Faithful, namely those that are
sincerely obedient to the Gospel, as if they had been strictly, and perfectly
just, and had fulfilled his Laws. By the help of which short, and plain state
of the controversy, methought I saw clearly into the whole matter, and was
freed from many perplexities, and confusions in which I was wont to be
involved.

And being thus informed of the principles of those Divines in those chief
heads of Doctrine, I had a curiosity to have an account of their mind,
concerning the Form of Ecclesiastical Government, about which there had been so
much stir in our European parts of Christendom, and therefore entreated him to
represent their opinion to me in this subject: To which he answered me thus.

The Ancient Form of Church Government in this Island ever since the plantation
of Christianity in it, has been Episcopal: But of later years, it was very
much hated, and opposed by the Ataxites, who set up new Modells (every sect
it is own fancy) as the only divine Government, and Discipline of Christ; So
that the Scriptures were racked, and every little word, and point forced, and
many subtilties of interpretation suborned to declare for the beloved
imagination: and then the whimsie was voted to be of divine right, and the only
Scripture-Government; and the advancing of it, made no less then the Interest
of Gods Glory, and the promoting of Christ's Kingdom. On the other side, the
ancient Government was decry'd as superstitious, Church Tyranny, Humane
Invention, a limb of Antichrist to be extirpated root, and branch, by a through,
Godly Reformation: In which design (as I told you) they succeeded to the
subversion both of the Civil, and Ecclesiastical state: But when they had
destroyed, they knew not how to build; for they could never agree upon the
Platform to be erected in the room of that which they had subverted: For every
Sect was for setting up it is own frame; and every one had a different Model
from every other; and each was confident, that it is Form was Christ's
Institution, and so by no means to be receded from, in the least point: The
effects of which were endless Animosities, Hatreds, and Struglings against each
other, and the greatest rage, and violence of them altogether, against the
Church of Bensalem, and all Episcopal constitutions.

Amidst these Bandyings, some Antifanatick Divines taught, That there was no
reason to think, that any particular Model was prescribed in Scripture, so, as
to be unalterable, and universal: That it was necessary there should be a
Government in the Church; That the Apostles had appointed General Officers, and
General Rules, such as God's Glory, Edification, Decency, Order, avoidance of
Offense, and the like; but that it did not appear, they had determined the
particular Circumstances, and Form: That there was no express command of them;
and that the plea of Apostolical example (could it be made out) would not hold
for an universal Law to the Church in all ages, except where there was some
intrinsic, necessary goodness in the things practiced; or some annexed Precept
to enforce it: That there was neither of these in the present case; and
therefore they urged, That the Form, and Circumstances of Government, was to be
left to the Ruling Powers in the Church, to be ordered by them so as should
seem best to suit with the General Rules, and Ends of Government.

By the means of which Principles, Foundation was laid for Peace, and
Obedience; and that age was prepared for the reception of the old, Legal
established Government, when it should be restored. Concerning This those
Divines taught,

That it was of all the most venerable Form, and greatly to be revered for its
Antiquity, Universality, and the Authority it had from Apostolical Practice,
and our Fundamental Laws: That on these, and other accounts, it was infinitely
to be preferred, and chosen, before any newfangled Model, upon the score of
which declarations, and discourses, in the Ataxites times, great complaint was
made by them, among the foolish Zealots of their party, that the Universities,
were overrun with a Prelatical spirit, than which, nothing was more odious in
those days: But the prudent men took no notice of their clamours, but went on
with the design of propagating such sober Principles, as tended to the healing
of the Nation. When the public Government of the Church was restored; They
most cheerfully put themselves under it, and submitted to its Orders heartily,
upon the belief of its being the most Primitive, Catholic, Prudent, Legal
Government in the world.

I Have now, said the Governor, past over the particulars, in which you
desired to be informed; much more might have been said of them, but I know your
own thoughts will improve these suggestions, which are enough to give light to
the main Notions. I returned him my humble acknowledgements for the care, and
pains he had taken to satisfy, and inform me in these, and the other heads of
those Men's Doctrines. To which he answered, That it was a great pleasure, and
satisfaction to him if he had given me any content by his relation; and then
willed me that if there were ought in the Theological part, that I had any
query about, I would propose it freely: For, said he, we have a little time
more to spare in talking of this first General, if you have any curiosity to be
informed further of any thing belonging to it. I answered that he added to his
favors by the liberty of Questioning, he was pleased to allow me, and that I
had one thing more to desire a few words of, if he so pleased, which was, what
Way of Preaching those Divines followed: This said He, I should have minded my
self, and am very glad you remember me of it!

You must know then, continued He, That there was not a greater diversity in
any thing in Bensalem in the Age of which I now speak, than in the Modes of
Preaching; of which amongst other evils, this was one, and not the least, That
the people distasted, and contemned all the Doctrines, and Instructions that
were not delivered after their own fashion, though otherwise never so
seasonable, and wholesome; and inordinately admiring their own men, who spoke
in the Phrase, and Mode that they fancied, they vilified, and despised those
others, that used another method, though it were never so solid, edifying, and
useful. And indeed, things were come to that pass in Bensalem, that there was
scarce any other use made of Preaching, but to pass judgments upon the
Preacher, and the Sermon; which was not only undertaken by the people of Age,
and Experience: or by those only of better education and more advanced
knowledge; But every Age, and every condition, was thought fit to judge here,
every Youth, and Ignorant; every Rustic, and Mechanic would pass absolute,
and definitive sentence in this matter. Accordingly the most empty, and
fantastical Preachers were generally the most popular: And those that dealt
most in jingles, and chiming of words, in Metaphors, and vulgar similitudes, in
Fanatic Phrases, and Fanciful schemes of speech, set off by pleasing smiles,
and melting Tones, by loudness and vehemence; These were sure to be the taking,
precious men, though their discourses were never so trifling, and ridiculous.
But the Divines, whom I describe, were no admirers of this ill-gotten, and
ill-grounded Fame: They had no ambition to be cried up by the common Herd, nor
any design to court their applauses: They cared not for their favor, or kind
thoughts further, than those afforded advantage and opportunity for the doing
of them good. This they considered as the end of their Ministry, and this they
made the Rule and Measure of their Preaching; which I shall describe to you
under these following Characters.

1. It was Plain both in opposition to, First, Obscurity, and Secondly,
Affectation. First, They preached no dark or obscure notions; For though their
thoughts were conversant about the deepest Theories, both in Philosophy, and
Religion, yet they knew, that such were not fit for Pulpits, or common hearers
They had no design to make themselves admired by soaring into the Clouds: Their
great aim was the edification, and instruction of those to whom they spoke; and
therefore they were so far from preaching the heights of speculation, That they
usually avoided (as much as they could) all the Controversies of Religion, in
which the Essentials of Faith, and Practice were not concerned. And when either
of these called for discourse of Doctrinal matters, their great care was to be
understood. For secondly, They did not involve their discourses in needless
words of Art, or subtle distinctions; but spoke in the plainest, and most
intelligible Terms: and distinguished things in the most easy and familiar
manner that the matter of discourse would bear. They took this for an
established Rule, That unwonted words were never to be used, either in Pulpits,
or elsewhere, when common ones would as fitly represent their meaning: and they
always chose such, as the custom of speaking had rendered familiar in the
Subjects on which they spoke, when those were proper, and expressive. And
though many sorts of thoughts, and Subjects cannot be made obvious to the mere
vulgar; yet they endeavored to render such as were out of the common road of
thinking, clear, and plain to those that are capable of the matters they were
to express. Thirdly, They did not trouble their hearers with pretended
Mysteries: They led them not into the dark places of Daniel, and the
Revelations: nor fed them thence with their own imaginations under pretense of
secret, and hidden Truths: No, they taught them from the plain Texts, and
Doctrines of the Holy Writings: and gave them the sincere milk of the Word
without any mixture of elaborate fancies, or mystical vanities. Fourthly, They
slighted, and avoided all canting Fanatic Phrases, which were so much the Mode
of those times. For They saw, they did but please with their sound, without
conveying any sense into the minds of those that were so much delighted with
them. So that the pretended plain preaching of those days, was really not at
all understood; nor as much as intelligible. Therefore instead of such phrases,
They used the most proper, and natural expressions, and such as most easily
opened the mind to the things they taught.

I do but slightly mention these particulars here, said the Governor, because
I have spoken of them before in my larger accounts of these men: And so he went
to the second thing mentioned, viz.

(1.) The plainness of their preaching, in opposition to Affectation. Now the
usual affectations of Preachers, said he, relate either to Learning, Wit, or
Zeal; from all which They were very free. For first, They affected not to
ostentate Learning, by high-flown expressions, or ends of Greek, and Latin:
They did not stuff their Sermons with numerous, needless Quotations; or
flourish them with the names of great Authors: ways to be admired by the
Vulgar, and despised by the Wise: No, their Learning was not shown in such
cheap trifles as these, but it abundantly appeared to the intelligent, by the
judgment and strength, the reason, and clearness with which they spoke.
Secondly, They despised the small essays of appearing witty in their Sermons:
They used no jingling of words, nor inventions of sentences, no odd fetches of
observation, or niceness in labored periods: They affected no gayness of
metaphors, or prettiness of similitudes: no tricks to be played with the words
of their Texts; or any other of the conceited sorts of fooling: but spoke with
seriousness, and gravity, as became the Oracles of God; and showed their wit in
the smartness, and edge of the things they delivered, without vanity, or
trifling. Thirdly, They did not put on fantastical shows, and appearances of
affected zeal: They used no set Tones, or clamorous noise; no violent, or Apish
actions: They spoke with a well-governed affectionateness, and concerment; and
such as showed they were in earnest: and very sensible of the weight of the
affairs they were about: But without any thing of indecency, or extravagance.

And now, said He, after what I have mentioned under this first Head, I may
spare my pains of speaking much under the rest that follow; and therefore I
shall be brief on them.

(II.) Those Divines were methodical in their preaching: not that they were
nice, in running their Texts into all the minute divisions of words; or formal
in tying themselves just to one order on all Subjects: But they divided their
matter into the substantial parts of Discourse; or resolved it into some main
Proposition; and so treated of their subject in the method that was natural to
it, and most beneficial for the people they were to instruct: They went not on
in a cryptick undiscovered order on the one hand, nor did they spin out their
matter into numerous, coincident particulars on the other: But made their
Method very easy, and obvious, and their Heads few, and very distinct; which
is helpful both to the understandings, and memories of the hearers.

(III.) Their preaching was Practical: For though they taught all the great
substantial principles of Religion; yet still they directed them to Practice,
and laid the main stress on that. According to the saying of our Blessed Lord,
If ye know these things, blessed are ye if ye do them. They taught the true,
practical Divinity, without whimsies, and Romantic strains; and laid down the
Rules of Life that are practicable, and such as sort with the plain Precepts of
the Gospel, and the condition, and possibilities of humane nature: They spoke
here, as those that understood the passions, appetites, and ways of men; and
the course that was to be taken, to set them in right order: They did not talk
by roat out of Books, or Enthusiastic experiences; They did not direct by
Metaphors, and Phrases, and unpracticable fancies: But laid down the true,
sober, rational, experimental method of action.

(IV.) Their way was earnest and affectionate: They were not cold, or trifling,
in matters of such vast consequence: They did not invite with indifference; or
reprove with softness; or direct with negligence and unconcernment: But did all
these, with a zeal, and warmth suitable to such weighty occasions. But then,
They endeavored to excite men's affections, not by their senses, and
imaginations only; not, as I said before, by mere empty noise, and Tones, and
Gestures, and Phrases, and passionate out-crys; but by the weight of their
sense, and the reason of their persuasions, endeavoring by the understandings,
to gain the affections; and so to work on the will, and resolutions. Such was
Their way of Preaching, on which I might have much enlarged, but I give you
only the brief Heads.

Here I asked him, what entertainment this their preaching met with in
Bensalem? He answered, That for a long time it was but coldly received by the
people, whose imaginations, and humors used to be fed upon Allusions, and
Phrases, and Metaphors, and Opinions: And therefore, they hated sound Doctrine,
and distasted the sincere Word: Their pallates were so vitiated by the
fantastical food, to which they had been used, that the substantial and
wholesome diet would not down with them: So that those Divines were not at all
popular at first, but the People generally ran after the affected, fanciful
men, who entertained their itching Ears with jingles, and mysteries, and new
nothings.

And after that many of These Teachers had forsaken the public places of
Worship, and in opposition to the Authority of the Church, and Edicts of State,
betook themselves to holes and private corners, The bewitched multitude
followed them into those places; Their zeal, and admiration of their own Men
being increased, and heightened by the prohibition, and restraint that was upon
them: For they doted on the fancies They taught; and could not endure sound
sense: But the Judicious of all sorts, entertained, and relished the sober,
unaffected preaching of the Anti-fanaticks; And at length also, by time, and
their approbation, and example, most of the wellmeaning, misled people were
recovered back to the Church of Bensalem, and brought to a relish and liking of
the plain way of Instruction.

And now said He, I have done with what concerns the Theological Genius, and
Principles of the men I undertook to describe, It Is too late for us at present
to enter upon their way of Philosophy and Learning: of this I have given some
short hints, but I intend you a larger account at our next meeting; and if you
are not tired already with my discourse, that shall be to morrow in the
afternoon, which I hope I shall have at liberty: If you will come hither at
that time, you will find me ready to acquaiut you with what is further
considerable in the Story of those Men.

I thanked him, with a profound reverence for the satisfaction and pleasure he
had afforded me already in his Relation; and for that further entertainment he
was pleased to design for me; saying, that I never counted time better spent
than that, which I had the honor to pass in his Instructive Conversation, and
on Subjects of such delight, and importance. And so I took my leave for that
night, and was conducted back by the same Messenger to my Lodgings.

I Went the next day, at the appointed time, and found the Governor in the
same room. After some Reflections on his past Relation, and a few common
matters of Discourse (which I need not remember) He told me, He would acquaint
me now with some things relating to the Opinion, and Genius of the same Men, in
several sorts of Learning: of this, said He, you heard somewhat in the
beginning, which will shorten this Account: I answered, that I did well
remember what was told me of their universal way of study, and converse with
the best Authors, both Ancient, and Modern. I therefore shall omit further
discourse of that, said He, and tell you their Opinion (as far as I apprehend
it) of the several chief parts of Philosophy, and Learning. I begin with

LOGIC: As to this, They opposed not the usual Systems of the Schools, as they
were Exercises, and Institutions for Youth: But They did not like the formal
Syllogistical way among maturer Reasoner^ They many of them more approved of
the Logic of Plato, which teaches first to explain the Terms of the Question,
and then to proceed by orderly Gradations from one proposition to another, till
we come to the thing we would prove. A method of Reasoning more quick, and
close, and much less subject to fallacies, and wanderings, than the way o^
Syllogism.

And to move the propositions from whence a man would infer his conclusion, in
the modest, Socratical way of Question; In my judgment, is a very good, and
advantageous method. For in this, the occasions of passion which are ministered
by positive assertions, are taken away, and the Arguer is engaged no further,
then he thinks fit. He may break off when he pleases, without prejudice to his
credit, which he has not engaged, by undertaking Dogmatical proof of any
thing: And so disputes may be brought to a short, and fair issue; and
extravagant heats may be avoided: for the Arguer may keep himself uningaged,
and so see more clearly how to apply his force, and restrain the discourse
within the bounds of the subject: whereas in the positive way of disputing by
Syllogism, there are these contrary disadvantages:

Our Reasons are led a great way about; Men's minds are concerned for the credit
of their assertions, which they positively undertake to prove; Ambiguous and
Aequivocal Terms stealin, and insensibly mislead the Reasoners; or distinctions
are applied, which mislead them more; The Disputer takes up one end, and runs
away hastily in an opposition of it, perhaps without clearly understanding what
it means, and without observing how this new pursuit works him off from the
main business; He goes on still, and is still turned out of his way more, and
more, by him that he opposes: For if he seek occasion to evade the force of
the Argument, he may do it well, and salve his credit to, and the deceit shall
not easily be perceived. In like manner the opponent for his part, may by
Syllogism draw his answerer, though a wary person, almost whether he pleases,
and impose upon him by Terms, and fallacious Contexture of words, although he
be one that understands consequence well, in plain reasoning: And so in this
way, men may talk endlessly, but come to no result; and when they are weary of
rambling, they may sit down, if they please, but be it when, and where they
will, they know not how they came thither, nor what is become of the Question
at first debated. This is the usual issue of all Syllogistical disputes; But in
the Platonical, and Socratical method, these extravagancies may easily be
avoided: which therefore I think to be the better way for men, that would find
truth, and inform one another: But for the Youth that would try their wits, and
appear subtle in arguing, Syllogisms may be proper for their purposes.

For PHYSIOLOGY; They did not sit down in any System, or Body of Principles, as
certain and established: They considered the incomprehensible wisdom that is in
the works of God; the difficulties that occur in the seeming plainest things;
the scantness, of our largest knowledge, and shallowness of our deepest
enquiries; of which I spoke before: and therefore gave but timorous assent to
any notions in Natural Philosophy: They held no infallible Theory here: Nor
would they allow any speculations, or accounts of Nature to be more then
Hypothesis, and probable conjecture: And these they taught were not to be
raised from abstracted notions, and the unassisted operations of the mind, but
to be collected leasurely from a careful observation of particulars: So that
they thought, with much reason, that the best Foundation for Natural Philosophy
would be a good History of Nature: This they saw to be very defective in their
Time, and that while it remained in that imperfection, the knowledge of Nature,
and the use of it, would be very scanty, and inconsiderable: But that from its
enlargement, more, and surer Light might be expected, and the uses of Life, and
Empire of man over the Creatures, might be greatly promoted, and advanced. For
These ends the Foundation of Solomon's House, about that time, was laid; and
This diverse of them thought the best design that ever was for increasing
Natural Knowledge, and the advantages of Humane Life, and infinitely beyond all
the disputing, notional ways, from which nothing could arise, but dispute, and
notion: They considered this method of joint endeavors, in such a royal, and
noble Assembly, about the Phoenomena, and effects of Nature, to be the way to
make Philosophy operative, and useful: To take it off from spending it is
strength in forming vain Ideas of fancy, and wrangling endlesly about
Chimaeras; and to make an Instrument of Action, and profitable works.

But notwithstanding this, They did not wholly slight General Hypotheses, and
Philosophical conjectures: No, They inquired into all the considerable
speculations, that are extant, both Ancient, and Modern; though they addicted
not themselves to any of the Sects of Philosophers: They rejected no probable
Opinion with contempt; nor entertained any, with fondness: They doated on none,
because they were Ancient; nor did they contemn any, because they were new: But
received the likelyhoods of Truth, and Knowledge of any date, from any hand, or
in any dress.

Here I asked, whether these men were not enemies to Ari-stotle, and his
Philosophy? He answered, That They gave that respect to Aristotle, that was due
to his antiquity, parts, and reputation in the World: That they read his Books,
and thought as well of him, as of some others of the Philosophers: That they
gladly received any of the Truths, or Probabilities, that he taught: But then,
That they did not make his Authority absolute; or slavishly submit their
judgments to all his Dictates; They did not reckon him infallible in
Philosophy; no nor yet free from many actual, great mistakes: They did not
prefer his judgment before all the elder Philosophers, or those of his own
time; Nor did they think he was without Equal, or Superiors, both in Knowledge,
and Virtue: They had not that partial, unjust fondness for him, that the
Moors, and Monks, and some other vain men had, to the prejudice, and disvalue
of the Philosophers, that were before Him, from whom he took most of his
Notions.

He said, That the Philosophy taught in some common Schools, for Aristotle's,
was a depravation, and corruption of it: That it was but Monkery, and Moorish
Ignorance formed into idle, and unintelligible whimsies. That the main
Principles, Foundation, and Soul of that Philosophy, Their first matter,
Substantial Forms, and Qualities, were mere Imaginations, that had no ground
either from Sense, or Reason: That they were utterly unaccountable in
themselves; and served no purpose of Knowledge or Life: But rendered all the
Philosophy that was built on them fantastical, and useless.

On the other side he said, That the Corpuscular Philosophy was the eldest, and
most accountable Doctrine: That it was as ancient as Natural Philosophy it
self: That it was applicable to the Phoenomena of Nature, and that it was very
easy, and intelligible: This Theory, added he, those Philosophers preferred
much to the other of Qualities and Forms, which in comparison is novel.

They examined the Philosophy of your Gassendus, which restored, and amplified
the Atomical Doctrine: And enquired into the Hypotheses of that other great man
of your World, Renatus Descartes; Both whose works had been brought hither, by
our Missionaries. This latter they considered, and studied much, and in him
they found a prodigious wit, and clear thoughts, and a wonderfully ingenious
Fabric of Philosophy, which they thought to be the neatest Mechanical System
of things that had appeared in the World; However, they adhered not to it, as
the certain Account of Nature; nor yielded their assent as to positive, and
established Truth; But entertained what they thought probable, and freely
dissented in other matters. Yea some of them, who thought highly of his
Mechanical wit, and believed he had carried matter and motion as far they could
go; declared earnestly against the compleatness, and perfection of his
Hypotheses; and learnedly showed, That the Mechanical Principles alone would
not salve the Phoenomena; and that his accounts though they were pretty, and
ingenious, were yet short, defective, and unsatisfying; and in some things not
very agreeing, and consistent. These judged that nothing could be done in
Physiology without admitting the Platonical (...), and Spirit of Nature; and so
would have the Mechanical Principles aided by the Vital: But in these matters,
others of them had different thoughts; though all agreed in the modesty, and
freedom of judgment and discourse.

As to MORAL PHILOSOPHY, They did by no means approve of the Contentious,
Disputing Ethics, that turned that useful knowledge, into Systems of
unprofitable niceties, and notions; and made it (as Cicero speaks) to be rather
Ostentatio Scientiae, then Lex Vitae: But they founded theirs, upon the
excellent knowledge of Humane Nature and Passions: Into these they inquired
much, and observed the various inclinations, and workings of the Humors, and
Appetites of Men; especially they studied themselves, and entered into the
recesses of their own souls: Nor did they stop here, but formed their
knowledge, and observations into solid Rules of Life, for the commanding of
their passions, and bounding their desires, and governing themselves, by the
Laws of Virtue and Prudence. Such were their Ethics; and their Tempers, and
Practices were suitable.

For though they were men of raised understandings, and great learning; Yet
were they not, in the least, haughty, or conceited; but their behavior was
generally most sweet, and obliging: They cared for no man's wit, that wanted
goodness; and despised no man's weakness, that had it: They hated the humor of
those learned men, who were stately, and imposing; and disliked nothing more
then Ill Nature: whatever their own was by Birth and Temper, their care was to
make it sweet, by Discipline and Usage; and so, exercised their Moral
Pinciples, and Rules upon themselves: They were no admirers of Popularity, but
pitied those that were at pains for Air and noise: They followed a sober,
virtuous course, without flanting shows, and pretensions; and lived in an
innocent, even cheerfulness, without rapture, on the one hand, or dejection, on
the other: They were free in their Conversations, and not superstitiously
scrupulous about things that are harmless and indifferent. But, said the
Governor; I consider, I need not insist thus on the description of their Moral
Temper of Spirit; It may be collected in these, and many other particulars,
from what has been said before: And therefore I now pass immediately to their

METAPHYSICS, About which, I must first tell you, That they had no opinion of
those of the Peripatetick Schools, which consisted of Logical niceties, and
empty notions, that sophisticated men's reasons, and inclined them to hover in
abstracted generals, and to rest in mere Terms of Art; to the neglect of the
more material ratiotinations: Such Metaphysics were in use at that time in the
Universities of Bensalem; and therefore out of respect to the Statutes of those
Seats of Learning, They did not professedly endeavor to expose those studies:
No, They were against rude and violent Innovations; But yet as they had
opportunity, they prudently advised such Youth as they knew, to take care that
they did not dwell on those Aerie Notions; or reckon of them, as any part of
that standing Knowledge, which they were to use, through the course of their
future lives: They allowed them for exercise, but cautioned against the
reception of them, as Principles of Truth, and Science.

Here I asked, whether Those men were against all Metaphysics? or what sort
they allowed? He made answer; That They were not against all. But that

1. Some of them counted, The explication of General Terms, and notions of
things to appertain to Metaphysics; and this they reckoned to be most
necessary, and useful for the avoiding confusions, and mistakes in reasoning:
So that they never entered into any Controversy, or Enquiry, without stripping
the words, and notions, they were to treat of, from all fantastry, and borrowed
senses, and fixing them in their natural, and genuine acception: Knowing, that
most disputes and errors in reasoning arise from mistakes of simple Terms.

2. But then others of Them, who as highly esteemed of this course, judged it
to belong to Logic, and that it was not to be brought under this science, the
only object of which, They made the Spiritual, and Immaterial World: And in
this sort of Metaphysics, the Science of Spirits, they were not all of one
Opinion; For some were for the Doctrine of Plato, making Sprita, extended,
penetrable, indiscerpible, self-motive substances: Whereas others thought with
Descartes, that extention, motion, and the like Attributes, belonged only to
Bodies, and had nothing to do with Spirits, which could be defined by nothing,
but Thinking, and the Modes of it. But this difference in Opinion produced no
rudeness, or heats of opposition, only it gave exercise some times, to their
wits, in their private Philosophical entertainments.

As for the Doctrine of the common Schools of Tota in Toto -- Both sides
esteemed it contradictious, and vain: And knew, that this was one great
occasion of the Sadducism, and disbelief of Spiritual Beings, which was so much
the Mode of that age.

I said, That I had heard something of both these Doctrines; And that each of
them seemed to me, to contain opinions that were very strange; adding, that I
desired to know, whether those Gentlemen entertained the conceits, that the old
Platonists, and our Cartesians did, in their Hypotheses? He asked me what
notions I meant; I answered, That the Platonists held, There was an Anima
Mundi; and the Praeexistence of particular Souls, things seemingly very
uncouth, and absurd. And the Cartesians, on the other side, taught, That all
things were Mechanical, but Humane thoughts, and operations; and that the
Beasts were but mere Automata, and insensible machins; which, said I; seem very
odd, and ridiculous fancies.

As to these Opinions replied he, They had different thoughts, as other
Philosophers have; Some of them supposing that the Platonical Opinions are very
fit to be admitted, to give assistance to the Mechanical Principles; which they
think very defective of themselves. And Others judging, That the Cartesian
Hypotheses are probable, and Mechanism sufficient to account for the
Phoenomena; and that there is no need of introducing so hopeless, and obscure a
Principle, as the Soul of the World.

In the Matters, and Mysteries of Providence, They also take several ways of
Opinion: But then, the dissenters to either judgment, do not condemn the
opposite, as ridiculous, and absurd: Knowing, That there is a great appearance
of truth in the contrary Doctrine; and no certainty in that, which they approve
most.

As to the Opinion of Praeexistence of souls: It has said He, been the
Doctrine of many of the wisest men of eldest times, both Gentiles, Jews, and
Christians, and the almost general belief of the old Eastern World: It contains
no opposition to any Article of Faith, and some believe, It will give a very
plausible, and fair solution of the main, and most difficult things in
Providence: On which accounts it should not, I think, be rashly, condemned as
absurd; but may very well deserve to be heard, and is very worthy to be
examined: Though, added He, I affirm nothing positively of it; And I suppose
many of the persons I describe, were disposed to like thoughts with these, in
reference to that Hypothesis.

I prayed him to acquaint me with their Opinion of the MATHEMATICS? He
Answered, That They were great valuers of those Sciences; which they accounted
excellent preparatives, and helps to all sorts of Knowledge, and very
serviceable particularly in this, That they used the mind to a close way of
reasoning, and were a good Antidote against the confused, and wandering humor
of Disputers: For which reason, Some of them thought, it would be very well, If
they were used as the first Institutions of the Academick Youth; judging, that
these Sciences would exercise the wit, as much, as the usual Logicks, at least;
and beget a much better habit in the mind, then those contentious studies.

Besides This, said He, I cannot at present think of any thing more,
considerable, concerning their inclinations, in mere Humane Knowledge: But as
to their way of Learning, as Divines, something may be added,

And with Relation to this I may say,

1. That they are not much taken with the Schoolmen, but rather think, That
those subtle, and Angelical Doctors have done Religion no small disservice, by
the numerous disputes, niceties, and distinctions they have raised, about
things, otherwise plain enough: By which, The natural, and genuine conceptions
of men's minds are perverted, and the clear light of Reason, and Truth
intercepted, and obscured: And they judged, There was less cause in the latter
ages to reckon of School Divinity, since the Peripatetick Philosophy, on which
it was grounded, grew every where into discredit: So that they thought it not
safe, to have Religion concerned, in that, which did not truly help it; and
which was not now able to help it self.

2. They did not admire many of the Commentators, and Expositors of the
Scripture: For though they praised those Industrious Men for their Zeal, and
Devotion to the holy Writings: Yet they did not think much due to diverse of
their performances. For a considering Man could not but observe, how they kept
voluminous stir about the plain Places, which they never left, till they had
made Obscure; while they let the difficult ones pass without notice. Besides
which, the manifold Impertinencies, Phancies, Disputes, Contradictions to one
another, and the Scriptures, which were observable among those Writers, rendered
diverse of them of mean account in the Judgment of those Men. However they had a
just esteem of many of the Critical Interpreters, and particularly of those
famous Lights of your end the World, well known to us also, Grotius, and
Hammondus, whose learned works and expositions they beheld with great respect,
and veneration.

(3.) As for the ANCIENT FATHERS; They valued those greatly of the first 300,
yea 500 years, who lived before Christianity was so much mingled with Opinions,
and corrupted by disputes; and the various devices of Men: Their works they
reverenced, because there was much holiness, in those venerable persons, and
much simplicity in their writings, and among others, there are two particular
reasons, why they had those sages in so much esteem.

(1.) Because the Controversies they handle, are mostly such, as Concern the
main things of Religion, in opposition to the Jews, Heathens, and some gross
Heretics, who undermined the Foundations of Faith, and Life: These were
undertakings worthy the zeal, and pains of those holy Ancients; who did not
multiply unnecessary quarrels, and occasions of dispute; or make speculative
opinions Articles of Faith, and fundamentals of Religion, and presently
denounce thick Anathema's against all, that differed from them in lesser
matters; But they stuck firmly to the few, plain things, and placed their
Religion principally in a holy Life, and lived in Charity, and Love, and
frequent communion: Those days, and those Men the Antifanites celebrated much,
and prayed, and endeavored for the Restoration of Christianity to that
Primitive Temper:

(2.) They reverenced those Fathers, because living nearer the times of the
Apostles, they had more advantages to know their Doctrines, and Government, and
Usages, than the ages at a greater remove have: on which Accounts, They attend
more to their practices and opinions, then to those of succeeding times, when
pride, ambition, covetousness, and disputes had lead Men aside into the various
ways of fancy, and faction: These then they accounted excellent witnesses of
Christianity, and our best Interpreters of it is Dectrines, and Constitutions;
though they did not make them Judges in affairs of Faith, and Religion, or
reckon all to be infallible, that they did, or said. Thus were they disposed
toward the first Fathers.

For Those of the following ages They esteemed their piety, and zeal; and
praised God for the good they did in their Generations; and gave all due
acknowledgments to their pious endeavors; and were ready to embrace their
instructions in the ways of Godliness, and Virtue; and willing to receive the
evidence of any truth from them: But They did not equal them in their
estimation with the Elder Fathers, nor superstitiously dote on all their
sayings; nor take them for the best Guides in all the Doctrines of Religion.

For those Fathers lived in the disputing ages, when pride, and interest and
prevailing faction had espoused opinions, as essentials of Faith, and made Men
quarrel, and divide, and break the peace of the Church, of the World, for
Trifles; They much differed from one another; and some of them, at times, from
themselves; and many of them, in some things, from Scripture, and Reason, and
more primitive Antiquity: They disputed often with much eagerness; and were
very angry with each other about things of no great moment; and vented unseemly
passions, and were too often very impatient of Contradiction, and different
judgment. They, some of them spoke hastily, and determined too soon in a heat,
against one kind of opposites; and then, forgot at another time, and affirmed
the quite contrary, against an other sort of Adversaries: They made too much of
their opinions, and were many times too severe to harmless dissenters. These,
and diverse more such, were the weaknesses of many, of those Reverend Men: which
I do not mention, said He, to detract from their worth in other things, or to
lessen their just honor and valuation: but to show you some of the things,
which, it is like, were the reasons, why those Divines did not esteem of the
latter, as they did of the most ancient Fathers.

These, and such like, I say, I judge might be the reasons: But They themselves
were very cautious in saying any thing that might look like detractions, or
disesteem of those venerable Persons: They contented themselves to omit poring
on such of them, as They thought there might be less cause to admire, or less
need to study; without discovering their nakedness, and imperfections; or
discouraging others from following their inclinations to converse with them.
Yea, they neglected not to read them themselves, as they had time, and
occasion: But then, they read them not with design to gather fine sentences to
adorn their discourses, nor to gain Authorities in speculative matters, to
confirm their opinions: But to improve their reasons, to get direction from
their pio^s councils, and to inform themselves of the Genius, Principles, and
Customs of the Times, in which they successively lived: That they might not be
imposed on by the pretenders to Antiquity, who endeavored to gain pretense to
their Innovations, by pretense of ancient (...): And this is enough of their
Inclinations (...) (...).

I have now, said: He, (...) a word to speak m^, under this Head, and that
shall be briefly;

(4.) About their opinion of the Rabinical Learning: Among the Authors of this
sort, diverse of them were very conversant: not out of any great esteem of the
Men, or their Learning; but from a desire to acquaint themselves by Them, with
the Doctrines, Terms of speech, and Customs of the Jews, in order to their
better understanding of the Scriptures, and the defense of Christianity,
against those enemies of the Cross. On these accounts, they (...) Writers,
notwithstanding the (...), and (...), with which their Books were loaded, to be
very useful for a Divine, and like to be of more behoof to him, than all the
tedious volumes of the Schoolmen: And some thought, it would not be amiss, if
the Rabbis succeeded in those places, which those other Doctors, were leaving
vacant.

And now, said He, I have also given you a Taste of the Genius, and Humor of
those Divines in some chief parts of Learning: And though I have mentioned only
some particular sorts, yet I do not thereby exclude them from their share in
the Languages, History, and other kinds of knowledge; which I have omitted in
this account, only, because their sense of them, for the most part, was common
with the judgment, and opinion of other learned Men.

I have represented to you their Genius and endeavors, not with design (as I
intimated before) to exalt, and magnify them above the other Divines of
Bensalem, but to show how the Providence of God overruled those evil times, in
which those Men were bred, and to raise a good and generous Spirit amid the
extravagances of an unhappy age: and I have thus particularly described their
Principles, and Practices, not to exclude other worthy, and Reverend Men (with
which, thanks be to God, this Church abounds) from the share of acknowments
that are due to their pious, and excellent Labors, but because those Persons
are better known to me, than any others of our Clergy.

At this Period of his discourse, a Servant came in, and with low reverence,
acquainted the Governor that some Persons of quality were come to speak with
him. Upon which, he rising up, told me, He was sorry for this interruption, but
hoped ere long, to have the freedom of another opportunity of Conversing with
me.

FINIS.
Books Published by Mr. Joseph Glanvill.
THe Way of Happiness represented in it is Difficulties, and Encouragements; and
freed from many popular, and dangerous mistakes.

Catholic Charity, recommended in a Sermon before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen
of London.

A Fast Sermon on the Kings Martyrdom.

Lux Orientalis, being a modest Philosophical Enquiry into the Doctrine of
Pra-existence.

A Prefatory Answer to Mr. Henry Stubbs.

A Further Account of Mr. Stubbs.

A Letter concerning Aristotle.

An Apology for some of the Clergy who suffer under false, and scandalous
Reports, on the occasion of the Rehearsal Transprised.

An Earnest Invitation to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

Seasonable Reflections and Discourses, in order to the cure of the Scoffing
and Infidelity of a degenerate Age.

ESSAYS, Philosophical, and Theological.

Books Printed for, and Sold by Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
ChurchYard, and at the White Heart in Westminster Hall.
A Rational Account of the Grounds of Protestant Religion; being a Vindication
of the Lord-Arch-Bishop of Canterbury's Relation of a Conference, etc. from the
pretended Answer of T. C. folio.

Sermons preached upon several occasions, with a Discourse annexed concerning
the true Reasons of the Suffering of Christ, wherein Crellius's Answer to
Grotius is considered. fol.

Irenicum: A Weapon-Slave for the Churches wounds: In quarto.

Origines Sacra; or a Rational Account of the Grounds of Christian Faith, as to
the Truth and Divine Authority of the Scriptures, and the matters therein
contained, quarto.

A Discourse concerning the Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome, and the
hazard of Salvation in the Communion of it, in Answer to some Papers of a
Revolted Protestant, wherein a particular account is given of the Phanaticisms
and Divisions of that Church, Octavo.

An Answer to several late Treatises occasioned by a Book entitled, A
Discourse concerning the Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome, and the
hazard of Salvation in the communion of it, the first Part, Octavo.

A second Discourse in vindication of the Protestant Grounds of Faith, against
the pretense of Infallibility in the Roman Church, in Answer to the Guide in
Controversy, by R. H. Protestancy without Principles, and Reason and Religion;
or the certain Rule of Faith, by E. W. with a particular enquiry into the
Miracles of the Roman Church, Octavo.

An Answer to Mr. Cresy's Epistle Apologetical to a Person of Honor, touching
his Vindication of Dr. Stillingfleet, Octavo. All written by Edw.
Stillingfleet, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.

The Rule of Faith, or an Answer to the Treatise of Mr. J. S. entitled
Sure-Footing, etc. by John Ti^lotson, D. D. Preacher to the Honorable Society
of Lincoln's Inn. To which is adjoined a Reply to Mr. J. S. his third Appendix,
etc. by Edw. Stillingfleet, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.

Knowledge and Practice: Or a plain Discourse of the chief things necessary to
be known, believed and practiced in order to Salvation: By. S. Cradock, Quarto;
a Book very useful for Families.

The Remains of Sir Walter Rawleigh, in Twelves.

A Discourse of War and Peace, by Sir Robert Cotton, in Octavo.

The Moral Philosophy of the Stoics, in Octavo.

Hodders Arithmetic, Twelves.

The Triumphs of Rome over despised Protestancy, Octavo.

The Original of Romances, Octavo.

The Advice of Charles the Fifth, Emperor of Germany and King of Spain, to his
Son Philip the Second, upon resignation of his Crown to his said Son, Twelves.

Observations upon Military and Political affairs, by the Right Honorable
George Duke of Albemarle, Folio, Published by Authority.

A Fathers Testament: by Phineahs Fletcher, in Octavo.

A Sermon preached before the King, January 30. 1675. by Greoge S^radling, D.
D. Dean of Chichester, and one of his Majesty's Chaplains in Ordinary.

A Sermon preached before the King, May 9. 1675. by John Sadb^ry, D. D. Dean of
Durham, and Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.

The Reformation Justified, in a Sermon preached at Guild Hall Chapel,
September 21. 1673. before the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, etc. upon Acts 24. 14.

A Sermon preached November 5. 1673. at St. Margarets Westminister, upon St.
Matthew, 7. 15, 16.

A Sermon preached before the King, February 24. 1675. upon Heb. 3. 13, These
three last by Edw. St^, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty.

Books Printed for, and Sold by John Baker, at the three Pigeons in St. Paul's
ChurchYard.
DUPORT in Psalmos 4. Greek, and Latin. Cantabrigiae. 4. -- Idem in Psalmos,
4. Grace. -- in Homer. 4. Grace, Latin,
Beveridge Grammatica Orientalis. 8. Gore Nomenclator Geograph. 8. Seldeni
Eutichyus. 4. Arab. Lat. Ailsbury de Decreto Dei. 4. Dionysius de Situ Orbis.
8. Grace. Comenii Janua. 8. Lat. cum Figu. Confessio Fide^. 8. Doughtei
Analecta Sacra. 8. p. s. 23. Ignoramus. 12. Vossii Elementa Rhetorica. 8.
Elegantiae Poeticae. 12. Exaletation of Ale. 8. Comenii Vestibulum. 8. Lat.
Eng. Pasoris Lexicon. 8. Gr. Lat. Quintiliani Orationes. 8. Glanvil on the
Sacrament. 12. Buroughs Remedy against Grief. 12. bound together. Directions
about Death 12. bound together. Emperor Augustus's speeches to the Married and
Unmarried. Dr. Meggots Sermon before St. Paul's Scholars on St. Paul's day, 1675.
A Visitation Sermon before the Lord Bishop of Ely, by Timothy Parker, at Lewis
in Sussex. Praeces scholae Paulinae. 8. Lat. Eng. Where are Sold all sort of
Foreign Books and School-Books.
FINIS.

