Imprimatur,

Sam. Parker.
April 9. 1670.
The Way of Happiness: Represented in its DIFFICULTIES AND ENCOURAGEMENTS; And
Cleared from many Popular and Dangerous MISTAKES.

By Jos. Glanvill, M. A.

LONDON: Printed by E.C. and A.C. for James Collins, at the King's Head in
Westminster Hall, M. DC. LXX.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
THE Author of this Discourse, being desired to Preach, at a place where he
was, from home; He recollected the Sermon which he had last delivered in his
own Congregation, and made use of that. It seems there were present who chanced
to mistake his meaning in some things, not inconsiderable. To satisfy some of
those, he writ down the Discourse while 'twas yet fresh in his memory,
intending it for the sight of two or three, by whom he was so unhappy as to be
misapprehended. Before those went out of his hands, I had, accidentally, a
sight of them in his Chamber, and thought they might be very fit for the
public view, to which I desired they might be exposed. Because the Subject is
great, and grave; and the Discourse, in my Judgment, gives a very clear and
intelligible account of the real difficulties of Religion, and the way to
overcome them; both which are too usually handled in Phrases and Confusions. By
which it will appear, that those whom some are pleased in scorn, to call the
Rational Divines, do not make the way to Heaven so easy, as those Maligners of
them, affirm of their Doctrines: But indeed represent it so as the Scripture
has done to their hands.

Besides which, I found in this Discourse, a very plain and practicable method
to act by, in order to ones being good and happy; even such a one as seems to
me very apt to encourage our endeavors, and soberly and safely to direct us in
them. For it is not made up of Metaphors, or dark Generals, or disputable
Notions, or numerous confused Particulars: But of things fairly to be
understood, and certainly to be practiced, and easily to be remembered; and such
as tend all to the perfection of our natures. I thought also that many
considerable things in Religion were stated very sensibly and clearly in these
Papers, and a ground laid to deliver the minds of men from many vain and
unsound Notions, which have much perverted and depraved the true, sober,
practical Divinity.

But the chiefest thing for which I desired its Publication, was, Because it so
plainly and distinctly detects one of the greatest, most popular, and most
dangerous Impostures of our age, by discovering how far the mere Animal
Religion may go; and how little it really signifies, notwithstanding its
glorious shows and pretenses. By this part of the Discourse, many may see how
much they have been mistaken in the opinion of their own Godliness; and that
the things of which they have been so enamoured, have nothing Divine or
Supernatural in them. I say, for such Reasons, I was desirous that this
Discourse should be public. The Author at first was averse to it, but at
length he gave it me to do with it what I pleased: And in gratitude for the
kindness, I think fit to do him that right, to give this account of the
occasion of its coming abroad.

And to this I am to add, That though this Discourse was never written till
after it had been publicly delivered; yet for the satisfaction of those that
mistook it, I assure them from the Author, That here is all that was spoken,
and for the most part the same order and words, only the Inferences, and some
other things up and down are added, but nothing that he knows omitted. I shall
presume to add no more, but now remit the Reader to the Book it self.

William Allen.
ERRATA.
Page line For Read 27 17 Qualifications gratifications 34 8 Difficulty
Difficulties 44 19 time. But time: But 51 4 introducing habits introducing of
habits 56 2 aiming to arriving at 85 15 ill affections it is affections 112 12
this mark the mark 168 19 force resistance

TO A Dear Friend.
My Friend,
I Believe I needed not heretofore have taken much pains to assure you of the
sincerity of my Friendship; But after so long an absence, and a distance so
great; it may, perhaps, be now seasonable to say, That I have still the same
dearness for you. How I might express this in some instance of real kindness,
has been long my care; and I have often meditated to send you something, that
might serve you in your eternal interests; of these I thought most, because
they are your chiefest, and I know you esteem them most: And I am in no
capacity of contributing to your other concerns. But hitherto, notwithstanding
those thoughts, my affection has produced nothing but desires and intentions.
I was lately considering, with trouble, how much I had been defeated in those
purposes and how frequently and unhappily dive^^ted; when, it came into my
mind, th^^ there was a little Discourse of mine go^^ newly to the Press, which
I phancied yo^ would not dislike, and remembering th^^ the Subject was The Way
of Happiness which I as passionately desire for you a^^ for my self, It pleased
me with the thoughts of putting it into your hands and so, in that way, of
conveying my se^ to you; which that I might do, wit^ some special note of a
more than ordi^nary regard, I thought of this course (...) particular
recommendation and directi^on. The Book contains things that yo^ have sometimes
heard me Discourse, an^ I am very desirous that you should thoroughly digest,
and retain those Note^ because I believe they will steed you^ Nor can I doubt,
but that you will e^^deavour to do so, because they are (...) thoughts and
councels of

Your most constant Friend, J. G.

The Way to Happiness.
Luke XII.24. Strive to enter in at the straight Gate: For many, I say unto
you, shall seek to enter in, and shall not be able.
INTRODUCTION.
WHEN I consider the goodness of God; and the merits of his Son, our Savior;
and the Influences of the Holy Spirit; and all the advantages of the Gospel;
The certainty o^ its Principles, the reasonableness of its duties, the
greatness of its ends, the sutableness of its means, the Glory of its Rewards,
and the Terror of its punishments; I say, when I consider these, and then look
upon Man as a reasonable Creature, apprehensive of Duty, and interest, and apt
to be moved by hopes and fears; I cannot but wonder, and be astonished to think,
that notwithstanding all this, the far greater part of men should finally
miscarry, and be undone. It Is possible some such Considerations might be the
occasion of the Question propounded to our Savior in the verse immediately
foregoing the Text -- Lord, are there Few that be saved? God is Love, and all
the Creatures are His, and man a noble sort; He is the Lover of Men, and Thou
art the Redeemer of Men; And though Man has offended, yet God is propense to
pardon, and in Thee he is reconciled; He is desirous of our happiness, and Thou
art come into the world to offer, and promote it; and the Holy Ghost is
powerful and ready to assist our endeavors; We were made for happiness, and we
seek it; And -- Lord, are there Few that be saved? The Text is Christ's return
to the Question, Strive to enter in at the straight Gate; for many, I say unto
you, will seek to enter, and shall not be able. In which words we have three
things.

(I) An Answer implied; Straight is the Gate. (II) A duty expressed, Strive to
enter. (III) A Consideration to engage our greater care and diligence in the
Duty; For many will seek to enter, and shall not be able.
By the Gate we may understand the entrance, and all the way o^ Happiness, and
that is, Religion; By the straightness of it, the Difficulties we are to
encounter; By striving, earnest and sincere endeavor: By seeking, an imperfect
striving; And from the words thu^ briefly explained, These Propositions offer
themselves to our Consideration.

I. There are many and great difficulties in Religion, The Gate is straight.
II. The Difficulties may b^ overcome by striving, Strive t^ enter. III. There
is a sort of striving that will not procure an entrance, For many will seek to
enter in, and shall not be able.
CHAP. I. There are great Difficulties in Religion. Religion is not hard to be
understood. The Difficulties arise (1) from the Depravities of our Natures, (2)
from the Influences of the senses, (3) from the disorder of our passion, (4)
from the power of Custom, (5) from evil example, and (6) from worldly interests
and engagements.
SECT. I.
I Begin with the FIRST in order, viz. That there are many and great
difficulties in Religion; And to what I have to say about it, I premise this
negative Consideration, That the Difficulties of Religion do not lie in the
UNDERSTANDING. Religion is a plain thing, and easy to be understood. It Is no
deep subtilty, or high-strain'd notion; it is no gilded fancy, or elaborate
exercise of the brain; It Is not placed in the clouds of Imagination, nor wrapped
up in mystical clothing; But it is obvious and familiar, easy and
intelligible; First preached by Fishermen, and Mechanics, without pomp of
speech, or height of speculation; addressed to Babes and Plebei^n heads; and
incended to govern the wills of the honest, and sincere; and not to exercise
the wits of the notional, and curious. So that we need not mount the wings of
the wind to fetch Religion from the stars; nor go down to the deep to fetch it
up from thence; For it is with us, and before us, as open as the day, and as
familiar as the light. The great Praecepts of the Gospel are clothed in
Sunbeams, and are as visible to the common eye, as to the Eagle upon the
highest perch. It Is no piece of wit or subtilty to be a Christian, nor will it
require much study, or learned retirement to understand the Religion we must
practice. That which was to be known of God, was manifest to the very Heathen,
Romans i.19. The Law is light, says Solomon. Prove. vi.13. And it is not only a
single passing glance on the eye; but it is put into the heart, and the promise
is, that we shall all know him, from the greatest to the least. Our duty is set
up in open places, and shone upon by a clear beam; 'Twas written of old upon
the plain Tables of Habakkuk, Hab. ii.2. So that the running eye might see and
read: And the Religion of the H. Jesus, like himself, came into the world with
rays about its head.

Religion, I say, is clear, and plain, and what is not so, may concern the
Theater, or the Schools; may entertain men's wits, and serve the interest of
disputes; But it is nothing to Religion, it is nothing to the interest of men's
souls.

Religion was once a Mystery, but the Mystery is revealed; And those things
that we yet count Mysteries, are plainly enough discovered as to their being
such as we believe them, though we cannot understand the manner how; and it is
no part of Religion to inquire into that, but rather It injoins us meekly to
acquiesce in the plain declarations of Faith without bold scrutiny into hidden
things. In short then I say, the difficulties of Religion are not in the
Understanding; In prompto and Facili est aeternitas, said the Father; The
affairs of eternity depend on things easy and Familiar. And I premise this to
prevent dangerous mistakes.

But though Religion be so facile, and plain a thing to be understood, yet the
way to Heaven is no broad, or easy Path; The Ga^ is straight enough for all
that; an^ I now come to show what are the real difficulties of Religion, an^
whence they arise.

SECT. II.
ONe great Difficulty arise^ from the depravity of ou^ natures. The Scripture
intimates^ That we are conceived in sin^ Psalm lv.5. Trangressours from the
womb, Isaiah xlviii.8. an^ Children of wrath, Ephesians. ii.3. An^ we find by
experience that we brin^ vile inclinations into the worl^ with us. Some are
naturally cruel^ and injurious; proud and imperi^ous; lustful, and revengeful:
O^thers, Covetous, and unjust; hu^moursome, and discontented; treacherous, and
false. And there is scarce an instance of habitual vice, or villainy, but some
or other are addicted to it by their particular make and natures: I say, their
natures, for certainly it is not true what some affirm (to serve their
opinions) in contradiction to experience; That vices are not in men's natural
propensions; but instil'd by corrupt education, evil customs and examples: For
we see that those whose education has been the same, do yet differ extremely
from each other in their inclinations; And some, whose breeding has been
careless and loose, who have seen almost nothing else but examples of vice; and
been instructed in little, besides the arts of Vanity and pleasure; I say,
there are such who notwithstanding these their unhappy circumstances, discover
none of thos^ vile inclinations, and propension^ that are in others whose
educati^^ has been very strict and advant^^geous. This I think is enough t^
show that many of our evil h^^bits are from nature, and not from custom only.

And yet I cannot say that H^^mane Nature is so debaucht, th^^ every man is
inclined to every ev^^ by it: For there are those, who b^ their tempers are
averse to some kind of vices, and naturally dispo^sed to the contrary virtues;
some by their constitutions are incline to hate Cruelty, Covetousness, lying
impudence, and injustice, and are b^ temper merciful, liberal, modest, tru^^
and just. There are kinds of vi^ces which our natures almost uni^versally rise
against, as many best^^alities, and some horrid Cruelties; And all men, except
Monsters in humane form, are disposed to some virtues, such as Love to
Children, and kindness to friends, and Benefactors. All this I must confess and
say, because experience constrains me; and I do not know why Systematick
notions should sway more then that.

But notwithstanding these last concessions, it is evident enough that our
natures are much vitiated, and depraved; and this makes our business in the way
of Religion, di^ficult. For our work is, to cleanse our Natures, and to destroy
those evil Inclinations, to crucify the old man, Romans vi.6. and to purge out
the old leven, 1 Cor. v.7. This is Religion, and the way of happiness, which
must needs be very difficult, and uneasy. For the vices of Inclination are
very dear, and grateful to us; They are our right hands, and our right eyes,
and esteemed as our selves: So that to cut off, and pluck out these, and to bid
defiance to, and wage war against our selves; to destroy the firstborn of our
natures, and to lop off our own limbs; This cannot but be very irksom and
displeasant employment, and this is one chief business; and a considerable
thing that makes Religion difficult.

SECT. III.
II. ANother difficulty arises from the Influence of the Senses. We are
creatures of sense, and sensible things do most powerfully move us; we are born
Children, and live at first the life of ^easts. That Age receives deep
impressions, and those are made by the senses, whose interest grows strong, and
established in us before we come to the use of reason; and after we have arrived
to the exercise of that, sensible objects still possess our affections, and
sway our wills, and fill our Imaginations, and influence our Understandings; so
that we love, and hate; we desire and choose, we fancy, and we discourse
according to those impressions; And hence it is that we are enamored of
trifles, and fly from our happiness; and pursue Vexation, and embrace misery;
and imagine perversely, and reason childishly: For the influence of the body,
and its senses are the chief Fountains of of sin, and Folly and Temptation:
Upon which accounts it was that the Platonical Philosophers declaimed so
earnestly against the body, and as^crib'd all evils, and mischief to i^ calling
vice (...), corporeae peste^ material evils, and bodily plagu^^ And the Apostle
that understoo^ it better, calls sin by the name (...) Flesh. Gal. v.17. Works
of the fles^ Gal. v.19. Law of the Member^ Romans vii.23. and cries out up^on the
body of this death, Romans vi^24.

And now this is our natural con^dition, a state subject to the preva^lent
influences of sense, and so sin^ and temptation by them; And 't^^ our work in
Religion, to morti^ the body, Romans viii.13. and (...) cease from making
provision for t^^ Flesh, Romans xiii.14 and from fulfilling the lusts thereof,
Gal. v.14^ To render our selves dead to the prevalent life of sense, and sin^
Romans vi.8. and 11. v. and to arise to a new Life, Romans vi 4. The Life of
righteousness, and Faith, Hab. ii.4. A Life that has other Principles, and
other pleasures; other objects, and other ends, and such as neither eye has
seen, nor ear heard, nor any of the senses perceived. Yea, this is a Life that
is exercised in contradiction to the judgments of sense. Its joy, is
Tribulation, Iam. i.2. It Is Glory, reproaches, 2 Pet. iv.14. It Is height, is
lowness, Luke xiv.11. It Is greatness, in being meanest, Mat. xx.27. And it is
riches, in having nothing, 2 Cor. vi.10. To such a Life as this, Religion is to
raise us; and it must needs be difficult to make us, who are so much Brutes, to
be so much Angels; us, who seem to live by nothing else but sense, to live by
nothing less; This with a witness is an hard, and uneasy work, and another
difficulty in Religion.

SECT. IV.
(III.) A Third proceeds from the natural disorder, and rag^ of our passions.
Our Corrupt natures are like the troubled Sea, Isa. lvii.20. And our passions
are the waves of that Ocean, that tumble and swell, and keep a mighty noise;
They dash against the rocks, and break one against another; and our peace, and
happiness is shipwrackt by them. Our passions make us miserable. We are
sometimes stifled by their numbers, and confounded by their disorders, and torn
to pieces by their violence; mounted to the clouds by ambition, and thrown down
to the deep by despair; scorcht by the flames of Lust, and overwhelmed by the
waters of unstable desire; Passions fight one against another, and all against
reason; they prevail over the mind, and have usurpt the Government of our
Actions, and involve us in continual guilt, and misery. This is the natural
state of man; and our work in the way of Religion, is to restrain this
violence, and to rectify these disorders, and to reduce those rebellious
powers under the Empire, and Government of the mind, their Sovereign. And so to
regain the divine image, which consists much in the order of our faculties; and
the subjection of the Brutish, to the reasonable powers. This, I say, Religion
aims at, to raise us to the perfection of our natures, by mortifying those
members, Co^ iii.5. our unruly passions and d^^sires; and crucifying the flesh
wit^ its affections, and lusts, Gal. v.24. An^ thereby to make us humble i^
Prosperity, quiet in Adversity; m^e^ under provocations, steady amid
temptations; modest in our desir^s temperate in our enjoyments; const^^^ to our
resolutions, and contented i^ all conditions. Here is our great business, and
our work is this: An^ certainly it is no easy thing to brin^ order out of a
Chaos, and to spea^ a tempest into a calm; to resist torrent, and to stop and
turn the tide; to subdue a rebellious rabble and to change them from
tyranni^cal Masters, to modest and obedien^ servants; These, no doubt, ar^
works of difficulty enough, and these must be our employment in the wa^ of
Religion; and on this score also, the Gate is straight.

SECT. V.
(IV.) OUR work in Religion is yet more difficult, upon the account of Custom,
to which we are subject, and by which we are swayed much. This is vulgarly said
to be another nature, and the Apostle calls it by that name, 1 Cor. xi.14. Does
not nature it self teach you, that if a man have long hair, it is a shame unto
him? By the word Nature, the best Interpreters say only Custom is meant; since
long hair is not declared shameful by the Law, and Light of Nature, taken in
it is chief, and properest sense: For then it had never been permitted to the
Nazarites: But the contrary custom, in the Nations that used it not made it
seem shameful and indecent^ There are other places in Scripture and ancient
Authors, wherein Na^ture is put for Custom: But I mu^^ not insist on this; the
thing I a^ about is, That custom is very power^ful; and as it makes a kind of
Na^ture, so, many times, it masters an^ subdues it. Wild creatures are hereby
made gentle and familiar; and those that naturally are tame enoug^ are made to
degenerate into wildness by it.

And now besides the original de^pravities of our natures, we have contracted
many vicious habits by corrupt and evil usages; which we were drawn into at
first by pleasure, and vanity in our young and inconsiderate years, while we
were led by the directions of sense: These, by frequent acts, grow at last into
habits, which though in their beginning they were tender as a plant, and easy
to have been crushed or blasted; yet time and use hardens them into the firmness
of an Oak, that braves the weather, and can endure the stroke of the Axe, and a
strong arm.

Now to destroy and root up these obstinate customary evils, is another part of
our work. And Religion teaches us to put off concerning the old conversation
the old man, Ephesians. iv.22. and to receive new impressions and inclinations; to
be renewed in the spirit of our minds, v.23. and to put on the new man, v.24.
To make us new hearts, Ezekiel. xviii.31. and to walk in newness of life, Romans
vi.4. This we are to do, and this we may well suppose to be hard work; the
Scripture compares it to the changing the skin of the Ethiopian, and the spots
of the Leopard Jer. xiii.23. and elsewhere. Ho^ can they do good, that are
accustome^ to do evil? Jer. xiii.23. It Is hard no doubt; and this is another
difficulty in Religion.

(V.) The power that Exampl^ has over us, makes the way of Religion difficult.
Example is more prevalent than precept; for man is a creature given much to
imitation, and we are very apt to follow what we se^ others do, rather than
what we ought to do our selves.

And now the Apostle has told us, That the whole world lies in wickedness, 1 John v.19. and we sadly find it: we cannot look out of doors, but we see vanity
and folly, s^nsuality, and forgetfulness of God^ Pride and Covetousness,
Injustice and Intemperance, and all other kinds of evils: These we meet with
every where, in public companies, and private conversations; in the high
ways, and in the corners of the streets.

The sum is, Example is very powerful, and examples of Vice are always in our
eyes; we are apt to be reconciled to that, which every one does, and to do like
it; we love the trodden path, and care not to walk in the way which is gone in
but by a few.

This is our condition, and our work in Religion is, to overcome the strong
biass of corrupt example; to strive against the stream, to learn to be good,
though few are so, and not to follow a multitude to do evil, Exodus xxiii.2.
This is our busines^ and this is very difficult.

SECT. VI.
(VI.) THE last difficulty I sha^^ mention, arises from Worldly interest and
engagement^ We have many necessities to serv^ both in our Persons, and our
Fam^^lies. Nature excluded us naked in^^ the World, without clothing f^^
warmth, or armature for defense; an^ food is not provided to our hand^ as it is
for the Beasts, nor do o^^ houses grow for our habitation, an^ comfortable
abode. Nothing is pr^^pared for our use without our i^^dustry, and endeavors.
So that (...) the necessity of this state, we are e^^gaged in worldly affairs:
These, N^^ture requires us to mind, and Reli^^ion permits it; And nothing can
^e done without our care; and care would be very troublesome, if there were not
some love to the objects we exercise our cares upon: Hence it is, that some
cares about the things of this world, and love to them, is allowed us; and we
are commanded to continue in the Call^ng wherein God has set us, 1 Cor.
^ii.20. and are warned that we be not slothful in business, Romans xii.11. We may
take some delight also in the Creatures that God gives us, and l^ve them in
their degree: For the Animal life may have its moderate qualifications; God
made all things, that they might enjoy their Being.

And now, notwithstanding all this, Religion commands us to set our affections
upon things above, Col. iii.2. not to love the World, 1 John ii.15. to be
careful for nothing Phil. iv.6. to take no thought for to morrow, Mat. vi.34.
The meaning of which expressions is, That w^ should love God and heavenly
things in the chief and first place; and avoi^ the immoderate degree of Worldly
lov^ and cares. This is our duty; an^ it is very difficult: For by reason o^ the
hurry of business, and those passions that earthly engagements excite; we
consider not things as we should, and so, many times, perceive not the bounds
of our permissions, and the beginnings of our restraints; where the allowed
measure ends, and the forbidden degree commenceth: what is the difference
between that care that is a duty, and that which is a sin; Providence and
Carking; and between that love of the World which is necessary and lawful, and
that which is extravagant and inordinate; I say, by reason of the hurry we are
in, amidst business and worldly delights, we many times perceive not our
bounds, and so slide easily into earthly-mindedness and anxiety. And it is hard
for us, who are engaged so much in the World, and who need it so much, who
converse so much with it, and about it, and whose time and endeavors are so
unavoidably taken up by it; I say, it is hard for us, in such circumstances, to
be crucified to the World, Gal. vi.14. and to all inordinate affections to it;
to live above it, and to settle our chief delights and cares on things at great
distance from us, which are unsuitable to our corrupt appetites, and contrary to
the most relishing enjoyments of flesh; which sense never saw nor felt, and
which the imagination it self could never grasp. This, no doubt, is hard
exercise, and this must be done in the way of Religion; and on this account
also, it is very difficult.

Thus of the FIRST Proposition, That there are great difficulties in Religion.
I come now to the SECOND.

CHAP. II. That the Difficulties may be overcome. The Instruments whereby it
may be done, viz. Faith, Prayer, and active endeavor. They are particularly
considered. The Method of endeavor proposed in plain and practicable Rules.
Some Qualifications of those Rules.
SECT. I.
(II.) THAT those Difficulties may be overcome striving; which imports both the
Encouragement, and the Means That THEY MAY BE VAN^QUISHT; and HOW.

(I.) That the Difficulties man be subdued, is clearly enough im^plyed, in the
Precept; We should not have been commanded to striv^ if it had been impossible
to overcom^ God does not put his Creature upon fruitless undertakings: H^ never
requires us to do any thin^ in order to that, which is not (...) be attained.
Therefore when he wa^ resolved not to be entreated for tha^ stubborn and
Rebellious Nation^ He would not have the Proph^^ pray for them, Ier. vii.16.
Pray (...) for this people, for I will not he^^^ thee. He would not be
petition^ for that, which he was determine not to grant. He puts not h^^
Creatures upon any vain expect^^tions, and endeavors; nor would he have them
deceive themselves, by fond dependences. When one made this Profession to our
Savior, Lord, I will follow thee whithersoever thou go, Christ tells him,
that he must expect from him no worldly honors, or preferments; no power or
sensual pleasure, no, not so much as the ordinary accommodations of Life. The
Foxes have Holes, and the Birds of the Air have Nests, but the Son of Man has
not where to lay his head, Luke ix.5.8. He would not have the man, that likely
might look for these, upon the opinion of his being the Messiah, in the Jewish
sense, one that should at last, whatever the meanness of his condition was at
present, appear as a Mighty, and Triumphant temporal Monarch; I say, our
Savior would not have the Man follow Him for that, which he had not to bestow
upon him. Since then that he who would not put us upon fruitless labors, has
commanded us to strive to enter; it is evident, that an entrance may be procured
into the gate by striving, and that the difficulty may be overcome.

SECT. II.
THE next thing in my method is to show, How; The manner is implied in the
^ext; and expressed in the Proposition, viz. By striving; and by this, is meant,
a resolute use of those means that are the Instruments of happiness. They are
three, Faith, Prayer and active Endeavor.

(I.) Faith is a chief Instrument, for the overcoming the Difficulties, I have
mentioned. And Faith in the general, is the belief of a Testimony; Divine Faith
the belief of a Divine Testimony; and the chief things to be believed, as
encouragements and means for a victory over the Difficulties in Religion, are
these; That God is reconciled to us by his Son; That he will assist our weak
endeavors by the Aids of his Spirit; That he will reward us, if we strive as
we ought, with immortal Happiness in a world of endless Glory.

By our belief of Gods being reconciled, we are secured from those ^ears, that
might discourage our approaches, and endeavors, upon the account of his
Purity, and Justice. By the Faith of his Assistance, all the objections against
our striving, that arise from the greatness of the Difficulties, and the
dispropor^ionate ^malness of our strength, are answered. And from our believing
eternal rewards in another world, we have a mighty motive to engage our utmost
diligence, to contest with all difficulties that would keep us from it.

What satisfaction is there, says the believer, in the gratification o^ my
corrupt inclinations and senses^ in comparison with that, which arises from
the favor of God, and an interest in his Son? What difficulties in my Duty,
too great for Divine Aids? What pains are we to undergo in the narrow, and
difficult way, that the glory which is a^ the end of it, will not compensate^
What is it to deny a base inclination that will undo me; it^ obedience to Him
that made, and redeemed me; and to despise the little things of present sense,
for the hope of everlasting enjoyments; Trifling pleasure, for Hallelujahs?
What were it for me to set vigorously upon those Passions, that degrade my
noble nature, and make me a slave, and a beast, and will make me more vile, and
more miserable; when the Spirit of the most High is at my right hand to assist
me? Why should my noble Faculties, that were designed for glorious ends, be led
into infamous practices by base usages, and dishonorable Customs? What is the
example of a wicked, sensual wretched world, to that of the Holy Jesus; and all
the Army of Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs? What is there in the world, that it
should be loved more than God? and what is the Flesh, that it should have more
of our time, and care, than the great interests of our Souls?

Such are the Considerations of a mind, that Faith has awakened; and by them
it is prepared for vigorous striving. So that Faith is the Spring of all; and
necessary to the other two instruments of our Happiness. Besides which, it is
acceptable to God, in it self, and so disposes us for his gracious helps, by
which we are enabled to overcome the Difficulties of our way. While a man
considers the Difficulties only, and weighs them against his own strength, Let
him suppose the Liberty of his will to be what he pleases, yet while it is
under such disadvantages, that will signify very little; and he that sees no
further, sits down in discouragement; But when the mind is fortified with the
firm belief of divine help, he attempts then with a noble vigor, which cannot
miscarry, if it do not cool and faint. For he that endures to the end, shall be
saved, Mat. xxiv.13. Thus Faith sets the other Instruments of Happiness on
work, and therefore it is deservedly reckoned as the first; and it is that which
must always accompany the exercises of Religion, and give them life, and motion.

SECT. II.
(II) PRayer is another means, we must use, in order to our overcoming the
Difficulties of the way. Our own, mere, natural strength is weakness; and
without supernatural helps those Difficulties are not to be surmounted. These
Aids then are necessary, and God is ready to bestow them on us; For He would
have all men to be saved, and to come to the Knowledge of the Truth, 1 Timothy
ii.4. But for these things he will be sought unto. And it is very just, and fit
that we should address our selves to him by ^rayer, to acknowledge our own
insufficiency, and d^pendence on him for the mercies we expect; and thereby to
own Him for the giver of every good, and perfect gift; and to instruct our
selves how his favors are to be received and used, viz. with reverence and
thanksgiving: This I say it is highly fit that we should do; and the doing it
prepares us for his blessings; and He fails not to bestow them on those that
are prepared by Faith, and Prayer; For he gives liberally and upbraids not;
And our Prayers are required, not as if they could move his will, which is
always graciously inclined to our happiness; But as it is that tribute which we
owe our Maker, and Benefactor; and that without which, it is not so fit he
should bestow his particular favors on us. For it is by no means becoming the
Divine Majesty, to vouchsafe the specialties of his Grace, and goodness to
those, that are not sensible that They want them; and are not humbled to a due
apprehension of their weakness, and dependence But for such as are so, and
express their humble desires in the Ardours of Holy Prayer, God never denies
them the assistances of his Spirit: For if ye being evil (says our Savior)
know how to give good gifts unto your Children, how much more shall your Father
which is in heaven give good things to those that ask Him? Mat. vii.11.

And These Divine Helps obtained by Faith, and Prayer, and joined with our
active constant endeavour^ will not fail to enable us to overcome the
Difficulties, and to procure us an entrance at the straight gate. And so I come
to the Third Instrument of our Happiness, and means that we must use, implied
in striving, viz.

SECT. III.
(III.) ACtive endeavor, in which Repentance and the fruits of it are implied;
Both Faith and Prayer are in order to this; and without it they can neither of
them turn to account. For Faith without works is dead, Jam. ii.20. and Prayer,
without endeavor, fruitless; yea indeed, in the Divine estimate, it is ^one at
all: It Is bodily exercise; no Prayer. For when we invoke Gods ^elp, we desire
it, that we may use ^t; Divine grace is not a Treasure to lay up by us, but an
instrument to ^ork with; And when we pray that God would assist us in our
endea^ours, and endeavor not at all, we mock God, and trifle with him in our
Prayers: I say then, That en^eavour is necessary, and necessary in ^ degree so
eminent, that this is always included in Faith when it is taken in the highest,
and noblest ^vangelical sense, viz. for the Faith which justifies, and saves;
for that ^omprehends all those endeavors, and their fruits, whereby we are
^ade happy.

We must not expect that God should do all ( exclusively) in the ^ork of our
Salvation. He does his part, and we must do ours, (though we do that, by his
help too.) He that made us without o^^ selves, will not save us without o^^
selves, said the Father. We are commanded to seek, Mat vii.7. To Ru^ 1 Cor.
ix.24. To fight, 1 Timothy vi.12. To give diligence, 2 Pet. i.10. The^^ all import
action, and endeavor. And that endeavor must not b^ only a faint purpose, or
formal service; but it must be employed in the highest degree of care, and
diligence. The Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, Mat xi.12. and thi^
violence must not be used in at heat, and sudden fit only, that cools, and
dies, and contents it self with having been warm for a time. Bu^ it must be a
steady, and constan^ course of activity, a continual striving to overcome the
remaining difficulties of the way.

We must endeavor then, vigorously, and constantly; and in that, (after our
Faith is strengthened by deep consideration, and divine assistance implored by
ardent Prayer) our course is, (I.) To abstain from all the outward actions of
SIN, and to perform the external acts of the contrary virtues To cease to do
evil, Isa. i.16. is the first step. When the Publicans asked John the Baptist,
Luke iii.12. what they should do; His direction was, That they should not
exact, verse. 13. and to the Soldiers asking the same question, he answers, Do
violence to no man, verse. 14. These were the sins of their particular
Professions, which were to be quitted, before any thing could be done higher.
We have ordinarily more power over our actions, than our habits, and therefore
we should begin here, and resolve deeply, by divine help, to cut off those
supplies that feed vicious inclinations; For wicked habits are maintained by
actions of wickedness; when they cease, the inclinations grow more faint, and
weak: And when we are come but thus far, to have confined our lusts, we shall
be encouraged to proceed to destroy them. It Is said, There is no great distance
between a Princes Prison and his Grave; The saying is most true in the Case of
Tyrants, and Usurpers^ and the habits of sin are both; when they are
restrained, they are not fa^ from being destroyed, if we employ our endeavors,
and the divine aids, as we ought.

This then I say, must be done First, and the other part of the advice must be
taken with it, viz. we must ^ractise the outward actions of the ^ontrary
virtues. We must do well, when we cease to do evil. When we ^urn from darkness,
it must be to ^ight, Acts xxvi.18. Not from one ^ind of darkness to another.
When we cease to oppress, we must be ^haritable; when we leave to tyran^ize
over our inferiors, we must ^e kind, and helpful to them. When ^e forbear to
slander, we must ^eak all the good we can of our Neighbor.

The outward actions of virtue ^re in our power; and it is somewhat ^o come so
far as this: What is ^ore, viz. The inward love and de^^ght in goodness, will
succeed in ^^me, if we persevere. It Is not ^^fe for us to propose to our selves
^^e greatest heights at first; if we do, we are discouraged, and fall back. God
accepts even of that little, if it be in order to more. He despises not the
day of small things, Zech. iv.10. If thou do well, shall thou not be
accepted? Christ loved the young man who had kept the external part of the
Commandments, Mark x.21. If he had had the courage to have proceeded; what he
had done, would have steaded him much. The inward love of virtue and holiness
is promoted by the outward exercises o^ them, and hereby the contrary evils are
both pined, and thrust out

Thus of the First thing that endeavor implies; upon this mu^^ follow next,

(II.) An attempt upon evil habi^^ viz. Those that have been super^ induced on
us by car^lesness an^ temptation, bad customs, and evil company. Every victory
is a means to another; we grow stronger, and the enemy weaker by it. To have
overcome the outward acts of sin, is a beginning in our spiritual warfare; but
our chief enemies are the habits; these must be attempted also, but with
prudence; wild beasts are not to be dealt with by main strength; A^t, and
stratagem must be used in ^his War; and it is good policy, I think ^ere, to
fight the least powerful foes first; the contracted habits, before we fall on
the inbred natural inclinations. While our forces are weak, ^tis dangerous
setting upon the ^trongest holds, viz. the vices of ^omplexion, which are woven
into our very natures. If a man apply ^ll his force where he has not
reso^ution enough to go through with what he undertakes, he receives a foyl,
and it is odds but he sits down, and faints. Prudence therefore is to be used,
where we distrust our strength: Fall upon sin then, where it is weakest, where
it has least of nature, and least of temptation, and where we have arguments
from reputation, and worldly interests, wherewith to war against it. If we
prevail, we are heartned by the success: Our Faith and resolution will grow
stronger by this experience, when we have triumphed over the sins of evil
custom, example, and sensual indulgence.

And when that is done, we must remember, that it is not enough that those
habits are thrust out; others must be planted in their room: when the soil is
prepared, the seed must be sown; and the seeds of vertuou^ habits, are the
actions of virtue. These I recommended under the last head, and shall say more
of the introducing habits, under one that follows on purpose.

(III.) The next advance in our endeavors, is, In the strength of God, and in
the Name of his Son, to assault the gre^ter Devils, and to strive to cast out
them; I mean the sins of Complexion, and particular Nature. This is a great
work, and will require strong Faith, and many Prayers, and much time, and great
watchfulness, and invincible resolution: Employ these heartily; and though thou
now and then may receive a foyl, yet give not off so, but rise again in the
strength of God, implore new aid, and ^ortifie thy self with more
considera^ions, and deeper resolves; and then renew the Combat upon the
encouragement of Divine assistance, and Christ's merits and intercession, and
the promise that sin shall not have dominion over us, Romans vi.14.

Remember, that this is the great work, and the biggest difficulty; if this be
not overcome, all our other labor has been in vain, and will be lost. If this
root remain, it will still bear poisonous fruit, which will be matter for
temptation, and occasion of continual falling; and we shall be in danger of
being reconciled again to our old sins, and to undo all; and so our latter end
will be worse the^ our beginning, 2 Pet. ii.20. Or, at least, though we stand
at a stay, and satisfy our selves with that; yet though we are contented, our
condition is not safe.

If we will endeavor to any purpose of duty, or security, we must proceed
still after our lesser conquests, till the sins of complexion are laid dead at
our feet. He that is born of God, sins not, and he cannot sin, 1 Ioh. iii.9.
Till we come to this, we are but struggling in the birth.

Such a perfection as is mortifying of vicious temper, is I hope attainable,
and it is no doubt that which Religion aims at; and though it be a difficult
height, yet we must not sit down this side: At least we must be always pressing
on to this Mark: if Providence cut off our days before we have arrived to it,
we may expect acceptance of the sincerity of our endeavors, upon the account
of the merits of our Savior: For he has procured favor for those sincere
Believers, and Endeavourers, whose Day is done, before their Work is
completed; this I mean, of subduing the darling sins of their particular
Natures.

But then if we rest, and please our selves with the little Victories and
seize, and let these our great enemies quietly alone, it is an argument
our endeavors are not sincere, but much short of that striving, which will
procure an entrance into the straight gate. The n^xt thing (and it is the last I
shall mention) which is employed in striving, is,

(IV.) To furnish our selves, through Divine Grace, with the habits and
inclinations of Holiness and Virtue. For Goodness to become a kind of Nature to
the Soul, is height indeed; but such a one as may be reached: the new Nature,
and new Creature, Gal. vi.15. are not mere Names.


We have observed that some men are of a Natural Generosity, Veracity and
Sweetness; and they cannot act contrary to these Native Virtues without a
mighty Violence: why now should not the New Nature be as powerful as the Old?
And why may not the Spirit of God, working by an active faith and endeavor,
fix habits and inclinations on the Soul as prevalent as those? No doubt, it
may, and does, upon the Diviner Souls: For whom to do a wicked, or unworthy
action, 'twould be as violent, and unnatural, as for the meek and compassionate
temper to butcher the innocent; or for him, that is naturally just, to oppress
and make a prey of the fatherless and the widow. I say, such a degree of
perfection as this, should be aimed at, Heb. vi.1. and we should not sit down,
and slacken our endeavors on this side it.

In order to our aiming to the happy pitch, we are to use frequent meditation
on the excellency and pleasure of Virtue and Religion; and earnest prayer for
the Grace of God; and diligent attendance upon the public worship; and pious
company and converses: For this great design, these helps are requisite, and if
we exercise our selves in them, as we ought, they will fire our Souls with the
love of God, and Goodness; and so at last, all Christian Virtues will become as
natural to us, as sin was before. And to one, that is so prepared, the Gate of
Happiness will be open, and of easy entrance; the difficulties are overcome,
and from henceforth the way is pleasant and plain before him, Prove. iii.17.

Thus I have shown you, that the formidable difficulties may be overcome, and I
have told you How: it is a plain course I have direct^d, that will not puzzle
your und^rstandings with needless niceties, nor distract your memories with
multitudes. Walk in this way, and do it constantly, with vigor and alacrity;
and there is no fear, but in the strength of God, through the merits and
mediation of his Son, you will overcome, and at last, enter.

SECT. IV.
I Had now done with this general Head, but that it is necessary to note three
things here.

(1.) Those Instruments of our happiness which we must use in striving, viz.
Faith, Prayer, and active Endeavor, must all of them be employed. Not any one
singly, will do the great work; nor can the others, if any one, be wanting. If
we believe, and do not pray; or pray, and do not endeavor; or endeavor,
without those, the Difficulties will remain, and 'twill be impossible for us to
enter. (2.) We must be diligent in our course: If we do not exercise Faith
vigorously, and pray heartily, and endeavor with our whole might, the means
will not succeed; and it is as good not at all, as not to purpose. The
Difficulties will not be overcome by cold Faith, or sleepy Prayers, or remiss
Endeavors: A very intense degree of these is necessary. (3.) Our striving must
be constant; we must not begin, and look back, Heb. x.38. or run a while, and
stop in midd course, 1 Cor. ix.24. and content our selves with some
seize, and think we have arrived, Phil. iii.14. If we do so, we shall
find our selves dangerously mistaken. The Crown is at the end of the Warfare,
and the Prise at the end of the Race. If we will succeed, we must hold on: The
life of one that strives, as he ought, must be a continual motion forwards;
always proc^eding, always growing.
If we strive thus, we cannot fail; if any of these qualifications be wanting,
we cannot but miscarry. And hence no doubt it is, that many that seek to enter,
shall not be able, and the presumed sons of the Kingdom are shut out, Mat.
viii.12. They seek, and are very desirous to be admitted; They do some thing,
and strive; but their striving is partial, or careless, or short; by reason of
which defects, they do not overcome, and shall not enter.

This is a dangerous Rock, and perhaps there are as many undone by cold, and
half striving, as by not striving at all. He that has done some thing,
presumes he is secure; He goes the round of ordinary Duties, but advances
nothing in his way; He overcomes none of the great Difficulties, none of the
Habits, or Natural Inclinations; He is contented with other things that make a
more glorious show; though they signify less; and perhaps despises these,
under the notion of Morality; and so presuming, that he is a Saint, too soon,
he never comes to be one at all: such are the seekers that shall not be able to
enter: Their seeking imports some striving; but it is such, as, though it be
specious, yet it is imperfect, and will not succeed. And hence the THIRD
Proposition arises, that I proposed to discourse.

CHAP. III. THE danger of mistaking in the Marks and Measures of Godliness.
Instances of the mere Animal Religion; how far it may go, in Faith, in Prayer,
and in Endeavour^ discoursed in several Particulars; and therein the whole
mystery of the Modern Pharisaick Godliness is discovered, and shown to be short
and insufficient. Objections against the severity of the Discourse, answered.
SECT. I.
(III.) THat there is a sort of striving that will not procure an entrance:
employed in these words, For many will seek to enter in, and shall not be able.

It Is a dangerous thing to be flattered into a false peace; and to take up with
imperfect Godliness; to reconcile the hopes of Heaven to our beloved sins, and
to judge our conditions safe upon insufficient grounds. This multitudes do, and
it is the great danger of our days; Men cannot be contented without doing
something in Religion; but they are contented with a little. And then they
reckon themselves godly, before they are virtuous; and take themselves to be
Saints, upon such things as will not distinguish a good man from a bad.

We seek after Marks of Godliness, and would be glad to know, how we might try
our state: The thing is of great importance; and if the Signs we judge by are
either false, or imperfect, we are deceived to our undoing. Mere Speculative
mistakes about Opinions, do no great hurt; but error in the Marks and Measures
of Religion, is deadly. Now there are sundry things commonly taken for signs of
Godliness, which though they are something, yet they are not enough; They are
hopeful for beginnings, but nothing worth when they are our end, and rest. They
are a kind of seeking, and imperfect striving; but not such as overcomes the
difficulties of the way, or will procure us an entrance at the Gate. Therefore
to disable the flattering, insufficient marks of Godliness, I shall discover in
pursuance of the Third Proposition, How far a man may strive in the exercises
of Religion, and yet^ be found at last among those seekers that shall not be
able to enter. And though I have intimated something of this in the general
before, yet I shall now more particularly show it in the Instances that follow.
And in these I shall discover a Religion that may be called Animal, to which
the Natural man may attain.

SECT. II.
(1.) A Man may believe the Truths of the Gospel, and assent heartily to all
the Articles of the Creed: and if he proc^eds not, he is no further by this,
than the faith of Devils, Jam. ii.19.

(2.) He may go on, and have a great thirst to be more acquainted with Truth;
He may seek it diligently in Scripture, and Sermons, and good Books, and
knowing Company; And yet do this, by the motion of no higher principle, than an
inbred curiosity, and desire of knowledge; and many times this earnestness
after Truth, proceeds from a proud affectation to be wiser than our Neighbors,
that we may pity their darkness; or the itch of a disputing humor, that we may
out talk them; or a design to carry on, or make a party, that we may be called
Rabbi, or serve an Interest: And the zeal for Truth that is set on work by such
motives, is a spark of that fire that is from beneath: It Is dangerous to a man's
self, and to the public weal of the Church, and mankind. But the man proceeds,
and is

(3.) Very much concerned to defend, and propagate his Faith; and the Pharisees
were so in relation to theirs, Mat. xxiii.15. and so have been many Professors
of all the Religions that are, or ever were. Men naturully love their own
Tenants, and are ambitious to mould others judgments according to theirs. There
is glory in being an instructor of other men; and turning them to our ways, and
opinions: so that here is nothing yet above Nature; nothing but what may be
found in many that seek, and are shut out. But,

(4.) Faith works greater effects than these, and Men offer themselves to
Martyrdom for it; This, one would think, should be the greatest height, and an
argument that all the difficulties of the way, are overcome by one that is so
resolved; and that the Gate cannot but be opened to him. And so, no doubt, it
is, when all things else are suitable: But otherwise these consequences by no
means follow. St. Paul supposes that a man may give his body to be burned, and
not have Charity, without which his Martyrdom will not profit, 1 Cor. xiii. For
one to deny his Religion, or what he believes to be certain, and of greatest
consequence, is dishonorable and base: and some out of principles of mere
natural bravery, will die rather than they will do it; and yet, upon other
accounts, be far enough from being heroically virtuous. Besides, the desire of
the glory of Martyrdom, and Saintship after it, may in some be stronger than
the terrors of Death: and we see frequently, that men will sacrifice their
lives to their honor and reputation; yea to the most contemptible shaddows of
it. And there is no passion in us so weak, no lust so impotent, but has, in
many instances, prevailed over the fear of dying. Every Appetite has had its
Martyrs; and all Religions theirs; and though a man give his body to be burnt
for the best, and have not Charity, viz. Prevalent love to God and Men, it will
not signify: So that Martyrdom is no infallible mark, nor will it avail any
thing, except sincere endeavor to overcome the greater difficulties, have gone
before it. Thus far Faith may go without effect: and yet one step further,

(5.) Men may confidently rely upon Christ for salvation, and be firmly
persuaded that he has justified, and will make them happy. They may
appropriate him to themselves, and be pleased mightily in the opinion of his
being theirs. And yet notwithstanding this confidence, may be in the number of
those seekers that shall not enter. For Christ is the Author of eternal life
only to those that obey him, Heb. v.9. and to obey him, is to strive
vigorously, and constantly, to overcome all our sinful inclinations and habits.
And those that trust he will save them, though they have never seriously set
about this work, deceive themselves by vain presumption, and in effect say,
that he will dissolve or dispense with his Laws in their favor. For he
requires us to deny our selves, Mar. viii.34. To mortify the body, Romans
viii.13. To love enemies, Mat. v.44. To be Meek, Mat. xi.29. and Patient, Jam.
v.8. and Humble, 1 Pet. v.7. and Just, Mat. vii.12. and Charitable, Heb.
xiii.16. and Holy as be that called us is holy, 1 Pet. i.15. And he has
promised to save upon no other terms; For all these are included in Faith, when
it is taken in the justifying sense; and this is the way of Happiness: If we
walk not in this, but in the paths of our own choosing, our relying upon Christ
is a mockery, and will deceive us.

We may indeed be confident, and we ought, that he will save all those that so
believe as to obey him; but may not trust that he will save us except we are
some of those. To rely upon Christ for our salvation, must follow our sincere
and obedient striving, and not go before it. The mistake of this is exceeding
dangerous, and I doubt has been fatal to many. The sum is, To rely on Christ
without a resolute and steady endeavor to overcome every sin and temptation,
will gain us nothing in the end but shame and disappointment: For it is not
every one that says unto him, Lord, Lord, shall enter into heaven, but he that
does the will of his Father which is in heaven, Mat. vii.21. The foolish
Virgins relied upon him, and expected he should open to them; Lord, Lord, open
to us, Mat. xxv.11. but he kept them out, and would not know them, v. 11.

Thus of the First imperfect Mark of Godliness; A man may upon the account of
mere Nature, arrive to all the mentioned degrees of Faith; and yet if his
endeavors in the practice of Christian virtues be not suitable, he will
certainly come short at last.

SECT. III.
(II.) A Man may be very devout, and given much to Prayer, be very frequent and
earnest in it; may have the gift of exp^essing himself fluently, without the
help of Form or Meditation: yea he may be so intent and taken up in these
exe^cises, that he may as it were be ravished out of himself by the fervours of
his spirit; so that he really kindles very high affections as well in others,
as in himself: And yet if he rests in this, and such like things, as Religion,
and reckons that he is accepted of God for it; if he allow himself in any
unmortified lusts, and think to compound for them by his Prayers, he is an evil
man notwithstanding, and one of those seekers that shall not be able to enter.
The Pharisees, we know, were much given to Prayer: They were long in those
devotions, and very earnest in them, often repeating the same expressions, out
of vehemence. Ignatius Loyola, founder of the Jesuits, was a man almost
ecstatical in his Prayers; and Hacket the Blasphemer, executed in the days of
Queen Elizabeth, was a person of Seraphical Devotion, and would pray those that
heard him even into transports. Basilides the cruel Duke of Mosco, is said to
have his hands almost continually lifted up in Prayer, except when they were
employed in some barbarous and bloody Execution: And we have known and felt one
not much unlike him. There are infinite instances in our days of this
dangerous sort of evil men.

And we may learn hence, that the greatest gift of Prayer, and earnestness and
frequency in it, is no good mark of Godliness, except it be attended with
sincere, constant and virtuous endeavors.

For some men have a natural spice of Devotion in a Religious Melancholy, which
is their temper; and such have commonly strong Imagina^ions, and zealous
affections, which when they are heated, flame forth into great heights, and
expressions of devotion: The warm fancy furnishes words and matter readily
and unexpectedly, which many times begets in the man a conceit that he is
inspired, and that his Prayers are the breathings of the Holy Ghost; or at
least, that he is extraordinarily assisted by it; which belief kindles his
affections yet more, and he is carried beyond himself, even into the third
heavens, and suburbs of glory, as he fancies, and so he makes no doubt, but
that he is a Saint of the first rank, and special favorite of Heaven; when all
this while, he may be really a bad man full of Envy, and Malice; Pride, and
Covetousness; Scorn, and ill Nature; contempt of his Betters, and disobedience
to his Governors. And while it is so, notwithstanding those glorious things, he
is no further than the Pharisee. Hearty and humble desire, though imperfectly
expressed, and without this pomp, and those wonders, is far more acceptable to
God, who delights not in the exercises of mere Nature, Psalm. cxlvii.10. but is
well pleased with the expressions of Grace in those that fear him.

So that a sincere and lowly-minded Christian that talks of no immediate
incomes, or communications; and perhaps durst not, out of reverence, trust to
his own present conceptions in a work so solemn, but uses the help of some
pious form of words suitable to his desires and wants, who is duly sensible of
his sins, and the necessity of overcoming them; and is truly and earnestly
desirous of the Divine aids, in order to it: such a one as this Prays by the
Spirit, and will be assisted by it; while the other does all by mere Nature and
imitation, and shall not have those spiritual aids which he never heartily
desires, nor intends to use.

This, I think, I may truly and safely say: But for the Controversy between
Forms and Conceived Prayers, which of them is absolutely best, I determine
nothing of it here. And indeed, I suppose that in their own nature, they are
alike indifferent, and are more or less accepted, as they partake more or less
of the Spirit of Prayer, viz. of Faith, Humility, and holy desire of the good
thing we pray for; and a man may have these that prays by a Form; and he may
want them that takes the other way, and thinks himself in a dispensation much
above it. So that my business is not to set up one of these ways of Devotion
against the other; but to show, that the heights and vehemencies of many warm
people in their unpremeditated Prayers, have nothing in them supernatural or
Divine, and consequently, of themselves, they are no marks of Godliness: which
I hope no one thinks I speak to discredit those pious ardours that are felt by
really devout souls, when a vigorous sense of God, and Divine things, does even
sometimes transport them: Far be it from me to design any thing so impious; My
aim is only to note, that there are complexional heats raised, many times by
fancy and self-admiration, that look like these, in persons who really have
little of God in them; and we should take care that we are not deceived by
them. Thus far also those may go that notwithstanding shall not enter. I add,

SECT. IV.
(III.) A Man may endeavor some things likewise, and so strive in the last
sense; and yet for want of some of the mentioned Qualifications, his work may
miscarry, and himself with it.

(1.) There is no doubt, but that an evil man may be convinced of his sin and
vileness, and that even to anguish and torment. The G^ntiles, says the
Apostle, Romans ii.14. which have not the Law, show the works of the Law written
in their hearts, their thoughts in the mean time accusing, or excusing one
another. Conscience often stings and disquiets the vilest sinners; and
sometimes extorts from them lamentable confessions of their sins, and earnest
declamations against them. They may weep bitterly at their remembrance, and be
under great heaviness, and dejection upon their occasion. They may speak
vehemently against sin themselves, and love to have others to handle it
severely. All this bad men may do upon the score of natural fear, and self
love, and the apprehension of a future Judgment. And now such convictions will
naturally beget some endeavors: A convinced understanding will have some
influence upon the will and affections. The mind in the unregenerate, may lust
against the flesh, as that does against it.

So that (2.) such a mere animal man may promise, and purpose, and endeavor in
some pretty considerable measure; but then, he goes not on with full
resolution, but wavers, and stops, and turns about again; and lets the law of
the members, that of death and sin, to prevail over him. His endeavor is
remiss, and consequently ineffectual; it makes no conquests, and will not
signify. He sins on, though with some regret; and his very unwillingness to
sin, while he commits it, is so far from lessening, that it aggravates his
fault: It argues that he sins against conscience, and conviction; and that sin
is strong and reigns.

It Is true indeed St. Paul, Romans 7. makes such a description seemingly of
himself, as one might think concluded him under this state; He says, verse. 8.
That sin wrought in him all manner of concupiscence: verse. 9. That sin revived,
and he died: verse. 14. That he was carnal; and again, sold under sin, verse. 20.
That sin dwelt in him, and wrought that which he would not: verse. 23. That the
law of his Members led him into captivity to the law of sin: and verse. 25. That
he obeyed the law of sin.

If this be so, and St. Paul, a regenerate man, was in this state, it will
follow, that seeking and feeble endeavor, that overcomes no difficulty, may
yet procure an entrance; and he that is come hitherto, viz. to endeavor, is
safe enough though he do not conquer.

This Objection presses not only against this head, but against my whole
Discourse, and the Text it self. Therefore to answer it, I say, That the
Apostle here is not to be understood of himself, but he describes the state of
an unregenerate man, though he speaks in the first person, a Figure that was
ordinary with this Apostle, and frequent enough in common speech: Thus we say,
I am thus, and thus, and did so, and so, when we are describing a state, or
actions in which perhaps we in person are not concerned.

In this sense the best Expositors understand these expressions, and those
excellent Divines of our own, Bishop Tailor, and Dr. Hammond, and others have
noted to us, That this description is directly contrary to all the Characters
of a regenerate man, given elsewhere by this, and the other Apostles. As he is
said to be dead to sin, Romans vi.11. Free from sin, and the servant of
Righteousness, Rom vi.18. That he walks not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit, Romans viii.1. that the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has
made him free from the law of sin and death, Romans viii.2. That he overcomes
the world, Joh. 5.4. He sins not, 1 John iii.6. He has crucified the flesh
with its affections and lusts, Gal. v.24. Which Characters of a truly
regenerate person, if they be compared with those above cited out of Romans vii.
it will appear, that they are as contrary, as it is possible to speak; and by
this, it is evident that they describe the two contrary states.

For can the regenerate be full of all manner of concupiscence, and at the same
time be crucified to the flesh, and ill affections and lusts? one, in whom sin
revives while he dies; and yet one that is dead to sin? carnal, and yet not
walking after the flesh, but after the Spirit? sold under sin, and yet free
from sin? Having sin dwelling in him; and a captive to sin; and obeying the law
of sin; and yet free from the law of sin and death? How can these things
consist? To tell us, It Is so, and it is not so, and to twist such contradictions
into Orthodox Paradoxes, are pretty things to please Fools and Children; but
the wiser sort care not for such riddles, as are not sense.

I think it is evident enough then, that the Apostle in that mistaken Chapter,
relates the feeble, impotent condition of one that was convinced and strove a
little, but not to purpose. And if we find our selves comprised by that
description, though we may be never so sensible of the evil and danger of a
sinful course, and may endeavor some small matter, but without success; we are
yet under that evil, and obnoxious to that danger: For he that strives in
earnest, conquers at last, and advances still, though all the work be not d^ne
at once. So that if we endeavor and gain nothing, our endeavor is peccant,
and wants Faith or Prayer for Divine aids, or constancy, or vigor; and so,
Though we may seek, we shall not be able to enter.

But (3) An Imperfect striver may overcome sin in some Instances, and yet in
that do not great matter neither, if he lies down and goes no further: There
are some sins we outgrow by age, or are indisposed to them by bodily infirmity,
or diverted by occasions, and it may be by other sins; and some are contrary to
worldly Interests, to our credit, or health, or profit; and when we have been
in any great degree prejudiced by them in these, we fall out with those sins,
and cease from them, and so by resolution and disuse, we master them at last
fully: which, if we went on, and attempted upon all the rest, were something:
But when we stop short in these petty victories, our general state is not
altered; He that conquers some evil appetites, is yet a slave to others; and
though he has prevailed over some difficulties, yet the main ones are yet
behind.

Thus the imperf^ct striver masters, it may be, his beastly appetite to
intemperate drinking, but is yet under the power of love of Riches, and vain
pleasure. He cease from open debauchery, but entertains spiritual wickedness
in his heart: He will not Swear, but will backbite and rail: He will not be
Drunk, but will damn a man for not being of his opinion: He will not profane
the Sabbath, but will defraud his Neighbor.

Now these half conquests, when we rest in them, are as good as none at all.
Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have regard to all thy Commandments, says
the Kingly Prophet, Psalm. cxix.6. It Is shameful to give off, when our work is
but half done; what we do, casts the greater reproach upon us for what we omit.
To cease to be profane, is something as a passage, but nothing for an end. We
are not Saints as soon as we are civil. It Is not only gross sins that are to be
overcome. The wages of sin is death, not only of the great and capital, but of
the smallest, if they are indulged. The Pharisee applauded himself, that he was
not like the Extortioners, Adulterers, and unjust, nor like the Publican, that
came to pray with him, Luke xviii.11. and yet he went away never the more
justified. The unwise Virgins were no profligate livers, and yet they were shut
out.

He that will enter, must strive against every corrupt appetite and
inclination. A less leak will sink a Ship, as well as a greater, if no care be
taken of it. A Consumption will kill, as well as the Plague; yea sometimes the
less Disease may in the event prove more deadly, than the greater; for small
distempers may be neglected, till they become incurable; when as the great ones
awaken us to speedy care for a remedy. A small hurt in the finger slighted, may
prove a gangreen, when a great wound in the head, by seasonable applications is
cured.

It Is unsafe then to content our selves with this, that our sins are not foul
and great; those we account little ones may prove as fatal, yea they are
sometimes more dangerous: For we are apt to think them none at all, or Venial
infirmities that may consist with a state of grace, and Divine favor; we
excuse and make Apologies for them, and fancy that Hearing, and Prayer, and
Confession are atonements enough for these. Upon which accounts I am apt to
believe, that the less notorious Vices have ruined as many as the greatest
Abominations. Hell does not consist only of Drunkards, and Swearers, and
Sabbath Breakers: No, the demure Pharisee, the plausible Hypocrite, and formal
Professor, have their place also in that lake of fire. The great impieties do
often startle and awaken conscience, and beget strong convictions, and so
sometimes excite resolution, and vigorous striving; while men hug themselves in
their lesser sins, and carry them unrepented to their graves.

The sum is, We may overcome some sins, and turn from the grosser sort of
wickedness, and yet if we endeavor not to subdue the rest, we are still in the
condition of unregeneracy and death, and though we thus seek, we shall not
enter.

(4.) A Man may perform many duties of Religion, and that with relish and
delight, and yet miscarry. As, (1.) He may be earnest and swift to hear, and
follow Sermons constantly from one place to another, and be exceedingly pleased
and affected with the Word, and yet be an evil Man, and in a bad state. Herod
heard John Baptist gladly, Mark vi.20. and he that received the seed into stony
places, received it joyfully, Mat. xiii.20. Zeal for hearing does not always
arise from a conscientious desire to learn, in order to practice, but sometimes
it proceeds from an itch after novelty and notions, or an ambition to be famed
for Godliness; or the importunity of natural conscience, that will not be
satisfied except we do something; or a desire to get matter to feed our
opinions, or to furnish us with pious discourse; I say, earnestness to hear
arises very often from some of these; and when it does so, we gain but little
by it: yea, we are dangerously tempted to take this for an infallible token of
our Saintship, and so to content our selves with this Religion of the ear, and
to disturb every body with the abundance of our disputes and talk, while we
neglect our own spirits, and let our unmortified affections and inclinations
rest in quiet, under the shadow of these specious services.

So that when a great affection to hearing seiseth upon an evil man, it is odds
but it does him hurt; It puffs him up in the conceit of his Godliness, and
makes him pragmatical, troublesome, and censorious; He turns his food into
poison: Among bad men, those are certainly the worst, that have an opinion of
their being godly; and such are those that have itching ears, under the power
of vicious habits and inclinations. An earnest diligent hearer then, may be one
of those who seeks, and is shut out. And so may

(2.) He that Fasts much, and severely: The Jews were exceedingly given to
fasting, and they were very severe in it. They abstained from all things
pleasant to them, and put on sackcloth, and sour looks, and mourned bitterly,
and hung down the head, and sat in ashes; so that one might have taken these
for very holy, penitent, mortified people, that had a great antipathy against
their sins, and abhorrence of themselves for them: And yet God complains of
these strict, severe Fasters, Zach. vii.5. That they did not Fast unto him; but
fasted for strife and debate, Isa. lviii.4. Their Fasts were not such as he had
chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burden; and to let
the oppressed free, verse. 6. But they continued, notwithstanding their Fasts,
and Gods admonitions by his Prophets, to oppress the widow, and fatherless, and
poor, Zach. vii.10.

Thus mere natural and evil men sometimes put on the garb of Mortification, and
exercise rigors upon their bodies, and external persons, in exchange for the
indulgences they allow their beloved appetites; and while the strict Discipline
reaches no further, though we keep days, and fast often, yet this will not put
us beyond the condition of the Pharisee, who fasted twice in the week, as
himself boasted. Luke xviii.12. And,

(3.) An imperfect striver may be very much given to pious and religious
discourses: He may love to be talking of Divine things; especially of the love
of Christ to sinners, which he may frequently speak of with much earnestness
and affection, and have that dear name always at his tongues end to begin and
close all his sayings; and to fill up the void places, when he wants what to
say next: and yet this may be a bad man, who never felt those Divine things he
talks of; and never loved Christ heartily, and as he ought.


'Twas observed before, that there are some who have a sort of Devoutness, and
Religion in their particular Complexion; and if such are talkative (as many
times they are) they will easily run into such discourses, as agree with their
temper, and take pleasure in them for that reason; and for this also, because
they are apt to gain us reverence, and the good opinion of those with whom we
converse. And such as are by nature disposed for this faculty, may easily get
it by imitation and remembrance of the devout forms they hear, and read: so
that there may be nothing Divine in all this; nothing, but what may consist
with unmortified lusts, and affections: And though such talk earnestly of the
love of Christ, and express a mighty love to his name, yet this may be too
without any real conformity unto him in his Life, and Laws. The Jews spoke much
of Moses, in him they believed, and in him they trusted, John v.45. His name
was a sweet sound to their ears, and 'twas very pleasant upon their tongues;
and yet they hated the Spirit of Moses, and had no love to those Laws of his,
which condemned their wicked actions. And we may see how many of those love
Christ, that speak often, and affectionately of him, by observing how they keep
his Commandments, John xiv.15. especially those of meekness, mercy, and
universal love.

Thus imperfect strivers may employ themselves in the external offices of
Religion: I have instanced only in Three, the like may be said of the rest. And
to this, I add, That they may not only exercise themselves in the outward
matters of duty, but may arrive to some things that are accounted greater
heights, and are really more, and spiritual, and refined. To instance.

SECT. V.
(I.) THey may have some love to God, Goodness, and good men. The Soul
naturally loves beauty, and perfection; and all mankind apprehend God, to be of
all Beings, the most beautiful, and perfect, and therefore must needs have an
intellectual love for him: The reason that that love takes no hold of the
passions in wicked men, is, partly because they are diverted from the thoughts
of Him, by the objects of sense; but chiefly, because they consider him as
their enemy, and therefore can have no complacency, or delight in him, who they
think has nothing but thoughts of enmity, and displeasure against them. But if
once they come to be persuaded (as many times, by such false marks, as I have
recited, they are) that God is their Father, and peculiar Friend; that they are
his chosen, and his darlings, whom he loved from eternity, and to whom he has
given his Son, and his Spirit, and will give Himself, in a way of the fullest
enjoyment: Then, the Love that before was only an esteem in the understanding,
does kindle in the affections by the help of the conceit of Gods loving them so
dearly, and the passion thus heated, runs out, even into seraphick, and
rapturous Devotions; while yet all this, is but mere animal love, excited
chie^ly, by the love of our selves, not of the Divine Perfections. And it
commonly goes no further, then to earnest expressions of extraordinary love to
God in our Prayers, and Discourses, while it appears not in any singular
obedience to his Laws, or generous, and universal love to mankind: which are
the ways whereby the true Divine Love is expressed; for, This is the love of God,
that we keep his Commandments, says the Apostle, 1 John v.3. And as to the
other, thus, If we love one another, God dwells in us, and his love is
perfected in us, 1 John iv.12. And on the contrary, If a man say, I love God,
and hates his brother, he is a liar, John iv.20. Charity then, and universal
obedience are the true arguments, and expressions of our love to God; and these
suppose a victory over corrupt inclinations, and self-will. But the other love
which arises from the conceit of our special dearness to God upon insufficient
grounds; that goes no further then to some suavities, and pleasant fancies
within our selves; and some passionate complements of the Image we have set up
in our imaginations. This Love will consist with Hatred, and contempt of all
that are not like our selves; yea and it will produce it: those poisonous
fruits, and vile affections may be encouraged, and cherished under it. So that
there may be some love to God in evil men: But while self-love is the only
motive, and the more prevalent passion, it signifies nothing to their
advantage.

And as the imperfect striver may have some love to God, so he may to piety and
virtue: every man loves these in Idea. The vilest sinner takes part in his
affections with the virtuous and religious, when he sees them described in
History or Romance; and has a detestation for those, who are charactered as
impious and immoral. Virtue is a great Beauty, and the mind is taken with it,
while it is considered at a distance; and our corrupt interests, and sensual
affections are not concerned. It Is These that recommend sin to our love, and
choice, while the mind stands on the side of virtue: with that we serve the Law
of God, but with the flesh the law of sin, Romans vii.25. So that most wicked
men, that are not degenerated into mere Brutes, have this mental and
intellectual love to goodness: That is, they approve, and like it in their
minds, and would practice it also, were it not for the prevalent biass of flesh
and sense.

And hence it will follow likewise, That the same may approve and respect good
men; They may reverence and love them for their Charity, Humility, Justice, and
Temperance, though themselves are persons of the contrary Character; yet they
may have a great and ardent affection for those that are eminently pious and
devout, though they are very irreligious themselves. The conscience of virtue,
and of the excellency of Religion, may produce this in the mere natural man,
who is under the dominion of vile inclinations, and affections; and therefore
this is no good mark of godliness neither. Our love to God and goodness will
not stead us, except it be prevalent. And as the love described may be natural,
and a mere animal man may arrive unto it: So,

(II.) He may to an extraordinary zeal for the same things that are the objects
of his love. Hot tempers are eager, where they take either kindness or
displeasure. The natural man that has an animal love to Religion, may be
violent in speaking, and acting for things appertaining to it. If his temper be
devotional and passionate, he becomes a mighty zealot, and fills all places
with the fame of his godliness: His natural fire moves this way, and makes a
mighty blaze. Ahab was very zealous, and it is like 'twas not only his own
interest that made him so, 2 Kings x.16. The Pharis^es were zealous people, and
certainly their zeal was not always personated, and put on, but real: Though
they were Hypocrites, yet they were such, as, in many things, deceived
themselves, as well as others. They were zealous for their Traditions, and they
believed 'twas their duty to be so. St. Paul while a persecutor, was zealous
against the Disciples, and he thought he ought to do many things against that
name. And our Savior foretells, that those zealous murderers that should kill
his Saints, should think, They did God good service in it, John xvi.2. So that
all the zeal of the natural man is not feigning, and acting of a part; nor has
it always evil objects. The Pharisees were zealous against the wickedness of
the Publicans, and Sinners. Zeal then, and that in earnest for Religion, may be
in bad men. But then, this is to be noted, that it is commonly about opinions,
or external rites, and usages, and such matters as appertain to first Table
Duties, while usually the same men are very cold, in reference to the Duties of
the Second: And when zeal is partial, and spent about the little things that
tend not to the overcoming the difficulties of our way, or the perfecting of
humane nature, it is a mere animal fervor, and no Divine Fire. And the natural
man, the seeker that shall not enter, may grow up to another height that looks
gloriously, and seems to speak mighty things. As,

(III.) He may have great comforts in religious meditations, and that even to
rapturous excesses. He may take these, for sweet communion with God, and the
joys of the Holy Ghost, and the earnest of Glory, and be lifted up on high by
them, and enabled to speak in wonderful ravishing strains; and yet
notwithstanding be an evil man, and in the state of such as shall be shut out.

For this we may observe, That those whose complexion inclines them to
devotion, are commonly much under the power of melancholy; and they that are
so, are mostly very various in their tempers; sometimes merry, and pleasant to
excess; and then plunged as deep into the other extreme of sadness, and
dejection: one while the sweet humors enliven the imagination, and present it
with all things that are pleasant and agreeable. And then, the black blood
succeeds, which begets clouds, and darkness, and fills the fancy with things
frightful, and uncomfortable. And there are very few but feel such varieties in
a degree in themselves^ Now while the sweet blood and ^^^mours prevail, the
person whose complexion inclines him to Religion, and who has arrived to the
degrees newly discoursed of (though a mere natural man) is full of inward
delight, and satisfaction; and fancies at this turn, that he is much in the
favor of God, and a sure heir of the Kingdom of Glory; which must needs excite
in him many luscious, and pleasant thoughts: and these further warm his
imagination, which, by new, and taking suggestions still raises the affections
more; and so the man is as it were transported beyond himself, and speaks like
one dropped from the clouds: His tongue flows with Light, and Glories, and
Communion, and Revelations, and Incomes; and then, believes that the Holy Ghost
is the Author of all this, and that God is in him of a truth, in a special way
of Manifestation, and vouchsafement. This is one of the greatest Heights of the
Animal Religion, and many times it proceeds from nothing more Divine. For when
melancholic vapors prevail again, the imagination is overcast, and the fancy
possessed by dismal and uncomfortable thoughts: and the man, whose head was but
just before among the Clouds, is now grovelling in the Dust. He thinks all is
lost, and his condition miserable; He is a castaway, and undone, when in the
mean while as to Divine favor he is just where he was before, or rather in a
better state, since it is better to be humbled with reason, then to be lifted up
without it. Such effects as these do mere natural passions and imaginations
produce, when they are tinctured and heightened by religious melancholy. To deny
ones self, and to overcome ones passions, and to live in a course of a sober
virtue, is much more Divine, then all this.

It Is true indeed, and I am far from denying it, that holy men feel those joys
and communications of the Divine Spirit which are no fancies; and the Scripture
calls them great peace, Ps. cxix.165. and joy in believing, Romans xv.13. and the
peace of God that passes all understanding, Phil. iv.7. But then, these Divine
vouchsafements are not rapturous, or ^cstatical. They are no sudden flashes
that are gone in a moment, leaving the soul in the regions of sorrow, and
despair; but sober lasting comforts, that are the rewards and results of
virtue; the rejoycings of a good conscience, 2 Cor. i.12. and the
manifestations of God to those rare souls, who have overcome the evils of their
natures, and the difficulties of the way, or are vigorously pressing on toward
this mark, Phil. iii.14. But for such as have only the forms of godliness, I
have mentioned, while the evil inclinations and habits are indulged, whatever
they pretend, all the sweets they talk of, are but the imagery of dreams, and
the pleasant delusions of their fancies.

SECT. VI.
THus I have shown how far the mere Animal Religion may go, in imperfect
striving. And now I must expect to hear

(1.) That this is very severe, uncomfortable Doctrine; and if one that shall
eventually be shut out, may do all this, what shall become of the generality of
Religious men that never do so much? And if all this be short, what will be
available? who then shall be saved?

To which I Answer, That we are not to make the measures of Religion and
Happiness our selves; but to take those that Christ Jesus has made for us: And
he has told us, That except our Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, we shall in no wise enter into the Kingdom of heaven,
Mat. v.20. Now the Scribes and Pha^isees did things in the way of Religion,
that were equal to all the particulars I have mentioned; yea they went beyond
marry of our glorious Professors, who yet think themselves in an high form of
Godliness. They believed their Religion firmly, and Prayed frequently and
fervently, and Fasted severely; They were ^xact, and exceeding strict in the
observati^n of their Sabbaths, and hated scandalous and gross sins; and were
very punctual in all the duties of outward Worship; and in many things
supererrogated and went beyond what was commanded: Such zealous people were
They; and They separated from the conversations and customs of other Jews, upon
the account of their supposed greater Holiness and Purity. These were heights
to which the Pharisees arrived; and a good Christian must exceed all this: And
he that lives in a sober course of Piety, and Virtue; of self Government, and
humble submission to God; of obedience to his Superiors, and Charity to his
Neighbors; He does really exceed it, and shall enter, when the other shall be
shut out. So that, when our Savior says, that the Pharisaick Righteousness
must be exceeded, the meaning is not, That a greater degree of every thing the
Pharisees did, is necessary; but we must do that whith in the nature and kind
of it is better and more acceptable to God, viz. That whereas they placed their
Religion in strict Fastings, and nice observations of Festivals; in loud and
earnest Prayers, and zeal to get Proselites; we should place ours, in sincere
subjections of our wills to the will of God; in imitation of the life of
Christ, and obedience of his Laws; in amending the faults of our natures and
lives; in subduing our passions, and casting out the habits of evil: These are
much beyond the Religion of the Phanatick Pharisee^ not in show and pomp; but
in real worth, and divine esteem. So that, upon the whole, we have no reason to
be discouraged, because They that do so much are cast out; since, though we
find not those heats, and specious things in our selves which we observe in
them, yet if we are more meek, and modest, and patient, and charitable, and
humble, and just, our case is better; and we have the Power of Godliness, when
theirs is but the Form; And we, whom They accounted aliens and enemies, shall
enter; while they, the presumed friends and domestics, shall be shut out.

But (2.) I expect it should be again Objected against this severity of
Discourse, That our Savior says, Mat. xi.20. That his yoke is easy and his
burden is light: which place seems to cross all that has been said about the
Difficulties of Religion. And it is true it has such an appearance, but it is no
more: For the words look as cross to the expressions of the same Divine Author,
concerning the straightness of the Gate, and narrowness of the Way, as to any
thing I have delivered from those infallible sayings. Therefore to remove the
semblance of contrariety, which the objected Text seems to have to those
others, and to my Discourse, we may observe,

That when our Savior says, that his yoke is easy, the word we read easy is
(...), which signifies very good, excellent, gracious; and the meaning, I
suppose is, That his Precepts had a native beauty and goodness in them; That
they are congruous and suitable to our reasonable Natures, and apt instruments
to make us happy; In which sense, this expression has no antipathy to the
Text, or to any thing I have said. And whereas it is added, [ My Burden is
light] I think by this, we are to understand, That his Commands are not of that
burdensome nature, that the Ceremonies of the Jewish Laws were: Those were very
cumbersome, and had nothing in their nature to make them pleasant and
agreeable; whereas his Religion had no expensive, troublesome Rites appendant
to it; nor did it require any thing but our observation of those Laws which
eternal Reason obliges us to, and which of our selves we should choose to live
under, were we freed from the intanglements of the World, and interests of
Flesh. So that neither does this Objection signify any thing against the scope
of my Discourse.

CHAP. IV. INFERENCES from the whole, concerning, (1) The true notion of a
state of Grace and Nature. (2) The great design of Religion to perfect humane
nature. (3) The agreement and oneness of Christianity and Morality. (4) The
method of of Grace on the souls of men. (5) The nature of the Animal Religion.
(6) The certain mark whereby to know our state. (7) The power of Godliness, and
the Forms of it.
SECT. I.
AND now I am at liberty to descend to the Improvement of what I have said; and
the things I have to add will be comprehended under these two Generals (1)
Inferences, and a plain (2) Advice in order to practice. I begin with the
Inferences and Corollaries that arise from the whole discourse. And (1) We may
collect, What is the state of Nature; and what the state of Grace. We have seen
that it is the great business of Religion to overcome evil Inclinations, and the
prevailing influence of sense, and passion, and evil customs and example and
worldly affections; And therefore the state of Nature consists in the power,
and prevalency of These. This is that the Scripture calls the Old man, Ephesians.
iv.22. The Image of the earthy, 1 Cor. xv. Flesh, Gal v.17. Death, Romans vii.24.
Darkness, John iii.19. and old leaven, 1 Cor. v.7. On the contrary, The state
of Grace is a state of sincere striving against them; which if it keeps on,
ends in Victory. And this is called Conversion, Acts iii.19. and Renovation,
while it is in its first motions; And the Divine Nature, 2 Pet. i.4. the image
of the heavenly, 1 Cor. xv.20. The Spirit, Gal. v.16. Light, Ephesians. v.8. and
Life, 1 John iii.14. when it is arrived to more compleatness, and perfection.

For our fuller understanding this, we may consider, That grace is taken (1)
for Divine favor; (2) for Christian Virtue. As it signifies Divine favor, so
it is used,

(1) For those helps and aids God affords us, viz. the Gospel, Joh. i.17. and
the influences of his Spirit, 1 Cor. xii.9. In this sense we are delivered from
the state of nature by Baptism, viz. We are entitled to divine helps, which is
a kind of regeneration; for we are born in a condition of impotence, and
weakness, and destitution of spiritual assistances; This is the world of mere
nature; But then in Baptism, we are brought into the world of the spirit, that
is, are put under its influences, and are assured of its aids, and so are
morally born again; Not that this Regeneration alone will save us, without our
endeavors; it imports only an external relation, and right to privileges, and
by these we may be powerfully assisted in our striving, if we use them.

But then (2) Grace too, as it signifies divine favor, implies his special
love, and kindness, such as he vouchsafes to holy, and virtuous men; so that we
may observe that there may be a distinction between a state of grace, and a
state of salvation. A state of Grace in the former sense, is a condition
assisted by the influences of Gods Spirit, and all baptized persons are in
that. But if they use not those h^lps, they are not in Gods special favor; and
so not in a state of Salvation. But when those assistances are duly employed,
and joined with our sincere endeavor, then the person so using them, is in a
state of Salvation also; and in Gods special love and favor. Thus of the state
of Grace in the first sense as taken for divine favor.

(2) The word is also used for Christian Virtue, 2 Peter iii.18. and virtue is
called grace, because it is wrought in us by the assistance of Gods Spirit and
the light of the Gospel, which are divine favors; and to be in a state of
grace in this sense, is to be a virtuous man, which supposes divine aids, and
intitles to divine love.


These things I have taken an occasion thus briefly to state; and I have done
it, because there is ofttimes much confusion in men's discourses about Grace,
and Nature, from which much trouble and many controversies have arisen. And by
what I have said also in these brief hints, the Doctrine of our Church in the
office of Baptism, may be understood clearly, and will appear to be very sound
and true, notwithstanding the petty exceptions of those, that understand not
what they say, nor whereof they affirm.

SECT. II.
(II) I may infer, That the great design of Religion and the Gospel is to
perfect Humane nature. The perfection of our natures consists (as I have
intimated) in the subjection, and subordination of the affections and passions
to the Mind, as it is enlightened, and directed by the divine Laws, and those of
Reason. This is the state of integrity, in which we were first made; and we
lost it, by the rebellion of our senses, and inferior powers, which have
usurpt the government of us ever since. Here is the imperfection, and
corruption of our natures.

Now Religion designs to remove and cure these; and to restore us to our first,
and happy state. Its business is not to reform our looks, and our language; or
to model our actions, and gestures into a devout appearance; not only to
restrain the practice of open profaneness, and villainy, nor to comfort us with
the assurance of Gods loving us, we know not why: But to cure our ill natures,
to govern our passions, to moderate our desires, to throw out pride and envy,
and all uncharitable surmisals, with the other spiritual sorts of wickedness;
and thereby to make us like unto God, in whom there is no shadow of sin, or
imperfection; and so to render us fit objects of his delight, and love.

So that whatever does not tend to make us some way or other really better:
better in our selves, and better in all Relations, as fathers, and children,
and husbands and wives, and subjects, and governors, and neighbors, and
friends, is not Religion; It may be a form of Godliness, but it is nothing to
the life, and power. And where we see not this effect of Religion, let the
professor of it be never so high and glorious in his profession, we may yet
conclude that either his Religion is not good, or that he only pretends, and
really has it not.

This I take to be a consideration of great moment and great certainty, viz.
That Christian Religion aims at the bettering and perfecting of our natures.
For the things it commands relate either to worship, or virtue. The instances
of external worship are prayer, and praise; both which are high acts of
gratitude and justice, and they fit us for divine blessings, and keep us under
a sense of God, and prepare us for union with him, which is the highest
perfection of which the creature is capable Thus the outward acts of worship
tend to our happiness; and the inward do infinitely the same.

They are Faith, and Love, and Fear. Faith in God supports, and r^lieves us in
all afflictions, and distresses. The love of him is a pleasure and solace to us
in all losses and disappointments, since he is an object most filling, and
satisfying; and one that cannot be lost, except we wilfully thrust him from us.
Fear of God has no torment; It Is no slavish dread of his greatness and power;
but a reverence of his perfections, and a lothness to offend him; and this
disposes us also for the communications of his grace, and love, Ps. lxxxv.9.
And this it does by congruity, and its own nature; which is to be said likewise
of the others. So that they would make those happy that practice them, whether
they had been positively enjoined, or not; And though no express rewards had
been annexed unto them.

There are other two acts of worship which Christianity requires, which are
instituted and positive, and respect Christ our Lord; They are, the Sacraments,
Baptism, and the Lords Supper; both which are holy Rites, of high
signification; and seals of an excellent Covenant between God and us, assuring
us of pardon of sins, and all divine favors, upon the conditions of our Faith,
and repentance; and more firmly obliging us to holy obedience, and dependence;
The only way in which we can be happy. Whence we see briefly, that all the
parts of worship which Christianity binds upon us, tend to our perfection, and
Felicity.

And all the virtues that it commands, do the same; both those that respect us
in a personal, and those others that relate to us as members of Societies. Thus
humility recommended, Mat. v.3. Meekness blessed, v. 5. purity, v.8. are virtues
that accomplish our particular persons, and make us happy in our selves. For of
Pride comes Contention, Prove. xiii.10. And a great part of our troubles arise
from stomach and self-will, all which humility cures. And meekness also takes
away the occasions of the numerous mischiefs we run into through the rage and
disorder of our passions; and it is in it self a great beauty and ornament,
since it arises from the due order, and government of our faculties. Purity
also, which comprehends temperance of all sorts, frees us from the tormenting
importunity of those desires, that drag us out of our selves, and expose us to
sin, and folly, and temptation, and make us exceeding miserable; besides which
it is a perfection that renders us like unto God, and the blessed Spirits of the
highest rank. And Christian ve^tues do not only accomplish, and make us happy
in our particular persons, but in the more public capacity also; They dispose
us to a quiet obedience to our governors without murmuring, and complaining;
and thereby the public peace is secured; and all good things else in that.

But there are other virtues that Christianity enjoins, which have a more
direct tendency to the happiness of others, as Justice, Mat. vii.12. Charity, 1
Cor. 13. Loyalty, Romans xiii. and all other public virtues may, I think, be
comprehended under these. Where there is no Justice, every man preys upon
another, and no man's property is safe. Where Charity is wanting, Jealousies,
hatreds, envyings, back-bitings, and cruelties abound, which render the world
deplorably unhappy. Where there is not Loyalty, and conscionable submission to
Governors, the public is upon every occasion of commotion, involved in
infinite miseries, and disasters. So that all the precepts of our Religion are
in their own nature proper instruments to make us happy; and they had been
methods of Felicity to be chosen by all reasonable creatures, though they had
never been required by so great, and so sacred an Authority.

These things I have said, because I could not choose but take this occasion to
recommend the excellency, and reasonableness of our Religion; And I have done
it but only in brief hints, because it arises but upon a Corollary from my
main subject, and from this I infer,

SECT. III.
(III) THat Christianity is the height, and perfection of morality. They both
tend to the real bettering, and accomplishment of humane nature: But the rules
and measures of moral Philosophy were weak and imperfect till Christ Jesus
came; He confirmed and enforced all those precepts of virtue, that were written
upon our hearts; and cleared them from many corruptions that were grown upon
them, through ignorance and vice, the glosses of the Jews, and false conceits
of the Gentiles; and he enforced them anew by his Authority, and the knowledge
he gave of divine aids, and greater rewards, and punishments, then were
understood before; yea he enlarged it in some instances, such as loving
enemies, and forgiving injuries. Thus Christ Jesus taught morality, viz. the
way of living like men; And the 5. Chapter of Matthew is an excellent Lecture
of this kind.

So that to disparage morality, is to disgrace Christianity it self; and to
vilify one of the ends of Christ's coming into the world. For all Religion and
all duties respect either God, our neighbor, or our selves, and the duties
that relate to these two last, are moral virtues. The Apostle St. James counted
these Moralities of visiting the Widow and Fatherless, to be the pure Religion
and undefiled^ Jam. i.17. And the Prophet Micah intimates, that those moral
virtues of justice and mercy, were some of the main things that God required of
us, Mich. vi.8. Our Savior says, that the whole Law is summed up in these
two, to love God with all our souls, and our neighbor, as our selves, Math.
xxii.13. which latter contains the duties of morality. And that which the grace
of God in the Gospel teaches, according to St Paul is, to live soberly,
righteously, and godly in this present world, Tit. ii.11. There is no godliness
without morality. All the fruits of the Spirit reckoned up Gal. v.22. are moral
virtues. And when we are commanded to gro^ in grace, 2 Pet. iii.18. virtue is
partly understood. For one branch of what is called Grace in us, is moral
virtue, produced by divine aids, Christian principles, and encouragements;
though it is true, the word is extended to those duties that relate immediately
to God also.

By which we see how ignorantly, and dangerously those people talk, that
disparage morality as a dull, lame thing of no account, or reckoning. Upon this
the Religion of the 2d. Table is by too many neglected; and the whole mystery
of the new Godliness is laid in frequent hearing, and devout seraphick talk,
luscious phancies, new lights, incomes, manifestations, sealings, in-dwellings,
and such like. Thus Antinomianism, and all kinds of Phanaticism have made their
way by the disparagement of morality, and men have learnt to believe themselves
the chosen, precious people, while their hearts have been full of malice, and
bitterness, and their hands of violence, while they despised dominions, and
spoke evil of dignities, rebel'd against the Government, destroyed public
peace, and endeavored to bring all into misery, and confusions. It Is this
diabolical project of dividing morality from Religion, that has given rise and
occasion to all these villainies. And while the practisers of such things have
assumed the name of the only godly, Godliness it self has been brought into
disgrace by them; and Atheism encouraged to show it self, in open defiance to
Religion. Yea, through the indiscretions, and inconsiderateness of some
preachers, the phantastry, and vain babble of others, and the general
disposition of the people to admire what makes a great show, and pretends to
more then ordinary spirituality; things are, in many places, come to that pass,
that those who teach Christian virtue, and Religion, in plainness and
simplicity without senseless phrases, and fantastic affectations, shall be
reckoned for dry moralists, and such as understand nothing of the life, and
power of Godliness. Yea, those people have been so long used to gibberish and
canting, that they cannot understand plain sense; and virtue is become such a
stranger to their ears, that when they hear it spoken of in a pulpit, they
count the preacher a broacher of new divinity; and one that would teach the way
to heaven by Philosophy: And he escapes well, if they do not say, That he is an
Atheist; or that he would reconcile us to Gentilism, and Heathen Worship. The
danger and vanity of which ignorant humor, the contempt of morality, is
apparent in the whole scope of my Discourse, and therefore I add no more
concerning it here; but proceed to another Inference, which is,

SECT. IV.
(IV.) That Grace and the new Nature, make their way by degrees on the soul;
for the difficulties will not be removed, nor the corrupt nature subdued all at
once. Habits that grow by repeated acts, time, and continuance, will not be
expelled in a moment. No man can become greatly evil or good on a sudden. The
Path of the just shines more and more to a perfect day, Prove. iv.18. We do not
jump from darkness into full light. We are not fully sanctified and converted
in an instant. The day begins in an insensible dawn, and the Kingdom of heaven
is like a grain of Mustard seed, Mat. xiii.31. It does not start up presently
to the stature of a tree. The Divine birth begins like the Natural, in an
imperfect embryo.

There are some seeds of Knowledge and Goodness that God has sown in our
natures; these are excited by the Divine Grace and Spirit to convictions, which
proceed to purposes; these to resolutions, and thence we pass to abstinence
from all gross sins, and the performance of outward Duties; and so at last by
degrees, to vigorous attempts, for the destruction of evil habits and
inclinations. When Grace is arrived to this eminent growth, it is very visible,
as the Plant is when it is above the ground: But the beginnings of Conversion
are not ordinarily perceived.

So that to catechize men about the punctual time, and circumstances of their
Conversion, is an idle device, and a great temptation to vanity and lying. Who
can tell the exact moment when the night ends, and the dawn enters? It Is true
indeed, the passage from the excesses of Wickedness, which begins in some
extraordinary horrors and convictions, is sometimes very notable; but it is not
not so in all or most. The time of St. Paul's Conversion was eminent, but that
change was from great contrarieties and miraculous, and therefore it is not to
be drawn into instance. Both the beginnings and minute progressions of Grace,
are usually undiscerned: We cannot see the Grass just putting out of the earth,
or actually growing; but yet we find that it does both. And Grace is better
known in its fruits, than in its rise. By their Fruits ye shall know them,
says our Savior, Mat. xii.33. and the same way we may know our selves.

SECT. V.
(V.) We see that there is an Animal as well as a Divine Religion: A Religion
that is but the effect and modification of complexion, natural fear, and self
love. How far these will go, we have seen, and how short it will prove in the
end. The not noting this has been the sad occasion of deceiving many. Some
observing great heats of zeal and devotion in the modern Pharisees, take these
to be the Saints and good people; believing all the glorious things which they
assume to themselves: When others, that know them to be envious and malicious,
unjust and covetous, proud and ungovernable, and cannot therefore look on them
as such choice holy people, are apt to affirm all to be hypocrisy and
feigning. In which sentences, both are mistaken for want of knowing that there
is a mere Animal Religion, that will produce very specious and glorious
effects. So that though the Pharisee Prays vehemently, and Fasts severely, and
talks much of the love of God, and delights greatly in hearing and pious
Discourse, and will suffer all things for what he calls his conscience; yet he
is not to be concluded a Saint from hence, because the mere Animal Religion may
put it self forth in all these expressions.

And though this Professor be a bad man, proud and covetous, malicious and
censorious, sacrilegious and Rebellious, yet we cannot thence be assured that
he is an Hypocrite, in one sense, viz. such an one as f^igns all that he
pretends: But we may believe that he is really so affected with Hearing, and
Praying, and devout Company, as he makes show, and yet for all this, not alter
our opinion of his being an evil man: since the Animal Religion will go as far
as the things in which he glories.

There is nothing whereby the common people are drawn more easily into the ways
of Sects and Separations, then by the observation of the zeal and devotion of
those of the factions: These they take to be Religion, and the great matters of
Godliness, and those the religious and only godly people. And so first they
conceive a great opinion of them, and then follow them whithersoever they lead.
For the generality of men are tempted into Schism and Parties, not so much by
the arguments of Fanatics, as by the opinion of their Godliness, which opinion
is grounded upon those things, which may arise from the mere Animal Religion,
and very commonly do so. This they understand not, and by this ignorance are
betrayed into the snare of Separation, to the disturbance of the Peace of the
Church, and their own great hurt and inconvenience. Whereas could they be made
to know and consider that complexion and natural passions may bring forth all
these fruits, they might be secured by this means against the tempting
imposture; and learn that Meekness and Patience, Affability and Charity,
Justice, and a Peaceable, humble temper, are better arguments of Saintship than
all these. Thus a great mischief might be prevented; and there is another also
that might be remedied by the same Observation: The inconvenience is this,

While the enemies of Factions object Hypocrisy to them, affirming that all
they do and say, is mere personating and pretense; they confirm and setle those
people in their way; for many of them know, that they are in earnest, and
consequently that their opposers are mistaken in their judgments concerning
them; by which they are better established in their own good opinion, and
hardened against conviction; whereas did they consider such things as I have
suggested, about the Animal Religion, and grant to them that they may be
serious, believe themselves infinitely, and feel all those Warmths, which they
pretend, and yet be evil men, and far enough from being godly; Did they show
them that all their zeal and Devotion, and more and greater than theirs, may
arise from a principle that has nothing Divine and supernatural in it: They
would thereby strike them in the right vein, and bring them down from the high
perch, whereon, by their false marks, they had placed themselves; and thereby
disabuse them, and prevent the abuse of others.

SECT. VI.
(VI.) WE see how we may know our state, whether it be that of Grace and Life;
or the other sad one of Unregeneracy and Death. The state of Grace is a motion
toward the recovery of the Divine Image, and a perfect victory over our
selves, and all corrupt inclinations and affections. The state of Unregeneracy
and Death, is the continuance under the power and prevalency of sense, passion,
and evil habits.

When it is a question to our selves, in which of these states we are; It must
be supposed that we are arrived to something of Religion: For the grossly wicked
cannot but know what their condition is. And the way I would propose to those
others, who are yet uncertain, is this, viz. To take notice,

Whether they really design, and make any progress in Goodness. Every motion
indeed cannot be felt or perceived; but if we go on, though never so
insensibly, time will show that we are grown. If we consider what are our
particular defects, and studiously apply proper instruments to remove them; if
we find success in those endeavors, and that we are better this year, than we
were the former; That our Passions are better governed, and our inordinate
affections more restrained, and our evil habits and inclinations less powerful
with us, it is an infallible sign, that we live and are in a state of Grace;
that we shall at last arrive to a perfect man in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. iv.13. and
shall attain if we faint not, 2 Cor. iv.1. whereas on the other hand, If we
come to some hopeful pitch, and stand still there; If sin and temptation be as
powerful with us now, as they were a year ago, and our inclinations and
passions just at the same pass, we are in a bad state, and dead. While the
Plant grows, it lives and may become a great tree, though at present it be but
small: whereas that whose stature is bigger, and more promising, if it proceeds
not, decaies and comes to nothing.

Though we are imperfect, if we are striving and going toward perfection, God
overlooks our Infirmities, and pardons them for Christ's sake. This is our
sincerity, and an effect of true Faith. But if on the other hand, we think our
selves well, and do not always attempt forwards, our state is bad, and our sins
will be imputed: Be our pretenses what they will, our Faith is not sincere, and
will not stead us.

When we get to a certain pitch in Religion, and make that our state, it is an
argument that our Religion was merely Animal; and but a mode of complexion,
self love and natural fear. When we overcome some sins, and are willing to
spare and cherish others, it is a sign that we are not sincere in our attempts
upon any, and that what we have done; was not performed upon good and divine
motives.

Sincerity is discovered by growth, and this is the surest mark that I know of
Trial. So that we have no reason to presume, though, as we think, we have gone
a great way; if we go not on. Nor on the other side, have we any to despair,
though our present seize are but small, if we are proceeding. The buds
and tenderest blossoms of Divine Grace, are acceptable to God; when the fairest
leaves of the mere Animal Religion are nothing in his estimate.

This is a great advantage we have from the Gospel, that imperfection will be
accepted, where there is sincerity; whereas according to the measures of exact
and rigorous Justice, no man could be made happy in the high degree of glory,
but he that was perfect, and whose victories were absolute.

SECT. VII.
(VII.) IT may be collected from our Discourse, wherein the Power of Godliness
consists, viz. In a progress toward perfection, and an entire victory over all
the evils of our Natures. The Forms of Godliness are not only in the ceremonies
of Worship, and external actions of feigned Piety; But all the fine things of
the Animal Religion, I have mentioned, are of this kind, and they are the worst
sort: By the grosser Forms men hardly deceive others; by these they effectually
gull themselves. So that many that vehemently oppose Forms, are the greatest
Formalists themselves. Forms of Worship may well agree with the Power of
Godliness; when as zeal against Forms, may be a Form it self; whatever makes
show of Religion, and does not make us better, that is a Form, at least to us.
There are Spiritual Forms, as well as those of the other sort, and these are
most deadly. Poison is worst in Aqua-Vitae. He that speaks his Prayers ex
tempore with vehemence and lowdness, if he strive not against his ill nature
and self will, is as much a Formalist, as he that tells his Prayers by his
Beads, and understands not one word he says. And those that run away from
Forms in Churches, meet more dangerous ones in Barns and private corners.
Orthodox Opinions, devout Phrases, set Looks, melting Tones, affected Sighs,
and vehement Raptures, are often mere Forms of Godliness, that proceed from the
Animal Religion, which it self is a Form likewise. O that the observers of so
many motes in their Brothers eye, would learn to throw out the Beams of their
own!

The Form of Godliness that pretends it self to be no more, is not so hurtful:
But the Forms, that call themselves the Power, are deadly. It Is the Formality
and Superstition of Separatists that keeps on the Separation: They contend for
phancies and arbitrary trifles, We for order and obedience. The People are
abused by names, and being frighted by the shadows of Superstition and
Formality, they run into the worst Formality, and silliest Superstition in the
World. The Kingdom of heaven consists not in meats and drinks, Romans xiv.17.
neither in Circumcision, nor Uncircumcision, 1 Cor. vii.19. not in zeal for
little things, nor against them; both the one and the other are equally formal.

The power of Religion lies in using Divine aids heartily and constantly, in
order to the overcoming the Difficulties of our way. This Godliness is not
exercised so much in reforming others, as our selves: The chief design is to
govern within, and not to make Laws for the World without us. This is that
Wisdom that is from above, which is pure and peaceable, Jam. iii.17. It makes
no noise and bluster abroad, but quietly minds its own business at home.

So that certainly the best men have not always had the greatest fame for
Godliness; as the wisest have very seldom been the most popular. They are the
effects of the Animal Religion that make the biggest show. The voice of true
Religion is heard in quiet, it sounds not in the corners of the street. The
power of Godliness is seen in Justice, Meekness, Humility, and Charity, things
that look not so splendidly as the Spiritual Forms.

And thus of the INFERENCES and COROLLARIES that may be drawn from my
Discourse, which though they cannot all be inferred from any of its minute and
separated parts, yet they lie in the design and contexture of it.

CHAP. V. Practical Advice for a CONCLUSION.
I Hasten now to Advice for Practice. The way of Happiness is difficult, but
the difficulties may be overcome by striving. A little will not do; many
seekers are shut out; what remains then, but that we persuade our selves to
strive, and that diligently, with constant resolution and endeavor.

We were made for Happiness, and Happiness all the World seeks: Who will show
us any good? Psalm. iv.6. is the voice of all the Creatures. We have sought it
long in emptiness, and shadows; and that search has still ended in shame and
disappointment. Where true substantial Felicity is we know, and the Way we
know, Joh. xiv.4. It is not hid from us in Clouds and thick Darkness; or if it
were, 'twere worth our pains to search after it. It is not at so great a
distance, but it may be seen, yea, it may be brought so near as to be felt.
Though the way is straight, yet it is certain; or if it were otherwise, who
would not venture his pains upon the possibility of such an issue? Many
Difficulties are in it; but our Encouragements and Assistances are infinite.
The love of God, and the gift of his son; the blood of Christ, and his
intercession; the aids of the Spirit, and the directions of the Gospel: the
Invitations and Promises, the rare Precepts, and incomparable Examples of those
holy men that have gone before us. These are mighty helps and great motives to
assist us in striving, and to quicken us to it.

Let us then arise in the strength of Faith, and in the encouragement of those
aids, and attempt with courage upon the Difficulties of our way. Let us engage
our deepest Resolutions, and most diligent endeavors. Here is no need to
deliberate, the things are necessary, the benefits unspeakable, and the event
will be glorious. It is no Question, I hope, whether God, or the Creature is to
be first chosen; whether Heaven or Hell be better? and therefore there is no
cause that we should stay and consider; we cannot be rash here, we cannot hurt
our selves by a too sudden engagement, we have delayed too long already, and
every moment we sit still, is one lost to our Duty, and our Happiness. Let us
resolve then, and begin with courage, and proceed with diligence, it is our End
and Felicity for which we are to strive; and every thing is active for its End
and Perfection.

All Creatures are diligent in serving the Designs of Providence; the Heavens
are in restless motion, and the Clouds are still carrying about their fruitful
Waters; the sluggish Earth it self is always putting forth in variety of Trees,
and Grass, and Flowers; the Rivers run toward the Sea, the Brooks move toward
them, and the Sea within it self. Thus all things even in inanimate Nature may
mind us of acting toward our end. And if we look a little higher, the Beasts
of the Field, the Fowls, and Cattle, and creeping things are diligent in
striving after the good and perfection of their Natures, and Solomon sends the
Sluggard to those little Insects the Ant and Be, to teach him activity and
diligence, Prove. vi.6. And shall the Beasts act more reasonably than the
professed Sons of Reason? May it not shame us, that we need instruction from
the Creatures that have no understanding? With what face can we carry our heads
so high, and look down with Contempt upon inferior Animals, when they live
more wisely and more regularly, than we.

The Sum is, All things are incessantly moving toward an End; and Happiness is
ours, which therefore should engage our most careful Thoughts, and most active
Endeavors.

We are solicitous and diligent about things of infinitely less moment, and in
effect of none, viz. uncertain Riches, sensual Pleasures, and worldly Honors;
though the way to these is sufficiently difficult and uneasy, yet we are not
discouraged; we attempt all those Difficulties with an obstinate Courage,
though without promise of any equal assistance, or assurance of success. We are
often defeated in our pursuits, and yet we go on. We are overmaster'd by cross
events, and yet we try again We miss our happiness, when we have attained our
end, and yet we are as active in courting disappointment another time: either
we attain not the things we seek, or find no true satisfaction in them, or they
die in our hands presently, and yet we strive. And does not this activity about
uncertain, unsatisfying Trifles, shamefully reprove our Negligence in reference
to our great End, Happiness, and Perfection; In striving for which we have all
the powers of Heaven to aid us, and the Word of God, and the Blood of his Son,
and the experience of all that ever tried, to assure us that we shall neither
fail of the things we seek, nor of the pleasure that we expect from them. And
why then do we lazily sit down, and with the Sluggard say, There is a Lion in
the way, while we despise greater discouragements, when vain things are to be
sought? The Merchant does not give off, because there are Storms, and the
numerous Dangers of the Deep to be met with in his way to the Indies; nor the
Soldier lay by his Arms, because of the hazards and toils of War. And do we
act courageously for petty purchases; and faint and despond when we are to
strive for Crowns and eternal Glories?

It Is true indeed our own natural strength is small, in proportion to the
Difficulties we are to encounter; but the Grace of God is sufficient for us, 2
Cor. xii.9. and we may do all things through Christ that strengthens us, Phil.
iv.13. Nature is weak, and imperfect, but we are not left in the condition of
mere nature: For we are not under the Law, but under Grace, Romans vi.14. We are
under the influences of the holy Spirit, which will remove the mountains, and
plain the way before us, if we take care to engage those aids by Faith and
sincere endeavor.

For this we may be sure of, That God will never be wanting to us, if we are
not so unto our selves. So that the case as to our natural inability, and the
assistance of Gods Spirit, seems to be thus. A man in a Boat is carried from
the Harbor he designs, by the violence of the Current; he is is not able only
by plying of the Oar, to overcome the resistance of the Tide; but a gentle Gale
blows with him, which will not of it self neither carry him up against the
Torrent: Neither of them will do it singly: But if he hoist the sail, and use
the Oar too, this united force prevails; and he gets happily to the Harbor.
This methinks resembles our Condition; we are carried down the Torrent of evil
Inclinations and Affections, our own unaided force is too little for that great
force: but the Holy Spirit is with us, It breaths upon us, and is ready to
assist, if we are so to use it, and by the super-addition and engagement of
those blessed Aids, there is no evil in our natures but may be overcome. So
that we have no reason to be discouraged at the apprehension of our impotence,
out of weakness we shall be made strong, Heb. xi.24. If we employ our Talent,
though it be but a very small one, we shall have more, Mat. xxv.29. And if we
accept of those divine helps, and use them, what was before, to mere natural
consideration, uneasy, will be pleasant and sweetly relishing.

One of the greatest Difficulties in the way of Religion, is to begin: the
first steps are roughest to those feet that have been unaccustomed to it. The
helps and manifold encouragements we shall meet with in the Progress, will
render it more agreeable and delightsome. Those very toils will be grateful;
and we know there is scarce any great sense of pleasure, but where there is
some Difficulty and Pain. Even our Work it self will be Wages. And it is not
only the End of Wisdom that is pleasantness, but the very way, Prove. iii.17. So
that though we are called upon to strive, and to run, and to fight, (which
words import Labor) yet we are not required to quit our pleasures, but to
change the objects of them; to leave the delights of swine for those of Angels;
sensual for spiritual Satisfactions.

Thus all things encourage, and invite us to strive; God calls upon us, and our
own Interests call; Christ Jesus came to engage us to this Work, and the Holy
Spirit waits to assist it. If notwithstanding all this, we sit still, our
Negligence will be inexcusable and fatal: or if we arise, and go a little
forward, and then lay us down to take our ease and rest, our state in the
judgment of one that knew, will be worse, more desperate, and excuseless, 2
Pet. ii.21.

I conclude all then, in the words of the blessed Apostle, 1 Cor. xv. Therefore
my beloved Brethren, be ye steadfast, unmovable, always abounding in the work
of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your Labor is not in vain in the Lord:
To him be Glory, and Honor henceforth, and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
AN INTRODUCTION, Page 1. CHAP. I. There are great Difficulties in Religion.
Religion is not hard to be understood. The Difficulties arise (1) from the
Depravities of our Natures, (2) from the Influences of the senses, (3) from the
disorder of our passions, (4) from the power of Custom, (5) from evil example,
and (6) from Worldly interests and engagements. p. 5 CHAP. II. That the
Difficulties may be overcome. The Instruments whereby it may be done, viz.
Faith, Prayer, and active endeavor. They are particularly considered. The
Method of endeavor proposed in plain and practicable Rules. Some
Qualifications of those Rules. p. 31 CHAP. III. The danger of mistaking in the
Marks and Measures of Godliness. Instances of the mere Animal Religion; how far
it may go, in Faith, in Prayer, and in Endeavor, discoursed in several
Particulars; and therein the whole mystery of the Modern Pharisaick Godliness
is discovered, and shown to be short and insufficient. Objections against the
severity of the Discourse, answered. p. 62 CHAP. IV. INFERENCES from the whole,
concerning, (1) The true notion of a state of Grace and Nature. (2) The great
design of Religion to perfect humane nature. (3) The agreement and oneness of
Christianity and Morality. (4) The method of Grace on the souls of men. (5) The
nature of the Animal Religion. (6) The certain mark whereby to know our state.
(7) The power of Godliness, and the Forms of it. p. 120 CHAP. V. Practical
Advice for a CONCLUSION. p. 160
The End.

