Imprimatur,

Tho. Tomkyns, RRmo in Christo Patriac Domino Dno Gilberto Divina Providentia
Archiepisc. Ex Aed. Lamb. Maii 2. 1668.
Cant. a Sacr. Dom.

PLUS ULTRA: OR, THE Progress and Advancement OF KNOWLEDGE Since the Days of
ARISTOTLE. In an ACCOUNT of some of the most Remarkable LATE IMPROVEMENTS OF
Practical, Useful Learning: To Encourage PHILOSOPHICAL ENDEAVORS. OCCASIONED
By a Conference with one of the NOTIONAL Way.

By Ios. GLANVILL.

LONDON, Printed for James Collins at the King's Head in Westminster Hall. 1668.

TO THE Right Reverned Father in GOD, WILLIAM Lord Bishop of Bathe and Wells.
MY LORD,
It Is a common, and vain pretense in Dedications, That the Name of the Great
Person is prefixed to keep off Censure: And if it would do so in earnest, the
Author might secure himself upon easy terms; and those that write Books, need
not complain so much of the Tongues of the Envious, and the Ignorant: But the
worst on it is, they that use the Courtship, intend it for no other; and know,
that they are no more secure under the Title of their Patron, than a Man in
Battle is behind a Target made with a Paper-Picture of St. George.

But, my Lord, though I contemn those silly, Romantic kinds of Flatteries, yet
I have a real need of your Lordship's Name, which, without this Vanity, I may
use in my defense: since the Angry Gentleman, that gave occasion to the
following Discourse, has usurped it to give color to his Reproaches. What are
the Particulars, I have told your Lordship, and have mentioned them in some of
the nearest ensuing Leaves. And since the Man of Disputations has accused me
for an Infidel, and framed a Story concerning your Lordship to confirm it, I
think it not sufficient to confute the Charge, but must also shame the Legend:
which, no doubt, your Name here prefixed, and the Assurance you were pleased to
give me that it was not true, will do effectually.

It becomes not me, my Lord, to suggest any Reflections to kindle your
displeasure for this Invention, to which certainly your Lordship owes no great
Acknowledgments: But to decline all things that look like Envy or Revenge, I
humbly implore on his behalf, your Pardon of the Forgery; and on my own, your
Permission to deal with this Disputer. This perhaps some may judge a bold
Offer, in one that pretends not great Matters, to undertake the Man of Gath;
but I have no dread of the formidable bulk of his Name and Arms (and some
think, Most of the famed Giants, were indeed but Men of ordinary stature.) For
the Reputation of a great Disputant, which my Assailant has in this Country,
it signifies no more with me, than that of a good Cudgel-player, or Master of
Fence: and what this Doughty Man 's Art and Force is, I have seen so much, as
instructs me, that there is no great reason to apprehend mighty Dangers from
his Puissance. My Lord, I have no contempt of any Man's Parts or Person, that
keeps himself within the bounds of Modesty and Civility: but for those that are
confident, imperious, abusive, and assuming, I confess it is hard for me to
speak of them with much Complement or respect.

And having taken the boldness to say all this, some perhaps may expect that I
should have the Duty and Justice to say a great deal more; and that I should
celebrate your Lordship after the manner of Dedications: But I began with
reproving one of those usual Vanities, and shall not end in the practice of
another. Those Epistolary Praises are mostly intended for little, and go for
nothing; For Flattery and Poetic Youth have strain^d them to such a ridiculous
height, that Wise men judge of them by the same measures, as they do the
Courtships of Common Amors. I dare not therefore offer your Gravity and Wisdom
such vulgar^ and obnoxious Trifles; but instead of those Fooleries, I give your
Lordship the serious assurance of my affectionate Duty, with the most grateful
acknowledgment of your Favors. And that your aged Head may be Crowned with all
the Blessings of a long Time, and after that, with the full Glories of an happy
Eternity, shall ever be the Prayer of,

My Lord, Your Lordships obliged and dutiful Servant, Jos. GLANVILL.

THE PREFACE TO THE REVEREND CLERGY OF THE Diocese of B. and W.
FATHERS and BRETHREN,
THE Respect I owe you, and the Relation the following Discourse has to a
Reverend Man of your Number, make me reckon my self obliged, in point of
Civility and Decorum, to give you an Account of this Engagement; Not that I
think so meanly of YOU, or of my Cause, as to endeavor to bribe or flatter You
into any partiality of judgment in my favor, which no doubt You would
disclaim, and, I hope, I shall not need: But I judge an Information in some
Particulars, may be necessary to a free and unprejudiced Examination of the
things contained in these Papers. And I begin with the desire, That you would
consider me as a Person that contemns all Wranglings, and vehemencies of
Dispute; and there is somewhat of Hell in all Wars: Especially I dislike and
lament all Public Controversies among those of the Sacred Function, by which,
great disrepute and reproach have been brought both upon Them and It; besides
the other numerous Mischiefs they have done Religion, and the Peace of Men. And
in those Differences, in which eager Theologues have been engaged, I have much
pitied the meanness and disorders of their Spirits, in the disingenuity and
violence of their Assaults ^^on one another Reputations, in ^^hich the
Question was not concern^; but the Cause of each, much dis^^ved by their
respective abuses. By which Premisals, You may perhaps ^^ink, that I am drawing
up a Charge against my own Discourse, which relates a Controversy, and one
with a Divine, that some possibly may judge too, not to savor in the menage of
it, of so much Candor and modest Sweetness as I seem to recommend. The Answer
of this, will be the first business of this PREFACE.

Therefore, for the publishing the matter of a Dispute, and that which was
privately begun, I have to say, That the Grave Man gave me occasion enough of
Displeasure and Complaint, by the dreadful and most injurious Censure of
Atheism, charged upon me, for saying no mo^^ than that [ The Scripture not writ
after the way of (...) Methods; and, that God (...) those Holy Oracles did
app^^ himself much to the Imagin^tion of the Prophets.] T^^ former of which
Sayings, is so evide^^ to one that considers the Inspire^ Writings, that it
will no doubt re^^ dily be granted by Wise men of a^^ denominations in
Religion; and should much wonder it is by an^ one made a question, but that we
ar^ fallen into an Age in which n^ Truth and Evidence can secure an^^ thing
from the Captiousness of Dis^puters. For the other, I have the Suffrage of all
that ever pretended to understand any thing of the Prophetic Spirit, as I
could at large make appear, if I thought any needed information and conviction
in this mat^^, besides my Reverend Anta^^nist: Or, if I had neither Evi^^nce
nor Authority to vouch me in ^ose Sayings; yet the Charge of ^^heism, is like
the bolt of one ^^at throws hard words in haste, and without aim or judgment.

So that I had cause enough to be ^ngry at an Imputation so little agree^ng
with the Discretion of a Wise man, ^he Charity of a Christian, or the Ci^^ility
of a Gentleman; And yet I did ^o more at first, but signify to my Assailant,
in a very modest and mild Letter, That I supposed he did not judge of me in his
cold and conside^ate thoughts, according to all that ^^verity he vented in the
heat of Pas^sion, upon the account of which, I was ready to pass by those
undeserved vehemencies of Expression, and to entertain a civility and respect
for him. This Letter the Grave Man received, but never returned me an Answer,
but what I had from P^^lick Frame, which brought me dai^ notice of his
declaring me an Ath^ist in all places and Companies. The^ foul indignities for
a while I though^ my self obliged to bear meekly, as b^ came a Christian, and
one that taugh^ others Patience; and accordingl^ sat down quietly under the
infam^^ of that Tongue, expecting when (...) would have spent its fury, and
have done: But it was not content to (...) lifie me abroad, but come into my
Parish to wound me nearer, and a^fixt on me the same horrid imputation, before
some of the People o^ my Charge; as if my Persecuter had designed, not only to
undo my Re^putation, but also to defeat the Success of my Labors.

These Carriages I thought very strange, and very unbecoming one who Preaches
that Charity that thinks no Evil; and yet still I bore, and did not repay in
kind, hoping that Time and greater matters would at last have taken off the
fierce Assailant from the persecution of my Name: But it seems the Gentleman
could find nothing else so powerfully to engage his Thoughts; and therefore he
multiplied Stories, and set his Invention on work, when Matter failed. He gave
out, That my LORD BISHOP had writ him a Gratulatory Letter for his egregious
Uindication of the Scriptures against me, and had also reproved my Atheism and
Infidelity, in another. I was glad he spoke good things of our Reverend
Diocesan, though at my Cost: but knew, as to what concerned my self, that it
was the overflowing of his good will toward the Bishop, who never spoke or
writ a^ word to me of any such matter. And for the other part, I asked his
Lordship, and he was pleased to assure me, that he never understood any thing
of such a Business, before my inquiry. Besides which, he storied, as I am
credibly informed, That I had sent him a Recantation (for that interpretation
he made of the respect of my Letter) And if it had been so indeed, he has much
added to the credit of his own Ingenuity and Veracity, in publishing me for
that, which he says I have retracted and disowned.

When therefore I saw, that a little Truth, which gave the color and occasion,
and a great deal of what was not so, for which there was no reason, were set on
work to bespatter and traduce me; When I perceived that my Patience was abused,
and my Civility made an Argument of Cowardice and unmanly Compliance; When I
saw my Name exposed (for which I ought to have a concernment upon another
account, besides that of Self-love) and the Effect of my Ministry like to be
hindered by my silence and tameness under those Peproaches; I thought it a duty
both to my self, and those of my Charge, to give Public Accounts of the whole
Matter, that they who are capable of judging, may see how little cause some men
have for their railing Insultations and Triumphs.

I therefore resolved to prepare a Letter, I had writ to a private Friend about
it, for the Public; and I have in such a way ordered my Castigations, that
they make up a Discourse upon a very seasonable and general Subject: So that my
Assailant has only given the occasion of the Me^thod. And so tender I am of
troubling others with my personal Matters^ that I suffered my thoughts severa^
times to cool, and should perhaps have reduced my mind to an idle indifferency
under those former Slanders, had not my Reverend Adversary taken care to
quicken the laziness of my Humor, and to war^ my intentions of proceeding, by
the continued abusive liberty of his Language; the report of which, daily
coming to my ears in fresh gusts as I was writing, did I confess excite in me a
great contempt of that kind of Spirit, and occasioned me to express less
deference and respect, than otherwise I should have done to this Assailant.
This I mention for your pardon, because of his Profession; the consideration of
which indeed did urge me sometimes to more indignation, when I reflected, how
unlike ^uch rough, injurious demeanor was, ^o what may be expected from those
that Minister in the Gospel of Peace and Love. So that though I am one that
resent a certain ungentility (besides the other unhandsom things) in bitterness
of Expression, yet I thought smartness of reproof to be here necessary and
seasonable. And whoever shall consider the mild carriage of my Pen, when 'twas
engaged in a Defense of one of my Books, against the assault of the Famous
ALBIUS, will see there, that I use it not as an Offensive Weapon of War, and
that my Humor is not fierce and abusive. I therefore crave your candor in
those Periods, where I may seem less smooth to my angry Antagonist; for I think
it not proper to Complement, when he Strikes. And yet I am not at eye for eye,
and tooth for tooth; nor do I study strict retribution: But having a great
Aversion in my Nature and my Principles, to the rude, disputing censorious, and
implacable Spirit, cannot forbear giving my Style a^tincture of the disesteem,
not to say contempt, I have for that Genius.

I had here added some other things, which I thought fit for your notice,
concerning the Matter of the black Charge; and such as I conceive will help me
to a better place in your thoughts, than the Dispute^ would provide for me: But
those Considerations would have swell'^ this Preface to a disproportionate
bulk^ and therefore I have cast them into the latter end, where I hope you will
take the pains to find them, and do me, and others that may be concerned, that
right, as to weigh deliberately those Apologetical Remarques. And having
signified this my desire, proceed to observe what more ^early relates to the
main Subject of ^he Discourse it self, the chief design of which is, to
encourage the freer and better disposed Spirits, to vigor and endeavor in the
pursuits of Knowledge; and to raise the capable and ingenuous, from a dull and
drowsy acquiescence in the Discoveries of former Times; by representing the
great Encouragements we have to proceed, from modern Helps and Advancements. Of
these I have given some Instances in the more remarkable Particulars: For I
intend not a full and accurate History of all the late Improvements of Science;
but so much as may serve my aim of confuting the fond Saying of my Antagonist,
and exciting of Philosophical Endeavors. In which, I confess, I had a
principal eye upon the ROYAL SOCIETY, and the Noble Purposes of that
Illustrious Assembly, which I look upon as the great ferment of useful and
generous Knowledge; and have said enough, I think, to justify that
Apprehension, in the following Sheets^. And because some pious men are afraid
of an Institution they have heard but imperfectly of, and are jealous of what
they have not had opportunities to understand, I have therefore given a
succinct Account of the Reason, Nature, and Designs of that Establishment, for
the information of such as have not met with their Excellent HISTORY. Besides
which, I think fit to add here, That WE of the CLERGY have no reason to
apprehend danger from that Constitution, since so many Pious, Learned, and
Excellent Persons of our Order, are Members of that Body. And for the
prevention of those panick, causeless Terrors, I shall take the boldness here
to name some of those Venerable and Worthy Ecclesiastics. I find therefore in
their Catalogue, The Most Reverend the Lords Archbishops of CANTERBURY and
YORK, The Right Reverend the Lords Bishops of ELY, LONDON, ROCHESTER, SARUM,
WINTON; and those other Reverend Doctors, Dr. John Wilkins Dean of RIPPON, Dr.
Edward Cotton Archdeacon of CORNWALL, Dr. RALPH BATHURST President of Trin.
Coll. OXON. Dr. John Pearson Margaret Professor of CAMBRIDGE, Dr. John Wallis
Professor of Geometry in OXFORD, Dr. William Holder, Dr. Henry More, Dr. John
Pell; and I reserve for your nearer notice, an excellent Person of your
Neighborhood and Number, Dr. John Beale, who in an Age that usually cools and
sinks, as to the more active Designs, does yet retain the vigor and vivacity
of sprightly youth, with the judgment of the ripest years, and is unwearied in
the noblest Activities and most generous Prosecutions.

And now I hope that there is none of you guilty of so great an immodesty and
irreverence, as to judge those Designs to have an evil Aspect upon Religion,
which are subscribed and promoted by so many great and grave Divines, of such
known Piety and Judgment. And the mention of those Celebrated Names, may serve
to remove another groundless suspicion which some have entertained, viz. That
the Universities are undermined by this new Philosophic Society: For whoever
phancieth or suggests that, casts a black Character upon the sagacity and
faithfulness of those Reverend Men, who all have been Eminent Members of one or
other of those Schools of Learning: and most of them do still retain a Relation
to those ancient and venerable Bodies.

But to supersede further Discourse about this here, I owe some things else to
my self, which is to answer the Objection, of my opposing the great Name of
ARISTOTLE. Concerning it, I have said. Some things in this Book, and more in
others; For the present therefore I shall content my self to suggest, That I am
very ready to give cheerful Acknowledgements to his Rhetoric, History of
Animals, and Mechanics, and could wish that these were more studied by his
devoted Admirers: But for the notional and disputing parts of his Philosophy,
it has deeply troubled me, when I have considered how much they have taken up
that Time, and those Endeavors, which should have been employed in surveying
the Works of GOD; that magnify and discover their Author, from which only the
true Philosophy is to be obtained: And the zeal I have for the Glory of the
Almighty discovered in his Creatures, has inspired me with some smartness and
severity against those Heathen Notions which have so unhappily diverted Learned
men from the study of Gods GREAT BOOK, UNIVERSAL NATURE; and consequently,
robbed Him of that Honor, and those Acclamations that are due to him, for
those admirable Results of his Wisdom and Goodness.

And now it is high time to draw up to the last Requests I have to You, which
are, That you would please to do me that right, deliberately to weigh my
following accounts, which though I have designed to express with all imaginable
perspicuity and clearness, yet I cannot expect that they should presently enter
into Minds, that most ordinarily converse with another sort of Matters, upon an
hasty and careless perusal. I say therefore, I appeal to the reflecting and
considerate thoughts of attentive and judicious men, But for the hairbrain'd
half-witted Censurers, that only tell the Leaves of Books, and pass Definitive
Sentences at a venture, I except against their Verdicts, and contemn them.

You see upon the whole, that I have dealt openly with my Antagonist, and have
said all to himself and the Public, and more than ever I did on any private
occasion: Though I believe, that he that has endeavored skulkingly and by
envious Arts to traduce me, would be ashamed to own that in the face of the
light, and mine, which he has reported in corners. Whether he intends to
answer my Relations and Reflections, or sit down in a grave silence, I cannot
tell. If he does the former, I look that he should show, either that there are
no such Instances of Improvement in Knowledge, since Aristotle, as I have
reckoned; or, That they are no Advantage for the Increase of SCIENCE. If he
proves either of these, his Return will be an Answer; and I shall admire his
Wit in an eternal respect and silence: But if he offers any thing else for a
Reply, I appeal to you, whether it be like to be to purpose? or, whether I
shall have any need to trouble my self to rejoyn to an impertinence? But on the
other hand, if his Sageness resolve to sit down, and gravely to say nothing in
Return (which it is like his Wisdom will counsel him to be best) I expect from
such an Ingenuity as his, that he should fall again to his little arts of
Calumny, and deal with my Book as he has with my Person, assault it behind
with dirt and hardnames, and confute it with a Pish, or a great word or two,
among his private Admirers. This no doubt will be the easiest way of Answering;
and those that have got great Reputation by Artifice, Chance, Uapouring, or the
Ignorance of those they converse with, have commonly the prudence not to put it
to the hazard of public Trials. I do not say, this is the Case of the Reverend
Disputer; let those that know, judge.

However it is, my Antagonist being of long standing in these Parts, is like to
have the wind here; and whether his Reply be public or not, I reckon he will
blow the DUST upon me: but if I have the SUN, as I hope, I shall have no reason
to regret his Advantage. The Truth is, I desire to conflict in an open
Champaigne, where there may be less danger of guile, treachery, and ambush: But
I perceive my Adversary is for fighting in Dirty-lanes and among the Cole-pits,
like the Irish among their Boggs. Let him enjoy the Empire of Learning in those
Places, and whatever Triumphs over me he pleases. If YOU, Sirs, and the
intelligent World favor the Justice of my Cause, which, without disparagement
to yours I cannot doubt, I have enough, and shall be content to permit the
Disputer to clap his Wings, and crow at home, till he be ashamed and weary of
his fond and causeless Orations.

These are the things I thought fit to premise to my Discourse, to which now I
remit your Eyes, without adding more, but the Respect and Service of,

Reverend Sirs, Your humble Honourer and Servant, J. G.

Modern Improvements OF USEFUL KNOWLEDGE.
To a Friend.
CHAP. I. The INTRODUCTION.
SIR,
THE Inquiry of your last was very obliging, as it signified an affectionate
concernment for me: And in testimony of my resentment of the Kindness, I shall
be large and particular in my Return; which I intend as full as my Affairs will
permit, because I owe you some Account of the Modern way of Philosophy, and the
ROYAL College of Philosophers: And I do not yet know, but that I may have an
occasion of making these things public. Not tha^ I am so fond to think my
little contrasts fit subject for general Entertainment; nor am I so tender and
overweening, as to make it a business to complain in Print of my private
Injuries: But I foresee, the Relation I am about will afford me fit and ample
opportunity to discourse things, which perhaps you may think worth your labor
to consider. And what I have to say, tends either to the direct recommendation
of the ways of Useful Knowledge, or to the detecting the immorality, weakness,
and vanity of the Spirit that opposes it.

Briefly then, as to your Inquiry about the Conference I had with the Grabe
Person you mention; You may please to know, That not long since I lighted into
the Company of that Reverend Man, who, I suppose you have heard, has a
Reputation for Learning among his Neighbors, and is accounted a Philosopher in
the Peripatetick way. I was glad of an opportunity of his Acquaintance, and
approached him with that respect which I judged due to a person of that
Gravity, and of whom I had heard advantageously.

He had been speaking before I came, about Aristotle and his Philosophy; And
after our first Civilities were over, he renewed the Discourse, and applied it
all to me. I confess I was not willing to begin an Acquaintance in a Dispute,
in which I foresaw there might be danger of heat and animosity. This I
intimated, and would have declined the occasion; because, though I love modest
and temperate Discoursing, yet I am a professed Enemy to all captious and
resolved Oppositions, which for the most part run into wild Rambles, and end in
Quarrels. But the Gentleman, it seems, had warmed himself by the concernment he
took in the Discourse, and was forward to prosecute the Argument in vindication
and praise of Beloved Aristotle: Which Carriage, though I thought somewhat too
young for the Gravity of that Appearance, and more becoming the pertness of a
Sophister, than the Sagess of a Reverend Divine; yet I abstained from any
displeasing Reflection, and should quietly have permitted him to have satisfied
himself in his Venerations of that Name, without interruption or disturbance:
For I count it not civil to trouble any One in his Worship, or to profess to
his face, a contempt of another Man's GODS.

But the Grave Gentleman could not be content only to celebrate and admire his
Aristotle; but was pleased to take an occasion to make Comparisons, and to
diminish the ROYAL SOCIETY. This Passage, I confess, I thought not handsome. And
methinks the Reverence we owe to the ROYAL FOVNDER and PATRON of that
Establishment, and the Respect that is due to PRINCES, PRIVY COVNSELLORS, and
PRELATES; to the most Learned Men of all Sorts and Professions, Mathematicians,
Chemists, Physicians, Anatomists, Antiquaries, and Philosophers; to the PRIME
NOBILITY, and so many of the Learned and Ingenious amongst the GENTRY: I say, I
thought that the Regard, which is a debt to such Persons as make up that
Honorable Assembly, had been enough to procure it Civil usage among all that
had but an indifferent proportion of Modesty and Breeding. And if there were
nothing else to oblige men to Respectful Discourse of this Generous Company, I
should think the Consideration of their Noble Aims, which no doubt are some of
the Greatest, most August, and most Hopeful that ever were, should be
sufficient to obtain them at least good words from all that are capable of
understanding their Catholic intendments and prosecutions. And these, Sir, are
not the little Projects of serving a Sect, or propagating an Opinion; of
spinning out a subtle Notion into a fine thread, or forming a plausible System
of new Speculations: but they are Designs of making Knowledge Practical, and
accommodating Mankind in things of Universal Benefit, by searching into the
Creatures of God as they are in his World, and not criticizing upon the Images
of them as they lie in that which the Phansies of Men have contrived. This my
Reverend Assailant either did not know, or did not consider. But supposing that
this Society had a design against adored Aristotle, or not so great an
apprehension of him as he had been wont to instill into his Pupils, thought fit
to bring it under his Corrections; and at his disrespectful Discourse of that
Assembly, I felt my self concerned.

I therefore took occasion to speak from somewhat he had newly said, which was
to this purpose, [ That Aristotle had more Advantages for Knowledge than the
ROYAL SOCIETY or all the present Age had, or could have; and for this strong
Reason, because he did totam peragrare Asiam.] This, Sir, you perceive was said
in haste, when Consideration was not at home. And I was much surprised to hear
an Assertion from one that had not lived in a Cell, which were scarce excusable
in a Recluse, who had seen or known nothing of the World, but the Antique
Venerable Images of a Religious House. And you will be sensible of the
injustice and incogitancy of this saying, and conceive better things of the
later Ages, when you reflect and think how many. Arts, Instruments,
Observations, Experiments, Inventions and Improvements, have been disclosed to
the World since the days of Aristotle, which are vast Advantages for Knowledge,
and all Noble and Useful Inquiries.

But before I come to instance in these Particulars, I must premise, That the
ROYAL SOCIETY, and those of that Genius, are very ready to do right to the
Learned Ancients, by acknowledging their Wit, and all the useful Theories and
helps we have from them: but they are not willing that those, however venerable
Sages, should have an absolute Empire over the Reasons of Mankind. Nor do they
think, That all the Riches of Nature were discovered to some few particular Men
of former Times; and that there is nothing left for the benefit and
gratification of after-Inquirers. But They believe, There is an inexhaustible
variety of Treasure which Providence has lodged in Things, that to the Worlds
end will afford fresh Discoveries, and suffice to reward the ingenious Industry
and Researches of those that look into the Works of God, and go down to see his
wonders in the deep. This, no doubt, the modesty and justice of the Ancients
themselves would have confessed. But besides this, the Modern Experimenters
think, That the Philosophers of elder Times, though their Wits were excellent,
yet the way they took was not like to bring much advantage to Knowledge, or any
of the Uses of humane Life; being for the most part that of Notion and Dispute,
which still runs round in a Labyrinth of Talk, but advances nothing. And the
unfruitfulness of those Methods of Science, which in so many Centuries never
brought the World so much practical, beneficial Knowledge, as would help
toward the Cure of a Cut finger, is a palpable Argument, That they were
fundamental Mistakes, and that the Way was not right.

For, as my Lord Bacon observes well, Philosophy, as well as Faith, must be
shown by its Works. And if the Morderns cannot show more of the Works of their
Philosophy in six years, than the Aristoteleans can produce of theirs in more
than thrice so many hundred, let them be loaded with all that Contempt which is
usually the reward of vain and unprofitable Projectors. But now, That this
Procedure has effected more for the information and advantage of Mankind, than
all the Ages of Notion; the Records of the Royal Society alone are a sufficient
Evidence (as the World will see, when they shall think fit to unfold their
Treasure.) I say then, the Mordern Philosophers arrogate nothing to their own
Wit, above that of the Ancients: but by the reason of the thing, and material,
sensible Events, they find they have an advantage by their Way. And a lame
Child that slowly treads the right Path, will at last arrive to his Journeys
end; while the swift Footman that runs about in a Wood, will lose himself in his
wanderings.

CHAP. II. The Ways of improving Useful Knowledge proposed. The Advantages this
Age has from the great advancements of Chemistry and Anatomy,
AND having said this, I come to encourage your hopes in the present
Philosophical Endeavors; and to discourse more largely, what I could but
suggest to the Reverend Disputer. And here I am to represent in as many
material Particulars as I can now call into my thoughts, the Advantages for
Useful Knowledge, which the later Ages have beyond those of the days of
Aristotle, and remoter Antiquity. And in order to this, I consider,

That there are Two chief ways whereby Knowledge may be advanced, viz. (1.) By
enlarging the HISTORY of Things: And (2.) By improving INTERCOVRSE and
COMMVNICATIONS. The HISTORY of Nature is to be augmented, either by an
investigation of the Springs of Natural Motions, or fuller Accounts of the
grosser and more palpable Phenomenon. For the searching out the beginnings and
depths of Things, and discovering the intrigues of remoter Nature, there are
THREE remarkable ARTS, and multitudes of excellent INSTRVMENTS, which are great
Advantages to these later Ages; but were either not at all known, or but
imperfectly, by Aristotle and the Ancients. The ARTS in which I instance, are
CHEMISTRY, ANATOMY, and the MATHEMATICS: The INSTRVMENTS, such as the
MICROSCOPE, TELESCOPE, THERMOMETER, BAROMETER; and the AIR-PVMP: Some of which
were first Invented, all of them exceedingly Improved by the ROYAL SOCIETY.

TO begin with the Consideration of the ARTS mentioned, I observe, That these
were very little cultivated or used in Aristotle's Times, or in those following
ones in which his Philosophy did most obtain.

For the FIRST, CHEMISTRY, it has indeed a pretense to the great Hermes for
its Author (how truly, I will not dispute) From him it is said to (...) come to
the Egyptians, and from ^em to the Arabians; Among these it was ^^^nitely
mingled with vanity and supersti^^ous devices: but it was not at all in use
^ith Aristotle and his Sectators. Nor ^oth it appear that the Grecians, or the
^^sputing Ages, were conversant in these ^seful and luciferous Processes, by
which Nature is unwound, and resolved into the minute Rudiments of its
Composition; and by the violence of those Artful Fires it is made confess those
latent parts, which, upon less provocation, it would not disclose. And now, as
we cannot understand the frame of a Watch, without taking it into pieces; so
neither can Nature be well known, without a resolution of it into its
beginnings, which certainly may be best of all done by Chemical Methods. And in
those vexatious Analyzes of Things, wonderful discoveries are made of their
Natures, and Experiments are found out, which are not only full of pleasant
surprise and information, but of valuable use, especially in the Practice of
Physic; For It directs Medicines less loathsome and far more vigorous, and
freeth the Spirits, and purer parts, from the clogging and noxious appendices
of grosser matter, which not only hinder and disable the Operation, but leave
hurtful dregs (...) the Body behind them. I confess, Sir, tha^ among the
Egyptians and Arabians, th^^ Paracelsians, and some other Moderns Chemistry
was very fantastic, unintelligible, and delusive; and the boasts, vanity, and
canting of those Spagyrists, brought (...) scandal upon the Art, and exposed it
to suspicion and contempt: but its late Cultivatours, and particularly the
ROYAL SOCIETY, have resin'd it from its dross, and made it honest, sober, and
intelligible, an excellent Interpreter to Philosophy, and help to common Life.
For they have laid aside the Chrysopoietick, the delusory Designs and vain
Transmutations, the Rosie-crucian Vapors, Magical Charms, and superstitious
Suggestions, and formed it into an Instrument to know the depths and efficacies
of Nature. This, Sir, is no small advantage that we have above the old
Philosophers of the National way. And we have another,

(2.) In the Study, Use, and vast Improvements of ANATOMY, which we find as
needful to be known among us, as it is wonderful 'twas known so little among the
Ancients, whom a fond Superstition deterred from Dissections. For the
Anatomizing the Bodies of Men, was counted bar^arous and inhumane in elder
Times: And (...) observe from a Learned Man of our own, That the Romans held it
unlawful to look on the Entrails. And Tertullian severely cen^ures an
inquisitive Physician of his time, for this practice, saying, That he hated
Man, that he might know him. Yea, one of the Popes (I take it 'twas Boniface
8.) threatens to Excommunicate those that should do any thing of this
then-abominable nature. And Democritus was fain to excuse his Dissection of
Beasts, even to the great Hippocrates. Nor does it appear by any thing extant
in the Writings of Galen, that that other Father of Physicians ever made any
Anatomy of humane Bodies. Thus shie and unacquainted was Antiquity with this
excellent Art, which is one of the most useful in humane Life, and tends
mightily to the eviscerating of Nature, and disclosure of the Springs of its
Motion. But now in these later Ages, Anatomy has been a free and general
Practice; and particularly in this it has received wonderful Improvements from
the Endeavors of several worthy Inquisitors, some of them Ingenious Members of
the ROYAL SOCIETY, as Sir George Ent, Dr. Glisson, and Dr. Willis. I instance
in the most remarkable of their Discoveries briefly; And those I take noti^^ of
are, The Valves of the Veins, discovered by Fabricius ab Aquapendente; The
Valve at the entrance of the gut Colon^ found, as is generally thought, by
Bauhinus^ The Milkie Veins of the Mesentery, by ^^^sellius; The Receptacle of
the Chyle, b^ Pecquet; and the Lacteae Thoracicae, by the same Discoverer; The
Glandulae Lacte^ Lumbares, by Bartholin; A new Ductusi^ the Testicles, by Dr.
Highmore; The Ductus Virsungianus, by Io. George Wirsung o^ Padua; The
Lymphatick Vessels, by Dr^ Ioliffe, Bartholin, and Olaus Rudbeck; The internal
Ductus Salivaris in the Maxillar^ Glandule, by Dr. Wharton, and Dr. Glisson^
The external Ductus Salivaris in the conglomerated Parotis, The Ductus of the
Cheek^ The Glandules under the Tongue, Nose, and Palate, The Vessels in the
nameless Glandul^ of the Eye, and the Tear-Glandule, by Nich^ Steno; The Sinus
of the Veins, and their Use, by Dr. Willis; The Ductus Renales, by Laurentius
Bellini; A new Artery, called Arteria Bronchialis, by Fred. Ruysch. I add, the
Origination of those Nerves which were of old supposed to arise out of the
substance of the Brain, but are found by late Anatomists to proceed from the
Medull^ Oblongata. And though the Succus nutritious be not yet fully agreed upon
by Physicians, yet it has so much to say for it self, that it may not
unreasonably be mentioned among the New Inventions.

But of all the modern Discoveries, Wit and Industry have made in the Economy
of humane Nature, the Noblest is that of the Circulation of the Blood, which
was the Invention of our deservedly-famous Harvey. It Is true, the Envy of
malicious Contemporaries, would have robbed him of the Glory of this Discovery,
and pretend it was known to Hippocrates, Plato, Aristotle, and others among the
Ancients: But whoever considers the Expressions of those Authors, which are
said to respect the Circulation, will find, that those who form the Inference,
do it by a faculty that makes all kind of Compositions and Deductions, and the
same that assists the Enthusiasts of our days to see so clearly all our
Alterations of State and Religion, to the minutest Particulars, in the
Revelation of St. John. And I think it may be as well concluded from the first
Chapter of Genesis, as from the Remains of those Ancients; who, if they had
known this great and general Theory, how chance they spoke no more of a thing,
which no doubt they had frequent occasions to mention? How came it to be lost
without memory among their Followers, who were such superstitious porers upon
their Writings? How chance it was not shown to be lodged in those Authors,
before the days of Dr. Harvery, when Envy had impregnated and determined the
Imaginations of those, who were not willing any thing should be found anew, of
which themselves were not the Inventors? But it is not only the remotest
Ancients, whom time has consecrated, and distance made venerable, whose Ashes
those fond men would honor with this Discovery: but even much later Authors
have had the glory fastened upon them. For the Invention is by some ascribed to
Paulus Venetus; by others, to Prosper Alpinus; and a third sort give it to
Andreas Caesalpinus. For these, though either of them should be acknowledged to
be the Author, it will make as much for the design of my Discourse, as if
Harvey had the credit; and therefore here I am no otherwise concerned, but to
have Justice for that Excellent Man: And the World has now done right to his
Memory, Death having overcome that Envy which dog's living Virtue to the Grave;
and his Name rests quietly in the Arms of Glory, while the Pretensions of his
Rivals are creeping into darkness and oblivion.

Thus, Sir, I have done with the Instances of Anatomical Advancements, unless I
should hitherto refer the late Noble Experiment of Transfusion of the Blood
from one living Animal into another, which I think very fit to be mentioned;
and I suppose it is not improper for this place: Or however, I shall rather
venture the danger of impropriety and misplacing, than omit the taking notice
of so excellent a Discovery, which no doubt future Ingenuity and Practice, will
improve to purposes not yet thought of; and we have very great likelihood of
Advantages from it in present prospect.

For it is concluded, That the greatest part of our Diseases arise either from
the scarcity, or malignant tempers and corruptions of our Blood; in which cases
Transfusion is an obvious Remedy; and in the way of this Operation, the peccant
Blood may be drawn out, without the danger of too much enfeebling Nature, which
is the grand inconvenience of mere Phlebotomies. So that this Experiment may be
of excellent use, when Custom and Acquaintance have hardened men to permit the
Practice, in Pleurisies, Cancers, Leprosies, Madness, Ulcer, Smallpox, Dotage,
and all such like Distempers. And I know not why that of injecting prepared
Medicines immediately into the Blood, may not be better and more efficacious,
than the ordinary course of Practice: Since this will prevent all the danger of
frustration from the loathings of the Stomach, and the disabling, clogging
mixtures and alterations they meet with there, and in the Intestines, in which
no doubt much of the Spirit and Virtue is lost. But in the way of immediate
injection, they are kept entire, all those inconveniences are avoided, and the
Operations is like to be more speedy and succesful, Both these noble
Experiments are the late Inventions of the ROYAL SOCIETY, who have attested the
reality of the former, that of Transfusion of Blood, by numerous Trials on
several sorts of brute Animals. Indeed the French made the Experiment first
upon humane Bodies, of which we have a good account from Monsieur Dennis: But
it has also since been practiced with fair and encouraging success, by our
Philosophical Society. The other of Injection, if it may be mentioned as a
different Invention, was also the product of the same Generous Inventors;
though indeed more forward Foreigners have endeavored to usurp the credit of
both. This latter likewise has succeeded to considerable good effects, in some
new Trials that have been made of it in Dantzick, as appears in a Letter
written from Dr. Fabritius of that City, and printed in the Philosophical
Transactions.

CHAP. III. Another great Advantage of late Times, from the Improvements of
Mathematics; particularly of Arithmetic, Algebra, and Geometry, discourst by
Instances.
I Proceed now to my THIRD Instance of ARTS (if the Reverend Logician will give
me leave to use the word in this large sense) which are Advantages for deep
search into Nature, and have been considerably advanced by the Industry and
culture of late Times, above their ancient Stature. And the Instance was,

(III.) THE MATHEMATICS. That these are mighty helps to practical and useful
Knowledge, will be easily confessed by all, that have not so much ignorance as to
render them incapable of information in these matters. And the Learned Gerand
Vossius has proved it by induction in particulars. And yet it must be
acknowledged that Aristotle, and the disputing Philosophers of his School, were
not much addicted to those noble Inquisitions: For Proclus the Commentator upon
Euclide, though he gives a very particular Catalogue of the Elder
Mathematicians, yet has not mentioned Aristotle in that number. And though
Diogenes Laertius takes notice of a Book he inscribed (...), another, (...),
and a Third, yet extant, (...); Yet it appears not that these were things of
very great value; and Aristotle's Metaphysical procedure, even in Physical
Theories, the, genius and humor of his Principles, and the aerie contentions
of his Sect, are huge presumptions that this Philosopher was not very
Mathematical. And his numerous succeeding Followers, were certainly very little
conversant in those generous Studies. I have elsewhere taken notice, that there
is more published by those Disputing men on some paultry trifling Question
about ens Rationis, and their Materia prima, than has been written by their
whole number upon all the vast and useful parts of Mathematics and Mechanics.
There was a time when these were counted Coniurations; and I do not very well
know the reason of the Reverend Disputers displeasure at my Discourse about
Dioptrick Tubes (of which you will hear in the process) except he was under the
dread of some such fancy, and believed there was Magic in Optics. It would
require much skill in those Sciences, to draw up the full History of their
Advancements; I hear a very accurate Mathematician is upon it: And yet to fill
up my Method, I Will adventure at some imperfect Suggestions about the Inventions
and Improvements of this kind: And I begin,

(I.) With ARITHMETIC, which is the handmaid to all the other parts of
Mathematics. This indeed Pythagoras is said to have brought from the
Phoenicians to the Graecians: but we hear no great matter of it till the days
of Euclide: not the Euclide that was the Contemporary of Plato, and Hearer of
Socrates; but the famed Mathematician of that Name, who was after Aristotle,
and at 90 years distance from the former. This is the first Person among the
Ancients, that is recorded by the exact Vossius to have done any thing
accurately in that Science. After him it was advanced by Diophantus, methodized
by Psellus, illustrated among the Latins by L. Apuleius, and in later times
much promoted by Cardan, Gemma Frisius, Ramus, Clavius, and diverse more modern
Artists, among whom I more especially take notice of that Ingenious Scot the
Lord Napier,

Who invented the Logarithmes, which is a way of computing by artificial
Numbers, and avoiding the taedium of Multiplication and Division. For by this
Method all those Operations are performed by Addition and Substraction, which
in natural Numbers were to be done those longer ways. This Invention is of
great use in Astronomical Calculations, and it may be applied also to other
Accounts. Besides this, the same Learned Lord found an easy, certain, and
compendious way of Accounting by Sticks, called Rabdology; as also Computation
by Napier's Bones: Both these have been brought to greater perfection by
others, since their first Discovery; particularly by Vrsinus and Kepler.

To them I add the Decimal Arithmetic, which avoids the tedious way of
computing by Vulgar Fractions in ordinary Accounts, and Sexagenaries in
Astronomy; exceedingly and lately improved by our famous Oughtred, and Dr.
Wallis a Member of the ROYAL SOCIETY. (If I should here subjoyn the Helps this
Art has had from the Works and Endeavors of Anatolius, Barlaam, Maximus
Palanudes, Nemorarius, Florentinus Bredonus, Pisanus, Orentius; and in this
Age, from those of Adrianus Romanus, Henischius, Cataldus, Malapartius,
Keplerus, Briggius, Crugerus, and a vast number reckoned up by Vossius, I
should be tedious on this Head; and therefore I pass lightly over it, and
proceed,

(II.) To ALGEBRA, of universal use in all the Mathematical Sciences, in Common
Accounts, in Astronomy, in taking Distances and Altitudes, in measuring plain
and solid Bodies, and other useful Operations. The first noted Author in this
Method was Diophantus, who lived long since the Idol of Disputers. He, and
those other Ancients that used it, performed their Algebraical Operations by
Signs and Characters suited to the several Numbers, and powers of Numbers, which
they had occasion to use in solving Problems: But the later Mathematicians have
found a far more neat and easy way, viz. by the Letters of the Alphabet, by
which we can solve many Problemes that were too hard for the Ancients, as far
as can be discovered by any of their remaining Works. For there were many
affected Aequations (as they call them) that did not equally ascend in the
Scale of Powers, that could not be solved by the elder Methods; whereas the
acute Vieta, a Mathematician of this last Age, affirms, he could resolve any
Problem by his own Improvements. Besides him, our excellent Oughtred another,
lately mentioned, did much in this way. But the inimitable Des Carts has
vastly outdone both former and later Times, and carried Algebra to that
height, that some considering men think Humane Wit cannot advance it further. I
will not say so much: but no doubt he has performed in it things deserving
vast acknowledgment, of which you shall hear more anon. And from hence I step,

(III.) To the Consideration of GEOMETRY, which is so fundamentally useful a
Science, that without it we cannot in any good degree understand the Artifice
of the Omniscient Architect in the composure of the great World, and our
selves. (...), was the excellent saying of Plato; and the Universe must be
known by the Art whereby it was made. So that what Galileo notes of Aristotle,
is a great sign of his defects, viz. That he reprehended his Venerable Master
for his Geometrical Sublimities, accusing him that he receded from the solid
Methods of Philosophizing, through his too much indulging that Study; Which is
so far from being likely, that Geometry is little less than absolutely
necessary to solid and real Philosophy; and as I intimated, it is next to
impossible to be a judicious and accurate Philosopher, and want it. Upon which
account, Plato admitted none to his School, but those that were acquainted with
that Science: Which practice the mentioned excellent Modern, notes to be
directly opposite to the Peripatetick genius; and some he knew great men of
that way, dehorted their Disciples from it; which he introduces one applauding
as a wise Counsel, since Geometry would detect and shame the futilities of that
National way. But not to take too large a compass, this is certain, That
Geometry is a most useful and proper help in the affairs of Philophy and Life.
It Is almost as clear from those former intimations, that Aristotle was not much
inclined that way; and we know that his late Sectators, have very seldom
applied themselves to Geometrical Disquisitions.

The Result of which is, We must expect the Advantages of this Science, from
the declining of his and their Empire; and I need not say expect it, they are
both in present view. And if after this you require accounts of the
Improvements Geometry has received, since the foundation of that Tyranny by
the Man of STAGYRA, I shall offer you the best I have; and though I am
conscious that they will be scant and defective, yet I hope sufficient for my
present purpose.

I note then from the celebrated Vossius, That Euclide was the first that
brought Geometry into a Method, and more accurately demonstrated those
Principles, which before were scattered among the Greeks and Egyptians, and
not so cogently or carefully proved. And Proclus reckons this Famous man as the
Compiler and Demonstrator, not as the Inventor of the Elements; and two of
these Books ( viz. 14. and 15.) are ascribed to Apollonius Pergaeus, who was
his nearest Successor in Fame for Mathematical Abilities. This Geometrician
improved the Science by four Books of Conicks, published of old; and three more
have been lately (in the year 1661.) translated out of an Arabic Manuscript in
the Duke of Tuscany's Library, and are now abroad. This Manuscript Jacob Golius
procured out of the East. Besides which, this Magnus Geometra, as he was
called, illustrated Euclide by his Learned Commentary upon him. But Archimedes
of Syracuse, was a Person of the greatest renown for Geometrical and Mechanical
Performances; concerning which, Polybius, Valerius, Plutarch, Livy, and others,
have recorded prodigious things. This great Wit carried Geometry from general
and idle Speculation, to the use and benefit of Mankind; whereas before him it
was an ancient and perverse Opinion, That this Knowledge ought not to be
brought down to vulgar Service, but kept up in abstractive Contemplations: upon
which score Archytas and Eudoxus, those great Geometricians before Euclide,
were scared from the Mechanical and Organical Methods, to the great hindrance
of beneficial Improvements in that way. But the excellent Syracusian
understood, that this Science is not debased, but promoted and advanced by such
Accommodations; and evinced the usefulness and excellency of Geometry, in his
admirable Paradox proposed before King Hieron (Datis viribus datum pondus
tollere) [(...)] This Mathematician flourished 160 years after the time of
Aristotle, who has the name of the most ancient that writ in Mechanics,
though that Book of his be not mentioned either by Archimedes, Athenaeus, Hero,
or Pappus, Mechanical Authors; and Cardan and Patricius affirm that Work to be
none of Aristotle's: Whose ever it was, the Performance has praise from the
Learned, as explaining the general Causes of Mechanical Geometry. But
Archimedes was more practical and particular: And though Plutarch in the Life
of Marcellus affirms he writ nothing; yet the contrary is abundantly proved by
Gerard Vossius, who has shown that the Books extant under his Name, that
contain so many great Maxims of Mechanics, are genuine; and both Strabo and
Pappus mention them as his. The Design of Archimedes, of combining Mechanism
and Geometrick Theory, was after happily promoted by Hero the Elder of
Alexandria, who invented those ingenuous Automata, that move by Air and Wyres;
concerning which he writ a Book that was Translated by Fredericus Commandinus,
as also he did another De Machinis Bellicis, by which he well improved
Geometrick Mechanics: And Pappus particularly celebrates his exactness in
solving the Deliaick Problem, De Cubo duplicando, acknowledging that he took
most of his own Accounts about that matter, from that exquisite Man. Next him,
I mention Theodosius of Tripoli, who very much improved Geometry by his three
Books De Figur a Sphaerica, which afforded great assistance to Ptolomy, Pappus,
Proclus, and Theon, in their Mathematical Endeavors. Menelaus also, who lived
in Trajan's time, contributed very much to the perfecting the Doctrine of
Sphaericks, as Vitellio well knew, who was famous for those things which he
borrowed from that Author. The Performances also of Ctesibius, who lived in the
time of Ptolomaeus Physcon, are much celebrated by Pliny. He invented many
things in Hydraulicks, and according to Athenaeus, he was the first Contriver
of Musical Organs. These were Mechanical: but Geminus Rhodius the Master of
Proclus Lycius, applied Logic to Geometry, out of particular Elements
abstracting Vniversals. He demonstrated, That there are only Three similar
Species of all Lines, viz. Right, Circular, and Cylindrical: And Perseus
following his steps, enriched Geometry with the Invention of three kinds of
Crooked Lines, the Parabole, Hyperbole, and Elipsis; for which he expressed his
extatick joy, as Thales, Pythagoras, and Archimedes did upon like occasions, in
a Sacrifice to the Gods. But to be briefer, Pappus improved the Sphoericks;
Theon more methodically digested the Elements of Euclide; Serenus Antinsensis
discovered, that the Section of a right Cylindre, is the same with the Elipsis
of a right Cone; Copernicus improved the Doctrine of Triangles; Ramus corrected
and supplied Euclide, where his Principles were defective; Maurolicus writ
first of Secant Lines; Clavius much illustrated and promoted the Doctrine of
Tangents, Secants, Triangles, Right Lines, and Sphaericks, besides what he did
in his Comment upon Euclide. I might mention with These, the worthy
Performances of Cusanus, Pitiscus, Snellius, Ambrosius Rhodius, Kepler,
Franciscus a Schoten, and others, who contributed very eminently to the
perfections and advancements of Geometry, and were late men.

But none have done in it like the excellent Persons whom I reserve for my last
mention; The chief are Vieta, Des Carts, and Dr. Wallis.

CHAP. IV. Improvements in Geometry by Des Carts, Vieta, and Dr. Wallis.
IN order to my giving an account of some of their Performances, I must
premise, That no great things can be done in Geometry, without the Analytical
Method; And though some Learned Men conceive the Ancients were acquainted with
this way of resolving Problems, yet their skill in it went no higher than the
Quadratick Order of Aequations, which They demonstrated by Circles and Right
Lines, which They called Loca plana: but they were able to do nothing in the
Cubical Aequations, or any of the Superior Orders; though they endeavored to
cover their defects in this Art, by recourse ad Locos Solidos, (viz. Conick
Sections) and Lineares, as they called them, such as the Helix, Conchoeides,
and those of like nature. But those tortous and curved Lines being described
Mechanically by Compound Motions, the Problems resolved by them are performed
Organically by the hand and eye, not Geometrically.

This was the State of the Analytick Art, as long as Learning flourished in
Greece; when That was subdued by the Barbarians, their Learning with their
Country passed to the Arabians, and also to the Persians, as we have it from
Hottinger and Bullialdus: But these Successors of the Greeks did not advance
their Learning beyond the imperfect Stature in which it was delivered to them.
In that condition it remained till Cardan and Tartaglia, who made some small
addition toward the perfection of it; For they gave some Rules for solving
Cubical Aequations, which were certain in some cases, but not in all. Their
Invention some other Mathematical men endeavored to advance, laying down Rules
for solving some Cubick and Biquadratick Aequations; but could never find an
universal way, that might reach all such: Yea indeed they utterly despaired,
and held it impossible. At length appears Vieta, who by inventing the Method of
Extracting Roots in the most numerous Aequations, and by converting the Signs
used by the Ancients into Letters, brought Algebra to a very great perfection,
as I have noted above; and by enriching the Analytical Art, by the Accessions
of his Exegetice Numerosa, and Logistice Speciosa, he has contributed infinite
helps to Geometry. After him, diverse other Learned men polisht and adorned his
Discourses; among whom I mention chiefly our Countrymen Harriot and Oughtred,
who altered Vieta's Notes to advantage, and invented Canons to direct our
Operations in the Extracting of Roots, both in pure and adsected Aequations.

But after these had thus improved the Analytick Art, and well assisted
Geometry by it, Des Carts appears, one of the greatest wits that ever the Sun
saw, a Person too great for praise, designed by Heaven for the Instruction of
the Learned World, and who no doubt will be the Object of its admiration, as
long as there is any Learning in it. This wonderful man in a few Pages, opens a
way to mighty Performances: He shows us how all the Problems of Geometry may be
brought to such terms, that we shall need nothing to the Construction and
Demonstration of them, but the knowledge of the length of certain right Lines;
and that, as all the Operations of Arithmetic are performed by Addition,
Substraction, Multiplication, Division, and Extraction of Roots (which is a
species of Division) So in Geometry, for the preparation of Lines that they may
be known, nothing needs more to be done, than that others be added to them, or
subtracted from them; or if the Line be single (which that it may be the
better referred to Numbers, may be called Unity) and beside that, two other
Lines, that a Fourth be found which shall have the same proportion to one of
these Lines, that the other has to Unity, which is the same with
Multiplication; or else, that by them a Fourth be found, which may have the
same proportion to one of them, which Unity has to the other, which is the
same with Division; or lastly, That there be found between Unity, and some
other Right Line, two or more mean Proportionals, which is the same thing with
the Extraction of Quadratick and Cubick Roots. And that he may justify the
introducing of Terms Arithmetical into Geometry, he observes, That the avoiding
thereof was an occasion of much perplexity and obscurity in the Geometry of the
Ancients; of which he could give no other conjecture, but because they did not
sufficiently understand the affinity and cognation of those Sciences. But if I
should intend an exact History of all his Performances, I must transcribe Him;
for he has said so much in little, that it is impossible to abridge those his
close Composures. I shall therefore only hint some principal things, referring
you to his Writings for the rest.

And I take notice first, That he has proposed an Universal Method for the
Solution of all Problems; not only those propounded in Right Lines, Plains, and
Solids: but also all that are made in Angles, a thing of most general Service
in all parts of Mathematics. By It he resolves the famous Proposition in
Pappus, which was too hard for Euclide, Apollonius, and all the Ancients. He
discourses the nature of crooked Lines, and shows which are fit to be used in
Geometrical Demonstrations; Gives Rules for the place where to apply our selves
in the Demonstration of any Problem; and tells us, that a Problem after it is
brought to an Aequation, and reduced to its least terms, and the unknown
Quantity is Quadratick, or of two dimensions, that then it may be demonstrated
by a Right Lines and Circles: but if the Aequation, after it is reduced to its
least Terms, leave the unknown Quantity, Cubick or Biquadratick, it must be
demonstrated by some one of the Conick Sections. Whereas again, if after the
Aequation reduced, the unknown Quantity remain of five or six Dimensions, or
more, in infinitum, then the Demonstration must be performed by Lines more and
more compound, according to the degree of Composition in the unknown Quantity
of the Aequation. But because the way by Lines is perplexed and tedious, he
gives Rules to reduce Aequations of many Dimensions, to fewer. He shows how to
fill up defects, when any Terms are wanting in the Aequation; how to convert
the false Roots into true, to avoid Fractions, and to lessen Aequations. He
has demonstrated by a Circle and Parabole the famous Problems so much agitated
among the Ancients, viz. the Trisection of an Angle, and the finding two mean
Proportionals between two Lines given, with more brevity and expedition than
any that went before him. And this, Sir, shall suffice by way of intimation,
concerning that Prince of Mathematicians and Philosophers.

Since him, others have improved his Method. Schotenius has demonstrated the
Loca Plana of Apollonius: Hadderius has added Inventions of use and pleasant
speculation in his Tract of Reduction of Aequations. Florimundus de Beaune has
writ ingenious and profitable things de Natura and Limitibus Aequationum. But
'twould be endless to attempt full Accounts of the Modern Advancements of this
Science, or indeed those accessions of growth it has had since Vieta. And
whoever should go about it, must reckon to begin anew as soon as he has
finished what he intended, since Geometry is improving daily.

I shall therefore add no more here, but only do right to an excellent Person
of our own Nation, Dr. John Wallis, a Member of the ROYAL SOCIETY, to whom
Geometry is exceedingly indebted for his rare Discoveries in that Science.
Particularly, he has propunded a Method for the measuring of all kind of
crooked Lines, which is highly ingenious; and put an end to all future Attempts
about Squaring the Circle, which has puzzled and befooled so many
Mathematicians, that have spent their thoughts and time about it. This he has
brought to effect as near as it can be done, and showed the exact performance
by rational Numbers impossible; He has proposed excellent ways for the
measuring all kinds of Plains, and all multangular and solid Bodies. But it is
time now to proceed to the consideration of the next Mathematical Science, viz.

CHAP. V. The late Improvements of Astronomy.
(4.) ASTRONOMY, one of the grandest and most magnifique of all those that lie
within the compass of Natural Inquiry. I shall not look back to its beginning
among the Chaldaeans, Egyptians, and eldest Graecians, in which Times it was
but rude and imperfect, in comparison to its modern Advancements. For the great
Men among the Greeks are taken much notice of, but for very ordinary and trite
things in this Science: As Anaximander Milesius, for teaching, That the Earth
was Globous, and the Center of the World not bigger than the Sun: Anaximines
for affirming, That the Moon shone but with a borrowed Light; That the Sun and
It were Eclipsed by the Earths interposal; and, That the Stars move round our
Globe: And Pythagor as was the first that noted the obliquity of the Ecliptic.
This Philosopher indeed was a Person of a vast reach, and said things in
Astronomy very agreeable to late Discoveries: But the Disputers Omniscient
Aristotle made very odd Schemes, not at all corresponding with the Phenomenon
of the Heavens, as appears from his Hypotheses of Solid Orbs, Epicycles,
Excentricks, Intelligences, and such other ill-contrived Phancies. Besides
which, if I should descend to consider his now palpable Mistakes about the
nature of Comets, the Galaxy, the Sphere of Fire under the Moon, and numerous
other such, I should oblige my self to a large ramble. Wherefore to be as close
as may be in these Notes, I observe, That after Aristotle, Astronomy was
cultivated and improved by Theophrastus, Aratus, Aristarchus Samius,
Archimedes, Geminus, Menelaus, Theon, Hipparchus, Claudius Ptolomaeus, and
infinite others among the Greeks,

Among later Authors, considerable things have been done in this way by both
Latins and Arabians: To omit the latter, I shall give you some particular
Instances of the other.

Johannes de Sacro Bosco ingeniously and methodically explained the Doctrine of
the Sphere. Thebit first found the Motion of Trepidation. Regiomontanus
published the first Ephemerides, and did excellent things in his Theoricks of
the Planets. Wernerus stated the greatest Declination of the Sun. Albertus
Pighius directed the way to find Aequinoxes and Solstices. Baersius framed
perpetual Tables of the Longitudes and Latitudes of the Planets. Copernicus
restored the Hypothesis of Pythagoras and Philolaus, and gave far more neat and
consistent Accounts of the Phenomenon. Ioachimus made Ephemerides according to
the Copernican Doctrine. Clavius invented a most useful demonstrative
Astrolabe, and writ an exquisite Comment upon Sacro Bosco.

But I conclude the last Century with the Noble Ticho Brahe, who performed the
glorious Work of restoring the Fixed Stars to their true places, the
assignation of which before him, was rather by guess, than any competent Rules;
and the mistakes here, were the very root and foundation of most Errors in
Astronomy. For which reason it was, that Copernicus left that earnest advice to
his Scholar Ioachimus, that he should apply himself to the restitution of the
Fixed Stars; for till this were done, there could be no hopes of attaining to
the true places of the Planets, nor doing any thing to purpose in the whole
Science. This engaged the Noble Tycho to this Enterprise, and he made it the
Foundation of all the rest. The Method he used is described by Gassendus. By
the help of this noble Performance he reformed the elder Astronomical Tables,
both the Ptolomaick and Copernican. And from his Observations of the new Star
of 1572, and six others in his time, he asserted Comets into their place among
Heavenly Bodies, shattering all the Solid Orbs to pieces; And he has done it
with such clear conviction, that even the Jesuits, whose thraldom to the Church
of Rome, deters them from closing with the Motion of Earth, confess a necessity
of repairing to some other Hypothesis than that of Ptolomy and Aristotle. I
might add to this, That this generous Nobleman invented and framed such
excellent Astronomical Instruments, as were by vast odds for use and
convenience far beyond any of former times: Himself has a Treatise concerning
them. He has also made exquisite Tables of the difference that Refractions
make in the appearance of the Stars, and done more great things for
Astronomical Improvement, than many Ages that were before him; for which reason
I could not pardon my self in a curt mention of so glorious an Advancer of this
Science.

The next Age after him, which is ours, has made excellent use of his
Discoveries, and those of his Elder, the famed Copernicus; and raised Astronomy
to the noblest height and perfection that ever yet it had among men. It would
take up a Volume to describe, as one ought, all the particular Discoveries: But
my Design will permit but a short mention. Therefore briefly, I begin with
Galilaeo, the reputed Author of the famous Telescope; but indeed the glory of
the first Invention of that excellent Tube, belongs to Iacobus Metius of
Amsterdam: but 'twas improved by the noble Galilaeo, and he first applied it to
the Stars; by which incomparable Advantage, he discovered the Nature of the
Galaxy, the 21 New Stars that compose the Nebulosa in the head of Orion, the 36
that conspire to that other in Cancer, the Ansulae Saturni, the Asseclae of
Jupiters, of whose Motions he composed an Ephemeris. By these Lunulae it is
thought that Jupiters distance from the Earth may be determined, as also the
distance of Meridians, which would be a thing of vast use, since this has
always been measured by Lunar Eclipses, that happen but once or twice a year;
whereas opportunities of Calculating by the occultations of these new Planets
will be frequent, they recurring about 480 times in the year. Besides, to
hasten off, Galilaeo discovered the strange Phases of Saturn, on while oblong,
and then round; the increment and decrement of Venus, like the Moon; the Spots
in the Sun, and its Revolution upon its own Axis; the Moons libration,
collected from the various position of its Maculae; and diverse other wonderful
and useful Rarities, that were strangers to all Antiquity. Shortly after
Galilaeo, appears Christopherus Scheiner, who by greater Telescopes viewed the
Sun with a curled and unequal Superficies, and in or near the Horizon of an
Elliptical figure. He found also, That that supposed uniform Globe of Light,
was of a different complexion in its several parts; some brighter than the main
Body, as the Faculae; others darker, as the Maculae. He made more than 2000
Observations of them, and described their Number, Magnitude, Situation, Figure,
and Revolutions. But I must contract. Kepler is next, who first proposed the
Elliptical Hypothesis, made very accurate and luciferous Observations about the
Motions of Mars, and writ an Epitome of the Copernican Astronomy, in the
clearest and most perspicuous Method, containing the Discoveries of others, and
diverse considerable ones of his own; not to mention his Ephemerides, and Book
about Comets. Ant. Maria Shirlaeus, with a new Telescope of a larger diameter
than ordinary, discovered five other Stars more remote from Jupiter than his
Satellites, and a kind of vapid Atmosphere about that Planet. Franciscus
Fontana observed the same Star, with nine others never leaving it more than ten
of its diameters; and in 1636. and 1643. with 8. Anno 1645. with 5, 1646. with
7. on other days with 6. varying their distances one to another, and not to be
seen about Mars nor Saturn, nor without extending the Telescope more than was
fitting for Fixed Stars. These Satellites are observed to suffer a defection of
their Light, when Jupiter interposeth between them and the Sun; whence it is
inferred, That they have their Light from It, and that Jupiter has none of his
own to impart to them. But to pass on lightly, Longomontanus described the
World according to all the Hypotheses of Ptolomy, Copernicus, and Ticho Brahe.
Iansonius Blaeu made far more perfect and exact Celestial Globes than any were
extant before. Gassendus writ judiciously of the Stars about Jupiter, and of
Mercury in the Sun, and gave the World most excellent Astronomical
Institutions. Ismael Bullialdus enriched the Science with a new Method to find
and easily compute the Paralaxes of Solar Ellipses. Hevelius drew a Graphical
Description of the Moon in all its Phases, as it appeared in the Telescope,
accurately delineating its Spots, and showing the inequality and mountanous
protuberances of its surface, which lends light to a vast Theory. Both these
last named are Fellows of the ROYAL SOCIETY. Of the Selenography of Hevelius,
Ricciolus made an Improvement, both as to the Number, Figure, Magnitude, Site,
Color of the Maculae, and the Eminencies, Profundities, and Asperities of the
Lunar Superficies. Martinus Hortensius found Mercury to have variety of Phases,
like the Moon; as, now Horned, then Gibbous, and at other times Round. But I
conclude this Account with the most Worthy and Learned Prelate Dr. Seth Ward,
now Lord Bishop of Sarum, who among his other excellent Performances in
Astronomy, has demonstratively proved the Elliptical Hypothesis, which is the
most Plain and simple, and performed by fewer Operations than either of the
other. This indeed was first discoursed of by Kepler, advanced by Bullialdus,
but demonstrated by this accomplished and Venerable Bishop, an Honorable
Member of the ROYAL SOCIETY.

CHAP. VI. Improvements of Optics and Geography.
I Come next (5.) To consider the OPTICS, whose Improvements are of great
importance in the matters of general Philosophy and humane Life; since the
^^formations of Sense are the ground of ^oth, and this Science rectifies and
helps the ^oblest of them. Concerning it, there was once a Book of Aristotle's
extant, according to Laertius: but it has submitted to Time. Since him, this
Science has been cultivated by Euclide, and the celebrated Archimedes, who is
said to have done strange things by it, upon the Ships of Marcellus: As
Proclus, who improved the Archimedean Artifices, destroyed a Fleet by his
Specula Vstoria, that besieged Constantinople. Ptolomy of Alexandria made
considerable Improvements of Optics; and Alhazenus the Arabian, is famous for
what he did in It. From these, Vitellio drew his, and advanced the Science by
his own Wit, and their Helps. Stevinus corrected Euclide, Achazen, and
Vitellio, in some fundamental Propositions that were mistakes; and in their
room substituted considerable Inventions of his own. Roger Bacon our famed
Countryman, whom Picus Mirandula calls the Phoenix of his Age, and Vossius, one
Learned to a miracle, writ acutely of Optics. He was accused of Magic to Pope
Clement iv. and thereupon imprisoned: But the Accusation was founded on nothing
but his skill in Mathematics, and the ignorance of his Accusers. After these,
the Dioptricks were improved by Kepler, Gassendus, Mersennus, and the noble and
incomparable Des Carts, who has said the most clear, useful, and improvable
things about it, that ever were extant on the Subject. But nothing has so much
advanced the Science, as the invention of the Telescope by Metius; and that
other of the Microscope, concerning which I have to say in the following
Instances. I pass therefore to the last I shall mention in the Mathematics,
which is,

(VI.) GEOGRAPHY. In this the Ancients were exceedingly defective. And
Aristotle knew the World, by the same figure his Scholar conquered it. It Is
noted by the ingenious Varenius, that the most general and necessary things in
this Science were then unknown; as, The Habitableness of the torrid Zone; The
flux and reflux of the Sea; The diversity of Winds; The Polar property of the
Magnet; The true dimension of the Earth. They wanted Descriptions of remote
Countries, concerning which both the Greeks and Romans had very fabulous
Relations. They knew not that the Earth was encompassed by the Sea, and might
be Sailed round. They were totally ignorant of America, and both the North and
South parts of this Hemisphere; yea, and understood very little of the remoter
places of their own Asia. Iapan, the Iava's the Philippicks, and Borneo, were
either not at all known, or exceeding imperfectly of old: But all these are
familiar to the latter Times. Mexico and Peru, and the vast Regions of those
mighty Empires, with the many Isles of the Great Sea are disclosed. The frozen
North, the torrid Line, and formerly unknown South, are visited, and by their
numerous Inhabitants found not to be so inhospitable and unkind to men, as
Antiquity believed. The Earth has been rounded by Magellan, Drake, and
Candish. The great Motion of the Sea is vulgar, and its varieties inquiring
every day: The diversities of Winds stated, and better understood: The Treasure
of hidden Virtues in the Loadstone, found and used. The Spicy Islands of the
East, as also those of the remote South and North, frequented, and the
knowledge of that People and those Countries transmitted to us, with their
Riches; The most distant being Parts Traveled and Described. Our Navigation is
far greater, our Commerce is more general, our Charts more exact, our Globes
more accurate, our Travels more remote, our Reports more intelligent and
Sincere; and consequently, our Geography far more perfect, than it was in the
elder Times of Polybius and Possidonius, yea than in those of Ptolomy, Strabo,
and Pomponius Mela, who lived among the Caesar's. And if It was so short in the
flourishing Times of the Roman Empire, how was it before, in the days of
Aristotle and the Graecians? We have an Instance of it in the Great Macedonian,
who thought the bounds of his Conquests to be the end of the World; when there
were Nations enough beyond them, to have eaten up the Conqueror, with his proud
and triumphant Armies. So that here also Modern Improvements have been great;
and you will think so, if you compare the Geographical Performances of Gemma
Frisius, Mercator, Ortelius, Stevinus, Bertius, and Guil. Blaeu, with the best
Remains of the most celebrated Geographers of the more ancient Ages.

CHAP. VII. That Useful Knowledge is to be aided by Instruments. Modern
Instances of such. Of the Telescope, Microscope, and Thermometer.
THus, Sir, I have touched upon some of the Improvements of the ARTS that
search into the recesses and intrigues of Nature, with which latter Ages have
assisted Philosophical Inquiries. And in these I see I have struck farther than
I was aware, into the account of those things also which lead us to the grosser
Phenomenon; and my Remarques about Geography are all of that nature. However I
shall not alter my Method; but after I have discoursed the INSTRVMENTS I
mentioned for Useful Knowledge, I shall consider somewhat of NATURAL HISTORY,
which reports the Appearances, and is fundamentally necessary to all the
Designs of Science. As for the INSTRVMENTS then, that are next, before I come
to give you the Notes I intend concerning them, I observe, That

The Philosophy that must signify either for Light or Use, must not be the
work of the Mind turned in upon it self, and only conversing with its own
Idaeas; but It must be raised from the Observations and Applications of Sense,
and take its Accounts from Things as they are in the sensible World. The
Illustrious Lord Bacon has noted this as the chief cause of the
unprofitableness of the former Methods of knowledge, viz. That they were but
the Exercises of the Mind, making Conclusions, and spinning out Notions from
its own native store; from which way of proceeding, nothing but Dispute and Air
could be expected. 'Twas the fault that Great Man found in the Ancients, That
they flew presently to general Propositions, without staying for a due
information from Particulars, and so gradually advancing to Axioms: Whereas the
Knowledge from which any thing is to be hoped, must be laid in Sense, and
raised not only from some few of its ordinary Informations; but Instances must
be aggregated, compared, and critically inspected, and examined singly and in
consort. In order to which Performances, our Senses must be aided; for of
themselves they are too narrow for the vastness of things, and too short for
deep Researches: They make us very defective and unaccurate Reports, and many
times very deceitful and fallacious ones. I say therefore, they must be
assisted with Instruments that may strengthen and rectisie their Operations.
And in these we have mighty advantages over Aristotle and the Ancients; so that
much greater things may well be expected from our Philosophy, than could ever
have been performed by theirs, though we should grant them all the superiority
of Wit and Understanding their fondest Admirers would ascribe to those Sages.
For a weak hand can move more weight by the help of Springs, Wheels, Leavers,
and other Mechanic Powers, than the strongest could do without them. And that
we really have these Advantages, must be shown by Instance: I mentioned Five
that are considerable to that purpose, which I took notice of among many
others; and they were the TELESCOPE, MICROSCOPE, THERMOMETER, BAROMETER, and
AIR-PVMP.

(I.) The TELESCOPE is the most excellent Invention that ever was, for
assisting the Eye in remote Discoveries. The distance of the Heavens is so
vast, that our unaided Senses can give us but extremely imperfect Informations
of that Upper World; And the Speculations that Antiquity has raised upon them,
have for the most part been very mean, and very false: But these excellent
Glasses bring the Stars nearer to us, and acquaint us better with the immense
Territories of Light: They give us more Phenomenon, and truer Accounts;
disperse the shadows and vain Images of the twilight of naked sense, and make
us a clearer and larger prospect. By these Advantages they enlarge our
Thoughts, and show us a more magnificent Representation of the Universe: So
that by them the Heavens are made more amply to declare the Glory of God, and
we are helped to nobler and better-grounded Theories. I have mentioned in my
Account of the Advance of Astronomy, some of the most remarkable Discoveries
that have been made by these Tubes, which exceedingly transcend all the
Imaginations of Elder Times; and by the further improvement of them, other
things may be disclosed as much beyond all ours. And the present Philosophers
are so far from desiring that Posterity should sit down contented with their
Discoveries and Hypotheses, that they are continually sollicitous for the
gaining more helps to themselves, and those that shall follow, for a further
progress into the knowledge of the Phenomenon, and more certain judgments upon
them. So that these Glasses are exceedingly bettered since their Invention by
Metius, and application to the Heavens by Galilaeo; and several ingenious
Members of the ROYAL SOCIETY are now busy about improving them to a greater
height. What success and informations we may expect from the Advancements of
this Instrument, it would perhaps appear Romantic and ridiculous to say; As,
no doubt, to have talked of the spots in the Sun, and vast inequalities in the
surface of the Moon, and those other Telescopical certainties, before the
Invention of that Glass, would have been thought fantastic and absurd. I dare
not therefore mention our greatest hopes: but this I adventure, That it is not
unlikely but Posterity may by those Tubes, when they are brought to higher
degrees of perfection, find a sure way to determine those mighty Questions,
Whether the Earth move? or, the Planets are inhabited? And who knows which
way the Conclusions may fall? And it is probable enough, that another thing will
at last be found out, in which this lower World is more immediately concerned,
by Telescopical Observations, which is, the most desired Invention of
Longitudes; upon which must needs ensue yet greater Improvements of Navigation,
and perhaps the Discovery of the North-west Passage, and the yet unknown South.
Whatever may be thought of these Expectations by Vulgar and narrow Minds, whose
Theories and Hopes are confined by their Senses, those that consider, that one
Experiment discovered to us the vast America, will not despair. But it is time
to pass from this, to a second Modern Aid, whereby our Sight is assisted, which
is,

(II.) The MICROSCOPE. The Secrets of Nature are not in the greater Masses, but
in those little Threads and Springs which are too subtle for the grosness of
our unhelp'd Senses; and by this Instrument our eyes are assisted to look into
the minutes and subtilties of things, to discern the otherwise invisible
Schematisms and Structures of Bodies, and have an advantage for the finding out
of Original Motions; To perceive the exactness and curiosity of Nature in all
its Composures; And from thence take sensible Evidence of the Art and Wisdom
that is in its Contrivance; To disclose the variety of living Creatures that
are shut up from our bare Senses, and open a kind of other World unto us, which
its littleness kept unknown. This Instrument has been exceedingly improved of
late, even to the magnifying of Objects a thousand times, and many useful
Theories have been found and explicated by the notices it has afforded; as
appears by the Microscopical Writings of those ingenious Mechanics, Members of
the ROYAL SOCIETY, Dr. Power and Mr. Hook.

But (III.) The THERMOMETER was another Instrument I mentioned, which discovers
all the small unperceivable variations in the heat or coldness of the Air, and
exhibits many rare and luciferous Phenomenon, which may help to better
Informations about those Qualities, than yet we have any. And as to this, I
observe with the great Verulam, and the other Bacon the Illustrious Mr. Boil,
That Heat and Cold are the right and left hand of Nature. The former is the
great Instrument of most of her Operations; and the other has its Interest.
And yet the Philosophy of Aristotle has neither done nor as much as attempted
anything toward the Discovery of their Natures; but contented it self with the
jejune, vulgar, and general description, That Heat is a Quality that gathers
together things of a like nature, and severs those that are unlike; and Cold
congregates both. But now if we will know any thing deeply in the business of
Rarefaction and Condensation, the Doctrine of Meteors, and other material
Affairs of Nature, other Accounts about these things must be endeavored; and
the bare informations of our Senses, are not exact enough for this purpose; for
their Reports in this kind are various and uncertain, according to the temper
and disposition of our Bodies, and several unobserved accidental mutations that
happen in them. This Instrument therefore has been invented to supply their
defects; and it gives far more constant and accurate, though perhaps not always
infallible Relations: but the justest are afforded by the Sealed Thermometer.
And besides the Uses of this Instrument I suggested, it will help very much in
framing the History of Weather, which may be applied to many excellent purposes
of philosophy, and services of Life.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Barometer and Air-Pump, and what Advantages we have and may
further expect from these Instruments.
But (IV.) The BAROMETER is another late Instrument very helpful to Useful
Knowledge. That there is gravity even in the Air it self, and that that Element
is only comparatively light, is now made evident and palpable by Experience,
though Aristotle and his Schools held a different Theory: And by the help of
Quicksilver in a Tube, the way is found to measure all the degrees of
Compression in the Atmosphere, and to estimate exactly any accession of weight,
which the Air receives from Winds, Clouds, or Vapors. To have said in Elder
Times, That Mankind should light upon an Invention whereby those Bodies might
be weighed, would certainly have appeared very wild and extravagant; and it
will be so accounted for some time yet, till men have been longer and are
better acquainted with this Instrument: For we have no reason to believe it
should have better luck than the Doctrine of the Circulation, the Theory of
Antipodes, and all great Discoveries in their first Proposals. It Is impossible
to persuade some of the Indians that live near the heats of the Line, that
there is any such thing as Ice in the World; but if you talk to them of Water
made hard and consistent by Cold, they will laugh at you as a notorious Romancer.
And those will appear as ridiculous among the most of us, who shall affirm it
possible to determine any thing of the weight of the Wind or Clouds. But
Experience turns the laugh upon the confident incredulity of the Scoffer; and
he that will not believe, needs no more for his conviction, than the labor of
a Trial. Let him then fill a Tube of Glass of some Feet in length, with
Quicksilver; and having sealed one end, let him stop the other with his Finger,
and immerge that which is so stopped into a Vessel of Mercury, the Tube being
perpendicularly erected; let him then substract his Finger, and he will
perceive the Quicksilver to descend from the Tube into the subjacent Vessel,
till it comes to 29 Digits or thereabouts; there, after some Vibrations, it
ordinarily rests. The reason that this remainder of the Mercury does not
descend also, is, because such a Mercurial Cylinder is just equiponderant to
one of the incumbent Atmosphere that leans upon the Quicksilver in the Vessel,
and so hinders a further descent. It is concluded therefore, That such a
Cylinder of the Air as presses upon the Mercury in the Vessel, is of equal
weight to about 29 Digits of that ponderous Body in the Tube. Thus it is when
the Air is in its ordinary temper: but Vapors, Winds, and Clouds alter the
Standard, so that the Quicksilver sometimes falls, sometimes rises in the
Glass, proportionably to the greater or less accession of gravity and
compression the Air has received from any of those alterations; and the Degree
of increase beyond the Standard, is the measure of the additional gravity. This
Experiment was the Invention of Torricellius, and used to little more purpose
at first, but to prove a Vacuum in Nature; and the deserted part of the Glass-
Tube was by many thought an absolute void, which I believe is a mistake: But it
has been since improved to this Design of weighing the degrees of compression
in the Air; a thing that may signify much, in giving us to understand its
temper in several Places, on Hills and in Caves, in diverse Regions and
Climates, which may tend to the disclosing many excellent Theories and helps in
humane Life. And the Air is so Catholic a Body, and has so great an influence
upon all others, and upon ours, that the advantage of such an Instrument, for
the better acquainting us with its nature, must needs be very considerable, and
a good Aid to general Philosophy. And who yet knows how far, and to what
Discoveries this Invention may be improved? The World a long time only rudely
star'd upon the Wonders of the Loadstone, before its use was found for the
advantage of Navigation; and it is not impossible, but that future Times may
derive so much benefit one way or other from this Invention, as may equal its
esteem to that of the Compass. The ROYAL SOCIETY, by their Care and Endeavors
in the using this Instrument, give us hopes, that they will let none of its
useful Applications to escape us. And I know not whether we may not mention it
as the first great benefit we have from it, that it was an occasion of the
Invention of Mr. Boyle's famous Pneumatick Engine: And this is the other
Instrument I noted, and called

(V.) The AIR-PVMP, concerning the usefulness of which, that excellent Person
himself has given the best Accounts, in his Discourse of Physico-Mechanical
Experiments made in that Engine, by which he has discovered and proved a rare
and luciferous Theory, viz. the Elastick Power or Spring of the Air, and by
this, has put to flight that Odd Fancy of the Fuga Vacui, and shown, that the
strange Effects which use to be ascribed to that general and obscure cause, do
arise from the native self-expansion of the Air. The extent of which Elastical
Expansion, he has found diverse ways to measure by his Engine, which also
discovers the influence the Air has on Flame, Smoke, and Fire; That it has
none in Operations Magnetical; That it is probably much interspersed in the
Pores of water, and comprest by the incumbent Atmosphere, even in those close
retreats; What operation the exsuction of the Air has on other Liquors, as
Oil, Wine, Spirit of Vinegar, Milk, Eggs, Spirit of Urine, Solution of Tartar,
and Spirit of Wine; The gravity and expansion of the Air under Water; The
interest the Air has in the vibrations of Pendulums, and what it has to do in
the propagation of Sounds; That Fumes and Vapors ascend by reason of the
gravity of the Ambient, and not from their own positive levity; The nature of
Suction, the cause of Filtration, and the rising of Water in Siphons; The
nature of Respiration, and the Lungs illustrated by trials made on several
kinds of Animals, and the interest the Air has in the Operations of Corrosive
Liquors. These, and many more such like beneficial Observations and
Discoveries, has that great man made by the help of his Pneumatick Engine; and
there is no doubt but more, and perhaps greater things will be disclosed by it,
when future ingenuity and diligence has improved and perfected this Invention.
(For what great thing was absolute and perfect in its first rise and
beginning?) And it is like this Instrument hereafter will be used and applied to
things yet unthought of, for the advancement of Knowledge and conveniences of
Life.

CHAP. IX. The Credit of Optick-Glasses vindicated, against a Disputing Man,
who is afraid to believe his Eyes against Aristotle.
THus, Sir, I have performed the first part of my promise, by showing what
Advantages the latter Ages, and particularly the ROYAL SOCIETY, have for deep
search into things both by ARTS and INSTRVMENTS newly invented or improved,
above those enjoyed by Aristotle and the Ancients.

To my Discourse about the Dioptrick Tubes, the Telescope and Microscope, the
Reverend Disputer replied, [ That our Glasses were all deceitful and
fallacious.] Which Answer minds me of the good Woman, who when her Husband
urged in an occasion of difference, [ I saw it, and shall I not believe my own
Eyes?] Replied briskly, Will you believe your own Eyes, before your own dear
Wife? And it seems this Gentleman thinks it unreasonable we should believe
ours, before his own dear Aristotle.

For an assurance of the credit of those Glasses, I told him he might try them
upon objects near, and easily visible by the unassisted sight; and if he made
the trial, he would find they altered the objects in nothing but their
proportions, which are represented larger for the advantage of vision in things
small and remote; and we have all the like reasons to distrust our Eyes, as
these Glasses (for their informations are the same in all things, but the
mentioned difference) and there is no man so much a fool, as not to make
allowances for that. Never was any yet so grossly deceived by the Microscope, as
to be persuaded that a Flea is as big as a Lobster; nor did the Telescope ever
make any one believe that the Moon was at the end of his Tube: But if the
former represents that little Creature as bristled and Ja^ar'd, and the other
makes the Planet mountanous and uneven, we have no reason to believe but that
their reports are sincere, though our unaided Senses are too gross to perceive
either the one or other; since, if the mentioned bristles and ja^ars are in the
Glass, and nor in the Animal, they would appear in like manner in all the small
Creatures which in the same light and position are looked on through the
Microscope: And if the ruggedness of surface were in it, and not in the Moon,
the same would be seen upon all other distant objects, that are viewed through
the other Optic Instrument. And if there be deceit in those Glasses, Seamen
had need beware how they trust them, since the Flags which appear to be those
of their Friends in the Perspective, may be really the Colors of their Enemies.

Upon these accounts, Sir, which afford plain and sensible evidence, I wondered
much at the Disputers strange suspicion, which had been scarce pardonable in a
vulgar head; and I know not what to call it in one, that would be thought a
Philosopher: But the wary man gave a reason, which made me as much wonder at
his Argument, as his Doubt. And to this attend Ye Philosophers of the ROYAL
COLLEGE, and prepare your selves to answer a Demonstration from Experience,
against your Glasses; Raise your Expectations for a wonderful, convictive
Experiment; Let the Mountains travel, and the Birth will follow. [ Take two
Spectacles (says the Experimental Sage) use them at the same time, and you
will not see so well as with one singly.] Therefore your Microscopes and
Telescopes are impostors. This man, Sir, is a Logician, and no doubt you
perceive so. O how I admire this rare faculty of arguing! How dull are our
Wits, to those subtle, Eagleey'd Schoolmen, who see Conclusions so far off,
through the more unerring Telescopes of their own piercing Understandings? Did
ever old man before make this use of his Spectacles? But to leave wondering,
let us endeavor to understand this Philosophy of Chue. How a man may see by
Spectacles, that Perspectives are deceitful. [ We can see better through one
pair, than two] says the deep Philosopher. Most sagely observed! The Argument
begins strongly: But in the Name of Aristotle, whence comes the Consequence?
Therefore Perspectives are fallacious. One Proposition for Sense,
And the other for Convenience.


This fits his purpose to discredit new Discoveries, it is no matter how it
follows. This Gentleman, you must know Sir, uses to have his word taken among
his admiring Neighbors, and so is not wont to be put to the trouble of
proving: but I was so unmannerly as to expect it, choosing rather to see with
mine own Eyes, than his infallible Spectacles. We can see better -- says the
Disputer. How does he know that? If Perspectives deceive us, though naked sense
witness for them, Why may not his single Spectacles be as deceitful as they?
These represent things bigger than they are to the unaided sight; and the
Philosophical Glasses do but the same thing, in a higher degree of magnifying
the Object. But we allow him the benefit of his single Spectacles, though he
will not be so courteous to our Glasses, and confess his Reverend Experiment of
the use of two, but are inquisitive about the Consequence. The Reason of which
certainly must be (if any be intended in it) that our Telescopes and
Microscopes have a Glass at each end, which the Man of Sapience thinks answers
the two pair of Spectacles, and therefore must render the Representation
deceitful. If this Philosopher had spared some of those thoughts to the
profitable Doctrine of Optics, which he has spent upon Genus and Species, we
had never heard of this Objection, which is as much a reason against the credit
of all perspective Glasses whatsoever, as the Philosophical ones he would
discredit. And without more Optics than those of natural Understanding, he
might, if it had pleased him, have known, that we see better through the two
Glasses in Perspectives, than any single one; because they are so fashioned and
ordered, that the visive rays are better gathered and united by them for the
advantage of sight: But in the two Spectacles, the case is contrary. These
things I suggested, and some others from the Dioptricks, in which this Sage
Person was pleased then to conceal his knowledge; and how great that was in
these matters, will appear by the Learned Problem he proposed at this period of
our Discourse, viz. [Why we cannot see with two pair of Spectacles, better than
with one singly? For, says the Man of Axioms, Vis unita fortior?] A pleasant
piece of Philosophy this; and I Will show the Disputer how strongly he infers
from his Maxim, by another Question like it. Why cannot he write better with
two Pens, than with a single one, since Vis unita fortior? When he has
answered this Quaere, he has resolved his own. I said in the Discourse, That
the reason he gave why one would expect it should be so, is the reason why it is
not; and this is plain enough to sense, from the confusion of Vision, which
shows, that the rays are not united after the way requisite for the aiding the
sight (as I just now intimated) and how that should be, I had here shown, but
that I am ashamed to add more in earnest about a grave foolery. And I confess,
Sir, I account these personal matters a kind of Digression from the main thing
I intended. To return therefore to my Subject.

CHAP. X. Our Advantages for Knowledge; from Modern Improvements of Natural
History.
HAving discourst the modern Help^ useful knowledge has for deep Research, I
am next

(2.) To recount what Aids it has received from our better acquaintance with
the Phenomenon. For this I must consider NATURAL HISTORY more particularly,
which is the Repository wherein these are lodged. How this may be compiled in
the best order, and to the best advantage, is most judiciously represented by
the Immortal Lord Bacon; and to show how highly It has been advanced in modern
Times, I need say little more, than to amass in a brief Recollection, some of
the Instances of newly-discovered Phenomenon, which are scattered under the
Heads of the Arts and Instruments I have discoursed, with the Addition of some
others: As,

In the HEAVENS, those of the Spots and Dinettick motion of the Sun, the
mountanous protuberances and shadows in the body of the Moon, about nineteen
Magnitudes more of Fixed Stars, the Lunulae of Jupiter, their mutual Eclipsing
one another, and its turning round upon its own Axis; the Ring about Saturn,
and its shadow upon the Body of that Star; the Phases of Venus, the increment
and decrement of Light among the Planets, the appearing and disaprearing of
Fixed Stars, the Altitude of Comets, and nature of the Via Lactea. By these
Discoveries, and more such, the History of the Heavens has been rectified and
augmented by the Modern Advancers of Astronomy, whom in their place I have
cited. In the AIR Its Spring, the more ^ccurate History and Nature of Winds and
Meteors, and the probable height of the Atmosphere, have been added by the Lord
Bacon, Des Carts, Mr. Boil, and others. In the EARTH, New Lands by Columbus,
Magellan, and the rest of the Discoverers; and in these, new Plants, new
Fruits, new Animals, new Minerals, and a kind of other World of Nature, from
which this is supplied with numerous conveniences of Life, and many thousand
Families of our own little one are continually fed and maintained. In the
WATERS, the great Motion of the Sea, unknown in elder Times, and the particular
Laws of flux and reflux in many places, are discovered. The History of BATHES
augmented by Savonarola, Baccius, and Blanthellus; of METALS by Agricola; and
the whole SVBTERRANEOUS WORLD described by the universally Learned Kircher. The
History of PLANTS much improved by Matthiolus, Ruellius, Bauhinus, and Gerard,
besides the late Account of English Vegitables published by Dr. Merret, a
worthy Member of the ROYAL SOCIETY. And another excellent Virtuoso of the same
Assembly, Mr. John Evelyn, has very considerably advanced the History of Fruit
and Forest-Trees, by his Sylva and Pomona; and greater things are expected from
his Preparations for Elysium Britannicum, a noble Design now under his hands:
And certainly the inquisitive World is much indebted to this generous Gentleman
for his very ingenious Performances in this kind, as also for those others of
Sculpture, Picture, Architecture, and the like practical, useful things with
which he has enriched it. The History of ANIMALS has been much enlarged by
Gesner, Rondeletius, Aldrovandus, and more accurately inquired into by the
Micrographers: And the late Travelers, who have given us Accounts of those
remote parts of the Earth, that have been less known to these, have described
great variety of Living Creatures, very different from the Animals of the
nearer Regions; among whom the ingenious Author of the History of the Caribbies
deserves to be mentioned as an Instance. In our own BODIES Natural History has
found a rich heap of Materials in the abovementioned Particulars of the Venae
Lacteae, the Vasa Lymphatica, the Valves and Sinus of the Veins, the several
new Passages and ^landules, the Ductus Chyliferus, the Ori^ination of the
Nerves, the Circulation of ^he Blood, and the rest. And all the main Heads of
Natural History have received ^ids and increase from the famous Verulam, who
led the way to substantial Wisdom, and has given most excellent Directions for
the Method of such an HISTORY of NATURE.

CHAP. XI. The Advantages of late Ages for spreading and communicating
Knowledge. Three great Instances of it, in Printing, the Compass, and the Royal
Society.
THus, Sir, I have dispatched the FIRST Part of my Method proposed in the
beginning; but stand yet engaged for the other, which is to show,

(II.) That the later Ages since Aristotle have had great advantages of him, in
respect of Opportunities and Helps for the spreading and communicating
Knowledge, and thereby of improving and enlarging it And methinks the very
mention of Age^ and Aristotle, by way of comparison in this case, has so much
of absurdity in it, tha^ I am almost ashamed to proceed further in the proof of
such a Proposition as this, viz. That the Advantages of Mankind in the
Succession of two thousand years, are more than those of a single Person who
lived but sixty three. Certainly those that have the fondness to think the
contrary, have a Faith that exceeds all the Extravagancies of Fiction: For
never any Romance was so absurdly vain, as to feign an Hero whose single
strength and valor exceeded Armies of other Mortals. And it is not less absurd
to suppose the Wit of one man, and he an Idolater and an Heathen, to transcend
the joint Understandings of all the wiser World, though assisted by his
Knowledge, the Light of Christianity, and the aggregated Informations and
Endeavors of many Learned Ages: But my Reverend Opposite had this belief, and
has thereby outdone the largest excesses of Poetry. For his sake therefore,
and those others that are of this more than hyperbolical Faith, I add the
SECOND Part of my proposed Method, though what I have said already upon the
First, is, I judge, more than sufficient for that purpose; And yet I think it
not impertinent to subjoyn those other Considerations, both because they will
further discover the unreasonable vanity of the doting Spirits, that oppose
all generous Endeavors for the advance and improvement of Knowledge; and
(which may signify more) will excite and encourage Hopes of Modern Attempts:
and Hope is the fuel of Activity and Endeavor.

I descend to demonstrate then by palpable and undeniable Instances, That we
have Advantages above Aristotle, and, which is much more, above all elder
Times, for mutual Communications, and impartments of our Notices, Observations,
Experiments, and Performances for the increase of Science. My Instances are
THREE, PRINTING, the COMPASS, and the ROYAL SOCIETY.

For the FIRST, PRINTING, It was, according to Polydore Vergil, the Invention
of John Cuthenberg of Mentz in Germany, though others give the honor to one
Fust of the same City, and some to Laurentius a Burger of Haerlem. But whoever
was the Author, this is agreed, That this excellent Art was first practiced
about the year 1440. and was utterly unknown i^ elder Times; at least in all
the parts of the World that are on this side the Kingdom o^ China, which they
say had it more early but it signifies not to our purpose. Now by reason of the
Ancients want of this Invention, Copies of excellent things could not be so
much dispersed, nor so well preserved either from the Corruptions of Tim^^ or
Design. The Charge of Books was very great, forgeries frequent, and mistakes o^
Transcribers numerous. They were quickly swept away out of those few Libraries
in which they were, by Fire and Violence, o^ spoiled by Dust and Rottenness.
And in the absence of this Art, 'twas easy enough for one Aristotle to destroy
the most considerable Remains of the Ancients, that the power of his great
Scholar put into his hands which, it is credibly reported of him, tha^ he did,
to procure more Fame for his own Performances: as also to conceal his thefts
and injurious dealings with those venerable Sages, whom he seems to take a
great delight to contradict and expose, as I have elsewhere proved. But now, by
this excellent Invention, the Knowledge that is lodged in Books, is put beyond
the danger of such Corruptions, Forgeries, or any fatal inconvenience. We
communicate upon easy ^terms at the remotest distance, converse with the
Wisemen that went before us, and se^^rely convey down our Conceptions to the
Ages that shall follow. So that by this means Knowledge is advantageously
spread and improved; especially since the Assistance modern Ingenuity has
brought us, in that other admirable Invention,

(2.) The COMPASS. How defective the Art of Navigation was in elder Times, when
they Sailed by the observation of the Stars, is easy to be imagined: For in
dark weather, when their Pleiades, Helice, and Cynosura were hidden from them
by the intervening Clouds, the Mari^ner was at a loss for his Guide, and
exposed to the casual conduct of the Winds and Tides. For which reason the
Ancients seldom or never durst venture into the Ocean, but steered along within
sight of the safer Shore. So that the Commerce and Communications of those Days
were very narrow; Their famed Travels in comparison were but domestic; and a
whole World was to them unknown. But it has been the happy privilege of later
Days to find the way to apply the wonderful Virtues of the Loadstone to
Navigation; and by the direction of the Compass we securely commit our selves
t^ the immense Ocean, and find our path i^ the vastest Wilderness of Waters. So
tha^ Commerce and Traffic is infinitely improved, the other half of the Globe
disclosed and that on this side the great Sea better understood. The Religions,
Laws, Customs and all the Rarities and Varieties of Art and Nature, which any
the most distant Clim^ knows and enjoys, are laid open and made common; and
thereby the History of Nature is wonderfully enlarged, and knowledge is both
propagated and improved.

Who it was that first discovered this excellent Mystery, is not certainly
known ^ But one Flavius Goia of Amalphis in the Kingdom of Naples, is said to
be the Author; and to have found this incomparable Rarity about 300 years ago.
It Is pity that one of the greatest Benefactors to mankind that ever was, should
lie hid in so neglected an obscurity; when the great Troublers of the World,
who have vexed it by the Wars of the Hand and of the Brain, have so dear and so
precious a Memory. For my part I think there is more acknowledgment due to the
name of this obscure Fellow, that has scarce any left, than to a thousand
Alexanders and Caesar's, or to ten times the number of Aristotle's. And he really
did more for the increase of Knowledge, and advantage of the World by this one
Experiment, than the numerous subtle Disputers that have lived ever since the
erection of the School of talking.

And methinks it may not be improper for me here to take notice of that other
great German Invention, that uses to be mentioned in the Company, viz. That of
GVNPOWDER and ARTILLERY, which has done its Service also for the help and
propagation of Knowledge, as you will perceive, when you shall consider; that
by the assistance of these terrible Engines of Death, the great Western Indies
were presently subdued, which likely had not been so easily effected by the
ancient and ordinary Methods of War. 'Twas this Thunder and Lightning, and the
invisible Instruments of Ruin, that destroyed the Courage of those numerous
and hardy People, took away the hearts of the strongest Resisters, and made
them an easy prey to the Conquering Invaders.

And now by the gaining that mighty Continent, and the numerous fruitful Isles
beyond the Atlantic, we have obtained a larger Field of Nature, and have
thereby an advantage for more Phenomenon, and more helps both for Knowledge and
for Life, which it is very like that future Ages will make better use of to such
purposes, than those hitherto have done; and that Science also may at last
travel into those parts, and enrich Peru with a more precious Treasure than
that of its golden Mines, is not improbable. And so these Engines of
Destruction, in a sense too are Instruments of Knowledge. Of the first Author
of this Experiment we know no more, but that he was a German Monk, who lighted
on it chance, when he was making some Chemical Trials with Nitre, near about
the time of the Invention of the Compass; but his Name and other Circumstances
are lost.

Now whoever considers, with the Noble Verulam, how much the state of things in
the World has been altered and advanced by these THREE EXPERIMENTS alone, will
conceive great hopes of Modern Experimental Attempts, from which greater
matters may be looked for, than those which were the Inventions of single
Endeavourers, or the results of Chance.

And of all the Combinations of Men that ever met for the Improvement of
Science, therewere never any whose Designs were ^etter laid, whose
Encouragements were greater, whose Abilities were more promising, or whose
Constitution was more judiciously or advantageously formed, than the ROYAL
SOCIETY.

CHAP. XII. Of the ROYAL SOCIETY. The Reasons of the Institution, and their
Designs. An Answer to the Question, What have they done?
THis Noble Institution, Sir, was the THIRD Advantage I mentioned, that the
Modern World has for the Communication and Increase of Knowledge. And just as
I am come to this Particular of my Method, I find I am happily prevented, and
see I need not say much about it; For their HISTORY, that is newly come abroad,
gives so full and so accurate an Account of them and their Designs, that
perhaps it may be superfluous to do more in This, than to recommend that
excellent Discourse to your perusal, which I do with some more than ordinary
zeal and concernment, both because the Subject is one of the most weighty and
considerable that ever afforded matter to a Philosophical Pen, and because it
is writ in a way of so judicious a gravity, and so prudent and modest an
expression, with so much clearness of sense, and such a natural fluency of
genuine eloquence: so that I know it will both profit and entertain you. And I
say further, that you may remember to do your self this right, That the Style
of that Book has all the properties that can recommend any thing to an
ingenious relish: For it is manly, and yet plain; natural, and yet not careless:
The Epithets are genuine, the Words proper and familiar, the Periods smooth and
of middle proportion: It is not broken with ends of Latin, nor impertinent
Quotations; nor made harsh by hard words, or needless terms of Art: Not rendered
intricate by long Parentheses, nor gaudy by flanting Metaphors; not tedious by
wide fetches and circumferences of Speech, nor dark by too much curtness of
Expression: It Is not loose and unjointed, rugged and uneven; but as polite and
as fast as Marble; and briefly, avoids all the notorious defects, and wants
none of the proper ornaments of Language. I say, proper; for Styles are
Clothes that must be fitted to the Subjects they are upon, and altered
according to the different kinds of things they describe and express.

Thus, Sir, you see I am not infected with that base Envy, that always speaks
detractingly or sparingly of the most worthy Performances of Contemporaries.
And because of this general ill nature in Mankind, few men can bear large
commendations of others, though they are never so just; but will endeavor to
find all the faults that malicious Wit can suggest, against any thing which
has a great character of worth upon it, especially if it be of modern date; a
baseness which no doubt has been a great discouragement to many noble Designs
and Endeavors. For my part, I thank God, I am inclined by my particular
complexion, as well as by my Reason, to take as much pleasure to do right to
the deserts of excellent Things and Persons, as some are to malign and defame
them; and in what I have said on this occasion, I have not only gratified that
humor, but I hope done you a kindness, by disposing you to a careful reading
of what I have so earnestly recommended: And in that you will see what were the
Reasons of forming such a Combination as the ROYAL SOCIETY, what is the Nature
of that Constitution, what are their Designs, and what they have done. You Will
find there a Collection of some (among numerous others that are in their
Repository) of the Experiments, Observations, and Instruments which they have
invented and advanced for the Improvement of real, useful Knowledge, and a full
vindication of the Design, from the dark suspicions and objections of jealousy
and ignorance.

BUT that I may not wholly refer you, which may look lik a put-off, I Will here
offer you something for a present stay to your Appetite, concerning this
Establishment, as it is an Advantage for the communication and increase of
Science. I say then, That it was observed by the excellent Lord Bacon, and some
other ingenious Moderns, That Philosophy, which should be an Instrument to work
with, to find out those Aids that Providence has laid up in nature to help us
against the inconveniences of this State, and to make such applications of
things as may tend to universal benefit. I say, They took notice, that instead
of such a Philosophy as this, That which had usurped the Name, and obtained in
the Schools, was but a combination of general Theortes and Notions, that were
concluded rashly, without due information from particulars, and spun out into
unprofitable niceties, that tend to nothing but Dispute and Talk, and were
never like to advance any Works for the benefit and use of men.

This being considered, the deep and judicious Verulam made the complaint,
represented the defects and unprofitableness of the Notional way, proposed
another to reform and enlarge Knowledge by Observation and Experiment, to
examine and record Particulars, and so to rise by degrees of Induction to
general Propositions, and from them to take direction for new Inquiries, and
more Discoveries, and other Axioms; that our Notions may have a Foundation upon
which a solid Philosophy may be built, that may be firm, tite, and close knit,
and suited to the Phenomenon of things: So that Nature being known, it may be
mastered, managed, and used in the Services of humane Life.

This was a mighty Design, groundedly laid, wisely expressed, and happily
recommended by the Glorious Author, who began nobly, and directed with an
incomparable conduct of Wit and Judgment: But to the carrying it on, It was
necessary there should be many Heads and many Hands, and Those formed into an
Assembly, that might intercommunicate their Trials and Observations, that might
jointly work, and jointly consider; that so the improvable and luciferous
Phenomenon, that lie scattered up and down in the vast Champaign of Nature,
might be aggregated and brought into a common store. This the Great Man
desired, and formed a SOCIETY of Experimenters in a Romantic Model, but could
do no more; His time was not ripe for such Performances.

These things therefore were considered also by the later Virtuosi, who several
of them combined together, and set themselves on work upon this grand Design;
in which they have been so happy, as to obtain the Royal Countenance and
Establishment, to gather a great Body of generous Persons of all Qualities and
sorts of Learning, to overcome the difficulties of the Institution, and to make
a very encouraging and hopeful progress in their pursuits. For the account of
which particulars, I refer you to the History, and only take notice, How
ignorantly those rash and inconsiderate people talk, who speak of this Assembly
as a company of men whose only aim is to set up some new Theories and Notions
in Philosophy; whereas indeed, Their first and chief Employment is, carefully
to seek and faithfully to report how things are de facto; and They continually
declare against the establishment of Theories, and Speculative Doctrines, which
they note as one of the most considerable miscarriages in the Philosophy of the
Schools: And their business is not to Dispute, but Work. So that those others
also that look on them as pursuing phancyful Designs, are as wide and unjust in
their ill-contriv'd Censure: Since Their Aims are to free Philosophy from the
vain Images and Compositions of Fancy, by making it palpable, and bringing it
down to the plain objects of the Senses; For those are the Faculties which they
employ and appeal to, and complain that Knowledge has too long hovered in the
clouds of Imagination. So that methinks this ignorant Reproach is, as if those
that doated on the Tales of the Fabulous Age, should clamor against Herodotus
and Thucydides as idle Romancers. For the main intendment of this Society is to
erect a well-grounded Natural History, which takes off the heats of wanton
Fancy, hinders its extravagant excursions, and ties it down to sober
Realities.

But this, Sir, I only touch en passant; and though I am not close upon the
main thing I intend, yet I cannot forbear taking notice of an insulting
Objection that we hear frequently in this Question, What have they Done?

To this I could answer in short (as I have once already suggested) more than
all the Philosophers of the Notional way, since Aristotle opened his Shop in
Greece. Which Saying may perhaps look to some like a fond and bold Sentence:
but whoever compares the Repository of this society, with all the Volumes of
Disputers, will find it neither immodest nor unjust. And their History has
given us Instances sufficient of their Experiments, Observations, and
Instruments, to justify a bolder Affirmation. But I insist not on this: The
thing I would have you observe is, That those who make the captious Question,
do not comprehend the vastness of the Work of this Assembly, or have some
fantastical Imaginations of it. They consider not the Design is laid as low as
the profoundest Depths of Nature, and reaches as high as the uppermost Story
of the Universe; That it extends to all the Varieties of the great World, and
aims at the benefit of universal Mankind. For could they expect that such
mighty Projects as these should ripen in a moment? Can a Cedar shoot up out of
the Earth like a blade of Grass? or an Elephant grow to the vastness of his
bulk, as soon as a little Insect can be formed of a drop of Dew?

No; The true knowledge of general Nature, like Nature it self in its noblest
composures, must proceed slowly, by degrees almost insensible: and what one Age
can do in so immense and Undertaking as that, wherein all the generations of
Men are concerned, can be little more than to remove the Rubbish, lay in
Materials, and put things in order for the Building. Our work is to overcome
prejudices, to throw aside what is useless, and yields no advantage for
Knowledge or for Life; To persuade men that there is worthier Employment for
them, than tying knots in bulrushes; and that they may be better accommodated
in a well built House, than in a Castle in the Air. We must seek and gather,
observe and examine, and lay up in Bank for the Ages that come after. This is
the business of the Experimental Philosophers; and in these Designs a progress
has been made sufficient to satisfy sober expectations: But for those that
look they should give them the Great Elixir, the Perpetual Motion, the way to
make Glass malleable, and Man immortal; or they will object that the
Philosophers have done nothing: for such, I say, their impertinent Taunts are
no more to be regarded, than the little chat of Idiots and Children.

CHAP. XIII. An Account of what has been done by the Illustrious Mr. Boil for
the promotion of Useful Knowledge.
BUt, Sir, I think I am fallen into things of which the Ingenious Historian
has somewhere given better accounts, and therefore I draw off; though before I
quite take leave of this Head of my Discourse, I think fit yet further to show
the injustice of the Reproach of having done nothing, as it is applied to the
Royal Society, by a single Instance in one of their Members, who alone has
done enough to oblige all Mankind, and to erect an eternal Monument to his
Memory. So that had this great Person lived in those days, when men Godded
their Benefactors, he could not have missed one of the first places among their
deified Mortals. And you will be convinced that this is not vainly said, when I
have told you, I mean the Illustrious Mr. BOIL, a Person by whose proper
Merits that noble Name is as much adorned, as by all the splendid Titles that
it wears. And that this Honorable Gentleman has done such things for the
benefit of the World, and increase of Knowledge, you will see, if you converse
with him in his excellent Writings, where you will find the greatest strength
and the gentilest smoothness, the most generous Knowledge and the sweetest
Modesty, the noblest Discoveries and the sincerest Relations, the greatest
Self-denial and the greatest Love of Men, the profoundest insight into
Philosophy and Nature, and the most devout, affectionate Sense of God and of
Religion. And in saying all this, I do not fear the Envy that great praise
excites; for that cannot be so impudent to deny the justice of this
acknowledgment.

But, Sir, I consider the commendation of this incomparable Person was not the
thing I undertook; but a succinct and general representation of his
Philosophical Performances: And to that I now address my self, without more
Preface.

(I.) In his Book of the AIR, we have a great improvement of the Magdeburg
Experiment, of emptying Glass Vessels by exsuction of the Air, to far greater
degrees of evacuation, ease, and conveniences for use; as also an advance of
that other famous one of Torricellius, performed by the New Engine, of which I
have said some things above, and called the AIR-PVMP. By this Instrument (as I
have already intimated) the Nature, Spring, Expansion, Pressure, and Weight of
the Air; the decrease of its force when dilated, the Doctrine of a Vacuum, the
Height of the Atmosphere, the Theories of Respiration, Sounds, Fluidity,
Gravity, Heat, Flame, the Magnet, and several other useful and luciferous
Matters, are estimated, illustrated, and explained.

And (2.) The great Doctrine of the Weight and Spring of the Air is solidly
vindicated and further asserted by the Illustrious Author, in another BOOK
against HOBS and LINVS.

(3.) In his PHYSIOLOGICAL and EXPERIMENTAL ESSAYS, he nobly encourages and
persuades the making of Experiments, and collecting Observations, and gives the
necessary Cautions that are to be used in such Designs. He imparts a very
considerable luciferous Experiment concerning the different parts and
redintegration of Saltpeter; whence he deduceth, That motion, figure, and
disposition of parts, may suffice to produce all the secondary affections of
Bodies; and consequently, That there is no need of the substantial Forms and
Qualities of the Schools. To this he adds a close History of Fluidity and
Firmness, which tends mightily to the elucidating those useful Doctrines.

(4.) In his SKEPTICAL CHEMIST he cautions against the sitting down and
acquiescing in Chemical and Peripatetical Theories, which many do, to the great
hinderance of the growth and improvement of Knowledge. He therefore advises a
more wary consideration and examen of those Doctrines, before they are
subscribed; and for that purpose he assists them with many very considerable
Observations and Experiments.

(5.) In his VSEFVLNESS of EXPERIMENTAL PHILOSOPHY he makes it appear how much
that way tends to the advance of the Power and Empire of Man over the
Creatures, and the universal Benefit of the World; confirming and illustrating
his Discourse with innumerable new and useful Discoveries.

(6.) In his HISTORY of COLD, he has to wonder cultivated that barren Subject,
and improved it (as is noted by the Philosophical Transactions) by near 200
choice Experiments and Observations. He has there given an account of the
defectiveness of common Weather-Glasses, the Advantages of the new Hermetical
Thermometers, and an Inquiry concerning the cause of the Condensation of the
Air, and Ascent of Water by Cold in the ordinary Weather-wisers; All which
afford valuable Considerations of light and use. But these are only
Preliminaries: The main Discourse presents us with an Account what Bodies are
capable of freezing others, and what of being frozen; The ways to estimate the
degrees of coldness; How to measure the intenseness of Cold produced by Art,
beyond that employed in ordinary Freezing; In what proportion Water will be
made to shrink by Snow and Salt; How to measure the change produced in Water
between the greatest heat of Summer, the first degree of Winter-cold, and the
highest of Art; How to discover the differing degrees of Coldness in different
Regions. A way of freezing without danger to the Vessel. What may be the
effects of Cold, as to the preserving or destroying the texture of Bodies.
Whether specific Virtues of Plants are lost through congelation, and then
thawing. Whether Electrical and Magnetic Virtues are altered by Cold. The
expansion and contraction of Bodies by freezing; how they are caused, and how
their quantity is to be measured. The strength of the expansion of Water
freezing, and an Inquiry into the Cause of that prodigious force. The Sphere of
Activity of Cold. How far the Frost descends in Earth and Water. An Experiment
showing whether Cold can act through an hot medium. A way of accounting the
solidity of Ice, and the strength of the adhesion of its parts: What Liquors
are its quickest Dissolvents. An Experiment of heating a cold Liquor with Ice.
These, and many more such instructive and useful things, are contained in that
excellent Discourse: To which is annexed a very ingenious Examination and
Disproof of the common obscure Doctrine of Antiperistasis, and Mr. Hobbs his
Notion of Cold.

(7.) In his EXPERIMENTAL HISTORY of COLOVRS, he has laid a foundation in 150
Experiments at least, for grounded Theory about these matters. He has shown
the grand mistake of the common belief, That Colors inhere in their Objects;
and proved they depend upon disposition of the external parts, and the more
inward texture of Bodies. He has stated and explained wherein the Disparity
consists between the Real and Exphatical; explicated the Nature of Whiteness
and Blackness; rectified some Chemical Principles; compounded Colors by
trajecting the Solar Beams through tinged Glasses; Showed how by certain
Tinctures it may be known, whether any Salt be acid or sulphurous. Has
proved, there is no necessity of the Peripatetick FORMS for the production of
Colors, by making Green by nine kinds of mixtures; compounded Colors real and
fantastical; turned the Blew of Violets by acid Salts into a Red, and by the
alcalizate into a Green; and performed many other extraordinary things on this
Subject, for the advantage of Knowledge and the uses of Life.

(8.) In his HYDROSTATICAL PARADOXES he showed, That the lower parts of Fluids
are pressed by the upper; That a lighter may gravitate upon one that is more
ponderous; That if a Body contiguous to it, be lower than the highest level of
the Water, the lower end o^ the Body will be pressed upwards by the Water
beneath; That the weight of an external Fluid suffices to raise the Water in
Pumps; That the pressure of an external Fluid is able to keep an Heterogeneous
Liquor suspended at the same height in several Pipes, though they are of
different Diameters; That a Body under Water that has its upper surface
parallel to the Horizon, the direct pressure it sustains is no more than that
of a Column of Water, which has the mentioned Horizontal Superficies for its
Basis. And if the incumbent Water be contained in Pipes open at both ends, the
pressure is to be estimated by the weight of a Pillar of water, whose Basis is
equal to the lower Orifice of the Pipe paralles to the Horizon) and its height
equal to a Perpendicular, reaching to the top of the Water, though the Pipe be
much inclined, irregularly shaped, and in some parts broader than the Orifice;
That a Body in a Fluid sustains a lateral pressure from it, which increases in
proportion to the depth of the immerst Body in the Fluid; That Water may be
made to depress a Body lighter than it self; That a parcel of Oil lighter than
Water, may be kept from ascending in it; That the cause of the ascension of
Water in Siphons, may be explained without the notion of abhorrence of a
Vacuum; That the heaviest Body known will not sink of it self, without the
assistance of the weight of the Water upon it, when it is at a depth greater
than twenty times its own thickness, though it will nearer the Surface.

This is the sum of the general Contents of that Discourse, which contains
things very useful to be known for the advantage of Navigation, Salt-works,
Chemistry, and other practical purposes.

(9.) In his Book of the ORIGIN of FORMS and QVALITIES, he delivers the minds
of men from the imaginary and useless Notions of the Schools about them, which
have no foundation in the nature of things, nor do any ways promote Knowledge,
or help Mankind; but very much disserve those great interests, by setting the
Understanding at rest in general obscurities, or employing it in aerie niceties
and Disputes, and so hindering its pursuit of particular Causes, and
Experimental Realities. In this Treatise he lays the Foundations and delivers
the Principles of the Mechanic Philosophy, which he strengthens and
illustrates by several very pleasant and instructive Experiments. He shows,
That the most admirable Things which have been taken for the Effects of
substantial Forms, and are used as proofs of the Notional Hypotheses, may be
the results of the mere texture and position of parts; since Art is able to
make Vitriol, as well as Nature; and Bodies by humane skill may be produced,
whose supposed Forms have been destroyed. He gives many very ingenious
instances to prove, That the Mechanic motions and order of the Parts is
sufficient to yield an account of the difference of Bodies, and their
affections, without having recourse to the Forms and Qualities of the Schools;
as in the restoration of Camphire to its former smell and nature, after its
dissolution and seeming extinction; in the changes of the color, consistence,
fusibleness, and other Qualites of Silver and Copper; in the odd Phenomenon of
a certain anomalous Salt, and those of the Sea Salt, dried, powdered, and mixed
with Aquafortis; and in the Sal mirabilis, in the production of Silver out of
Gold by his Menstruum Peracutum, in the transmutation of Water into Earth in a
certain Distillation of Spirit of Wine and Oil of Vitriol. I say, This
excellent Gentleman has by Experiments rare and new about these Subjects, made
it evidently appear, That the internal motions, configuration, and posture of
the parts, are all that is necessary for alterations and diversities of Bodies;
and consequently, That substantial Forms and real Qualities are needless and
precarious Beings.

CHAP. XIV. A further Account of what that Gentleman of Honor has by him, not
yet published, for the Advantage and Improvement of Real Knowledge. The Reasons
we have to hope great Things from the Royal Society.
THese, Sir, are some brief and general Hints of those great things this
incomparable Person has done for the information and benefit of Men; and
besides them, there are several others that He has by him, and the Inquisitive
expect, in which real Philosophy and the World are no less concerned. I
received a late Account of them from an ingenious Friend of his, Mr.
Oldenburgh, Secretary to the ROYAL SOCIETY, who also renders himself a great
Benefactor to Mankind, by his affectionate care, and indefatigable diligence
and endeavors, in the maintaining Philosophical Intelligence, and promoting
the Designs and Interests of profitable and general Philosophy. And these being
some of the Noblest and most Public Employments, in which the Services of
generous Men can be engaged, loudly call for their Aids and Assistances, for
the carrying on a Work of so universal an importance.

But I shall have a fitter place to speak of this, and therefore I return to
the Illustrious Person of whom I was discoursing. And for Philosophical News,
and further evidence of the Obligation the World has to this Gentleman of
Honor, I shall give you the List of what he has more, yet unpublish'd for its
advantage and instruction. And I take the boldness to do it, because himself
has been pleased to quote and refer to those Discourses in his published
Writings; concerning which, the generous Secretary's Account is more
particular, and he received it from the Noble Author's immediate information.
It speaks thus.

(I.) Another Section of the Usefulness of Experimental Philosophy, as to the
Empire of Man over inferior Creatures; where he intends to premise some
general Considerations about the Means whereby Experimental Philosophy may
become useful to Humane Life; proceeding thence to show, That the Empire of Man
may be promoted by the Naturalists skill in Chemistry, by his skill in
Mechanics, or the Application of Mathematics to Instruments and Engines; by
his skill in Mathematics, both pure and mixed: That the Goods of Mankind may be
much increased by the Naturalist's insight into Trades; That the Naturalist may
much advantage men, by exciting and assisting their curiosity to discover, take
notice, and make use of the homebred Riches and Advantages of particular
Countries, and to increase their number, by transferring thither those of
others; That a ground of high expectation from Experimental Philosophy is
given, by the happy Genius of this present Age, and the productions of it; That
a ground of expecting considerable things from Experimental Philosophy is given
by those things which have been found out by illiterate Tradesmen, or lighted
on by chance; That some peculiar and concealed property of a natural thing, may
enable the knowers of it to perform, with ease, things, that to others seem
either not feisible, or not practicable without great difficulty; That by the
knowledge and application of some unobvious and unheeded Properties and Laws of
natural things, diverse Effects may be produced by other means and Instruments
than those one would judge likely; and even by such, as if proposed, would be
thought unlikely; That the knowledge of peculiar Qualities, or uses of physical
things, may enable a man to perform those things Physically, that seem to
require Books, and dexterity of hand proper to Artificers; That the uses of
scarce one thing in Nature, to Humane Life, are yet thoroughly understood; That a
great Inducement to hope for considerable matters from Experimental Philosophy,
may be taken from the mutual assistance that the Practical and Theorical part
of physic may be brought to afford each other; That we are not to make our
Estimates of what may be hoped for hereafter, when men shall be assisted with
the History of Nature, a method of employing it, and true Principles of Natural
Philosophy, and associated Endeavors, by what is already performed without any
of those Assistances. (2.) He has also in a manner promised Essays touching
the concealments and disguises of the Seeds of living Creatures. (3.) An
Appendix to the Physico-Mechanical Treatise concerning the Air. (4.) Something
concerning Heat and Flame. (5.) The Skeptical Naturalist, showing the
imperfections of Natural Philosophy as we yet have it. (6.) A Discourse of
improbable Truths. (7.) The production of Qualities by Art. (8.) Several useful
Series of Inquiries and Directions of his, whereof diverse are extant in the
Philosophical Transactions; as, (I.) General Heads for a Natural History of a
Country small or great. (2.) Observations and Directions about the Barometer.
(3.) Inquiries touching the Sea; and, (4.) About Mines. (5.) Quaeries and
Trials proposed, for the improving of that Grand Experiment, for the
transfusing Blood out of one live Animal into another. (6.) Others for the
finding the Effects of the Rarifying Engine exhausted, in plants, Seeds, and
Eggs of Silkworms. Besides These, he has a great many other unpublish'd
Inqui^^es, and Series of Experiments and Obser^^tions of the most considerable
parts of ^^tural Philosophy. As, (I.) About Pre^^us stones. (2.) Fermentation.
(3.) Heat (...) Flame. (4.) An Account of a new kind (...) Baroscope, which he
calls Statical, and (...) advantage it has above the Mercurial. ^ 5.) A New
Experiment, showing how a ^onsiderable degree of cold may be sudden^y produced
without the help of Snow, Ice, ail, Wind, or Nitre, and that at any time ^t the
year, viz. by Sal Armoniack. (6.) A ^ay of preserving Birds taken out of the
^ggs, and other small Foetus's

This, Sir, is the Account I received of that Noble Persons further Designs,
for the ^dvantage of useful Knowledge; and ^^ough he has not made an absolute
Pro^ise of those Discourses to the Public, ^et he is known to have such, and
they are with probability expected, since he is too generous to detain from the
capable and in^^uisitive those his excellent Discoveries, which tend to the
common Benefit. And thus I have said what may suffice for general Information
about the ROYAL SOCIETY, and the hopes we may justly conceive of this
Constitution. And in what I have discoursed, I have not so much declined from
the proof of my undertaking which was to show the advantage that the latter Age
has, for the promotion and i^^ crease of Knowledge, above those of fo^^ mer
Times: For by describing the Reason^ Nature, and some of the Effects of the
Establishment, I have not obscurely suggeste^ the Helps that the World has and
man expect from Them, for those Grand and C^ tholick Purposes; and it is easy
to see in the very frame of this Assembly, that they ar^ fitted with
Opportunities to amass togethe^ all the considerable Notices, Observations and
Experiments, that are scattered up an^ down in the wide World; and so, to mak^
a Bank of all the useful Knowledge that is among men. For either by their whole
Bo^ die, or some or other of their particul^^ Members, they hold a Learned
Correspon^ dence with the greatest Virtuosi of all the known universe, and have
several of their own Fellows abroad in Foreign Parts, by reason of whose
Communications, they know most of the valuable Rarities and Phaenomen^ observed
by the curious in Nature, and all considerable Attempts and Performances of
Art, Ingenuity, and Experiment. To which consideration, if you add the
inquisitiveness of their Genius, and the way of their Pro^edure, by particular
and cautious Observa^ion; the coldness and shiness of their As^ent, and the
numbers of judicious men that ^urefully examine their Reports; I say, If ^hese
Particulars be weighed, it will appear ^o the unprejudiced, That the World had
^ever such an advantage for the accumula^ing a Treasure of substantial
knowledge, as (...) has by this Constitution; for single Inquisitors can
receive but scant and narrow ^nformations, either from their own Expe^ience, or
Converses; and those they have, ^e frequently very imperfect, or very mista^en:
There is often either vanity or credulity, ^norance or design in their
Relations, which therefore are many times false in the main ^atter, and oftener
in the circumstance: So ^^at the Histories of Nature we have hither^^ had, have
been but an heap and amassmen ^f Truth and Falsehood, vulgar Tales and Ro^antick
Accounts; and it is not in the pow^^ of particular unassociated Endeavors to
^^fford us better. But now, the frame of ^his Society suggests excellent ground
to ^ope from them sincere and universal Re^^^^tions, and the best grounded and
most ^seful Collection of the affairs of Art and Nature, that ever yet was
extant. And ^s they have peculiar Privileges for the gathering the Materials
of knowledge, (...) They have the same for the impartment a^ diffusion of them.
And by this time I ho^^ you will acknowledge, That I have ma^^ good also what I
undertook in THIS (...) last and Great Particular.

CHAP. XV. The Absurdity of making Comparis^ between the Advantages Aristot^^
had for Knowledge, and those later Ages.
THus I have showed in plain and m^terial Instances, the vanity and wea^ness of
the Disputer's Affirmation a^^ belief, That Aristotle had more Advantag^ for
Knowledge than all the later ages. An^ so I have done with his Proposition: But
h^ Reason also is to be considered, and the was,

Aristotle had these Advantages above ^ the World, because he did Totam
pe^agrare Asiam. How wisely said an^ concluded this was, will appear after ^
have taken notice, that his Reason is defective both in what it affirms, and in
what it would infer. For the first, it is evident, that Aristotle and the
Ancients did not know all ASIA; for that part which lay beyond the River, was
in a manner a Terra Incognita unto them: so that they knew scarce any thing of
the Indies that lie on the other side of Ganges, little or nothing of the vast
Kingdom of China, nothing of Iapan, or the numerous Oriental Islands, besides
the defects in the ancient Geography, noted above; and these made a great if
not the best part of Asia; of which though Aristotle might have heard, yet we
have no shadow of Reason to believe he had any Information from thence. And
then I consider,

(2.) That the Account he had from the best surveyed Regions, were but from
Hunters, Fowlers, Fishermen, and such kind of Inquisitors, who were like enough
to make vain and mistaken Reports, and he was fain to depend upon the credit of
their Relations; and therefore his History of Animals contains many things that
are frivolous, and many that are palpably false. To which I add,

(3.) The Observation of my Lord Bacon, That though Aristotle made some use of
those Experiments and Observation she had from those Informers, yet it was
after he had concluded and decreed. For he did not use and employ Experiments
for the erecting of his Theories: but having arbitrarily pitched his Theories,
his manner was to force Experience to suffragate, and yield countenance to his
precarious Propositions. And on this account, the Great man says, he was less
excusable than the Schoolmen, who altogether quitted and neglected the way of
particular Industry and Experiment. Thus then Aristotle neither knew all Asia,
nor had certain Relations of that part thereof, of which he had the best
Informations; nor did he use those he had as he ought; which were enough to
bring the Disputers Reason to nothing. But I consider further, That though
these things had been otherwise, and as much for the interest of his
Affirmation as he could wish, yet,

(2.) His Inference must fail, since the latter Ages have a much larger World
than Aristotle's Asia; We have the America, and the many New Lands that are
discovered by Modern Navigators; we have larger and more perfect Geography even
of the old World, infinitely more acquaintance and better correspondence in all
the parts of the Universe, by our general Traffic, than the Ancients, whose
Commerce was narrow, and knowledge of remote Parts consisted but in hearsays
and doubtful Rumors. We have besides, New Heavens as well as a New Earth, a
larger and truer prospect of the World above us. We have traveled those upper
Regions by the help of our Tubes, and made Discoveries more becoming the Wisdom
and Magnificence of our Creator, and more agreeable to the appearances of
things, than the arbitrary phansies and conjectures of Aristotle and his
Schools. We have a greater world of Arts, Instruments, and Observations, as in
all Particulars my Discourse has made good. And what are Aristotle's
peragrations of Asia, to all these? To the great Western Indies; to the full
and clearer knowledge of the Ancient Lands; to those nobler Accounts we have of
the Heavens, and universal Nature; to our vast Improvements of Chemistry,
Anatomy, Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy, Geography, Optics, Natural History,
Navigation, and all things else of benefit and instruction? I say, what are the
gleanings of a few mercenary Hunters, Fowlers, and Fishermen, over one part of
Asia, to these Advantages? And what are the Reports of a few ordinary Fellows,
and the Trials of a single person, to the learned Inquiries and Endeavors of
many sagacious inquisitive Ages, and the performances of a numerous Company of
deep, wary, diligent, and eagle-ey'd Philosophers, who have the help of those
Observations, and the addition of an infinite number more?

Upon these accounts, Sir, the Disputer, you see, will need a great deal of
Logic to make any thing of his Proposition or his Reason, both of which are
very lame, and I know not where he can find a prop for their feebleness. I
shall not therefore employ more force to overthrow such sickly Reasonings, that
have not strength enough to bear their own weight; but out of pity to those
infirmities, shall let them go without further castigations. And I hope you
have not so understood me, as if the aim of what I have said hitherto, was only
to disprove this Disputer (which were a poor project, and would signify but
very little.) But my Design is, by representing the advantages and hopefulness
of the Modern way, to kindle an ardour in you toward the generous Experimental
Researches, to vindicate Philosophy from the imputation of being notional and
unprofitable, and to keep you from adhering to that which is so, and has been
the occasion of the scandal. And as for those that yet stick there, I have some
things to observe concerning the Reasons of their Devotion to that aerie
disputative Philosophy, and their Enmity to the Practical.

CHAP. XVI. The Reasons of some Men's Superstious Adherence to the Notional way;
and of the Disputer that gave occasion to this Discourse
I Consider then, That easy youth in its first addresses to Learning, is
perfectly passive to the Discipline and Instructions of its Teachers, whose
Documents are promiscuously received with ready submission of Understandings,
that implicitly depend on their Authority. We suck in the first Rudiments as
we do the common Air [facili haustu] as my Lord Bacon expresses it, without
discrimination or election, of which indeed our tender and unexercised minds
are not capable. And, I confess, it is necessary we should do so; nor were there
any hurt in this innocent easiness, did not most men all their lives worship
the first thing they saw in the morning of their days, and ever after
obstinately adhere to those unexamined Receptions. But this is the mischief, we
infinitely believe every thing when we are Children, and most examine little
when they are Men, but settle in their first impressions, without giving
themselves the trouble to consider and review them. And these prejudices by
custom and long acquaintance with our Souls, get a mighty interest, and shut
them against every thing that is of a different color from those Images of
Education. This is a general fault and infirmity of humane Nature, and from
hence it comes to pass, that the tutour'd Youth sides easily into the belief of
the first Principles of Philosophy, which they are taught, and are confirmed in
them by their Exercises and Disputes, and Books and Converses: By these their
Understandings, which before were White-Paper, are dyed and deeply tinctured by
the color they have imbibed; And these infusions insensibly grow as 'twere
into the very substance of the Mind, and are upon all occasions appealed to as
its unprejudiced, unsophisticate Dictates. So that having spent some time in
learning and trimming those Notions, the most divert to Business or other
Studies, without troubling themselves with any more Philosophical pursuits; but
being satisfied with those Notices which their first Education lodged in their
Minds, they seek no further, nor do care to be wiser in those matters, than
they were in the disputing infancy of their Knowledge.

All this while no other hurt is done, but that men thus are injurious to
themselves, and hinder their own Improvements. But it is much worse when they
fondly fix these as the pillars of Science, and would have no body else go
further than their laziness or their cares will permit them to travel; but rail
spightfully at all Endeavors for the advancement of Philosophic Wisdom, and
will be angry with every one that has outgrown his Cherry-stones and Rattles,
speak evil at a venture of things they know not, and like Mastives are fiercer
for being kept dark. These are the great Enemies of the useful, experimental
Methods of Philosophy: They take it ill that any thing should be accounted
valuable, in which they are uninstructed. being loath to learn in an Age wherein
they expect to Dictate; and the Satyrist has told them another reason.

-- Turpe putant parere minoribus, and quae
Imberbes didicere, senes perdenda fateri.
I will not say how much of this I take to be the case of our Reverend
Disputer; only this, He employed his younger Studies upon the Philosophy of
Disputation, and, it is like, gained an ability to out-talk many of his
Contemporaries in that way. He confirmed himself in these Notions by
instructing others in them, and upon these Foundations has built himself the
Reputation of a great Scholar and a Disputant among his Country-Admirers. So
that you are not to wonder that he is vehemently displeased with the ROYAL
SOCIETY, and Experimental Philosophers, since their Designs take away the
honor of his Craft, and in this way he is upon the same level with those that
are but beginning; the thought of which must needs be distasteful to a
self-assured and imperous mind. And yet because you shall not think that I say
any of this out of envy to his Fame, I shall do him all the right I can, by
acknowledging,

That I take him for a Person that understands the Quiddities and Haecceities,
the Praecisiones formales and the Objectivae, the Homogeneities and
Heterogeneities, the Catagorematice's and the Syncatagorematice's, the
Simpliciter's and the secundum Quid's. He knows, no doubt, that First Matter
that is neither Quid, nor Quale, nor Quantum; and that wonderful Gremium
materiae, out of which Forms were educed that were never there. He can tell you
fine things of the fiery Element under the Moon, and the Epicycles of the
Stars; Can resolve all Questions by the compendious way of Formaliter,
Materialiter, Fundamentaliter, and Eminenter; Tell you the difference between
Quodam modo and Modo quodam, and show the causes of all things in Sympathy,
Antipathy, Combination of the Elements, and Insfluences of the Heavens. He sees
clearly by his Spectacles, That the Milky-way is but a Meteor, and Comets only
kindled Vapors, in spite of the contrary information of the deceitful
Telescopes. He can, no doubt, dispute roundly about the composition of Entia
rationis and Vniversals, the Praedications of Genus and Species, and the manner
of their conservation in Individuals; of the number of the Praedicaments, and
what Being is in this, and what in another; of the inherence and propagation of
Accidents, the real essence of Relations, the nature of Vbi and Quando, and a
thousand other Logical tricks about Shuffling and ordering Propositions and
forms of Syllogism. In Physiology he can discourse of the nakedness of First
Matter, the eduction of Forms out of its bosom; show, that the want of a Being
is a Principle of it, how forms of Elements are refracted in mixed Bodies;
Dispute subtly about the Primum incipiens in Motion, the instantaneousness of
Generation, the Maximum quod sic, and the Minimum quod non, and infinite more
of such wonderful, useful, significant Speculations. And in the Metaphysics I
acknowledge him in the words of the incomparable Droll; He knows what is what,
and that is as high
As Metaphysick Wit can fly.


These, and other such profundities, are some of the main things of that
Philosophy to which our Disputer is so zealous a Votary. But for the Mechanic,
that attempts material and intelligible Accounts of things, and is in its
grounds much ancienter than that of Aristotle which he admires, for the
Experimental Methods and late Improvements of useful Knowledge; as for these, I
say, I had no reason to judge by his Discourse that he had any acquantance with
them; nor does he, as far as I can perceive, pretend it: But having it seems
concluded, That nothing more was to be known, than he knew, when he disputed in
the Schools, he has sat down ever since, and hugged himself in his own
Omniscience and Infallibility, without caring to be informed, what the
inquisitive World has been doing in this late Age of Inquiry. And if it be any
thing more than what he has understood in his Circle of Disputations, it is
fantastical and unprofitable, and not worthy his care or notice, which is very
prudently concluded; For if it should be otherwise, the Disputer would lose the
credit of his Superlative Learning.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Peripatetick Philosophy, and Aristotle, as he concerns the
Universites.
ANd on this occasion, Sir, I observe the incompetency of their judgments who
are Enemies to the Real Experimental Philosophy, in that they do not (as I
intimated) at all, or very little, understand what they condemn. This I have
some reason to say, since in the whole compass of my Acquaintance, which is not
very narrow, I profess I know not one who opposes the Modern way, that is not
almost totally unacquainted with it. And on the other side, upon the most
careful turn of my thoughts among my Philosophic Friends, I cannot light on
one of all those that are for the Free and Experimental Procedure, but who have
been very well instructed in the Peripatetick Doctrines, which they have
deserted, and most of them much better than those who are yet zealous
contenders for them.

And for my own part, I must confess, that in my younger and Talkative Age, I
was much delighted with those subtilities that exercise the Brain in the
niceties of Notion and Distinctions, and afford a great deal of idle Employment
for the Tongue in the Combats of Disputation: In which I acknowledge I was
none of the most backward, but being highly pleased with those engagements, I
found as much diversion in them, as in my dearest Recreations: Yea, and in this
Recital methinks I feel a kind of sweet relish upon my mind, of those past
complacencies. But after I had spent some vears in those Notional Studies,
perhaps with as good success as some others, I began to think CVIBONO, and to
consider what these things would signify in the World of Action and Business,
I say, I thought; but I could find no encouragement to proceed from the Answer
my thoughts made me: I asked my self what accounts I could give of the Works of
God by my philosophy, more than those that have none, and found, that I could
amaze and astonish Ignorance with Distinctions and words of Art, but not
satifie ingenious Inquiry by any considerable and material Resolutions. I
considered I had got nothing all this while, but a certain readiness in
talking, and that about things which I could not use abroad, without being
Pedantick and ridiculous. I perceived that that Philosophy aimed at no more,
than the instructing men in Notion and Dispute; That its Design was mean, and
its Principles at the best uncertain and precarious; That they did not agree
among themselves, nor at all with Nature. I examined the best Records I could
meet with about the Author of those current Hypotheses, but could not be
assured that Aristotle was he. I saw many Reasons to believe, that most of the
Books that bear his Name, are none of his; and those that are most strongly
presumed to be so, are mightily altered and correupted by Time, Ignorance,
Carelessness and Design. I perceived that the Commentators and late Disputers
had exceedingly disguised and changed the Sense of those very Writings, and
made up a Philosophy that was quite another thing from that which those Books
contain. So that by these means I was by degrees taken off from the implicit
Veneration I had for that Learning, upon the account of the great Name of
Aristotle which it wore. And in the process of my Inquiries, I lighted upon
several excellent Authors, who said and proved very evil things of that
Philosopher himself; As, That he was impious in his Life and many of his
Doctrines, a Persecutor of the most venerable Sages, and corrupter of the
Wisdom of the Ancients; That he was of no such superlative account in the
wisest Times, but much opposed and slighted by the First Fathers; That he grew
into his Magisterial Authority by chance, in Times of blackest Ignorance, and
held an unjust Empire over the freeborn Minds of Men, who since they are
enlightened by the Rays of the glorious Gospel, have less reason to bow down to
the Dictates of an Idolater and an Heathen. I say, I found these things, and
many more, urged against the School-Philosopher, by men of great Learning and
Name. Nor could I ever light on any thing in his most devoted Admirers, that
tended to the answering or disproof of any of those grand Accusations, most of
which seemed to me to have too much evidence, to be easily disabled; not to
mention how many Reasons I saw my self for the worst of those Characters, in
the Books that are ascribed to him, if really they are his.

These things then I pondered, and in the heat of my Thoughts, and a youthful
Indigntion, I drew up the charge, and gave in the full of those bold Accounts
to the public, in a Letter about Aristotle, which perhaps you will not do
amiss to consider. Thus the great impediment was removed, and the prejudcie of
Education overcome, when I thought further, That useful Knowledge was to be
looked for in God's great Book the Universe, and among those generous Men that
had converst with real Nature, undisguised with Art and Notion. And still I saw
more of the justice of the excellent Poet's Censure of the sons of Aristotle,
when he says, They stand
Locked up together hand in hand:
Every one leads as he is led,
The same bare path they tread,
And dance like Fairies a fantastic Round;
But neither change their Motion, nor their ground.
From this Philosophy therefore, and these Men, I diverted my eyes and hopes,
and fixed them upon those Methods that I have recommended, which I am sure are
liable to none of those Imputations.

And here I think fit to add a Caution which I have given in another Discourse,
and do it once more to prevent a dangerous misunderstanding, viz. [And it is,
That I have said nothing of this to discourage young Academiasn from applying
themselves to those first Studies which are in use in the Universities. Their
Statutes require Exercises in that way of Learning; and so much knowledge of
it, as inables for those Duties, is requisite and fit. Nor do I deny, but that
those Speculations, raise, quicken, and whet the Understanding, and on that
account may not be altogether unprofitable, with respect to the more useful
Inquisitions; provided It keep it self from being nice, aerie, and addicted too
much to general Notions. But this is the danger, and the greatst part run upon
the Rock. The hazard of which might in great measure be avoided, if the
Mathematics and Natural History were mingled with these other Studies which
would indeed be excellent Preparatives and Dispostions to future Improvements.
And I add further, that the young Philosophers must take care of looking on
their Systematick Notions as the bounds and Perfections of Knowledge; nor make
account to fix eternally upon those Theroies, as established and infallible
Certainties: But consider them in the modest sense of Hypotheses, and as things
they are to take in their passage to others that are more valuable and
important. I say, the Peripatetick Studies thus tempered, will not, I suppose,
be desallowed by the men of the Practical Method; and so the
Vniversity-Establishments can receive no prejudice from the Spirit that
dislikes a perpetual acquiescence in the Philosophy of the present Schools.

CHAP. XVIII. Some things else debated by the Author with the Disputer, about
the Prophets and the Scriptures. The Imagination was ordinarily the immediate
Subject of Prophetic Influx.
I HAVE now done with the Philosophical Considerations I intended here, and am
so fond as to believe, that I have said enough about the main business of our
Conference; from which the Disputer at last showed an inclination to draw off,
and endeavored to engage me in other things that were aside and irrelative to
our Discourse: Particularly, I perceived he made toward the Controversies
between the Calvinists and Remonstrants, and offered me several Temptations to
fall in there. I knew it was a Design to draw me into his Road of talking, and
considered that our Spirits were too much moved, and our Time too short for
those deep and endless Debates. And I have long since resolved never to treat
with any one about them, that is not very free, thoughtful, modest, and benign,
without which praedispositions in the Subject, I know the clearest and greatest
evidence in the World can make no impressions. Upon these accounts I declined
the bait; but in the process of our rambling Talk, was insensibly led into a
Discourse as extrinsick, which was concerning the Method of the Scriptures.
About this I said,

That those Holy Oracles were not written methodically; Meaning, not according
to the Rules of our Methods; especially I instanced in the Prophetic Writings,
which are very little suited to the ways of our Order. And in consequence of
this, I affirmed, That God was pleased in those Inspirations to apply himself
much to the Imagination of the Prophets; which Faculty, I said, was desultory,
and did seldom tie it self to strict coherence. This was the sum of all from
whence the Disputer took occasion for loud outcries. He told me, [ That my
Affirmations were Atheistical; That God was the God of Order, and not of
Confusion; and dealt with the noblest Faculty, which is the Understanding] I
was astonished at the haste of the wild and groundless Censure, and answered
to the Argument, That he might as well conclude, That all the Blades of Grass,
and Flowers of the Field, should be placed in Knots, and a Garden-order, and
the Stars set in Rank and File, because God is the God of Order, as the other
Proposition he would infer.

I said there was no doubt but that the Divine Wisdom, which had made all
things in Number, Weight, and Measure, had an Order and Idea to it self,
according to which it framed them: But then I added, That as his ways were
above ours, so were many of the Methods of his Working besides them; and
consequently, I thought it somewhat too bold and presumptuous to bring down
Infinite Wisdom to our Rules, upon that score reproving the Custom of some
Formal Preachers, who spend much pains to little purpose, in finding long
Series of connection, where many times none were intended.

This is the whole substance of what I said in this Affair, and at this period
of the Conference the Disputer lost all patience, and with sufficient spite
and rage told me, That I was an Atheist; That he had indeed desired my
Acquaintance, but would have no more on it; and so turned his back, and went
away, giving me time only to Answer, That I had no great reason to lament the
loss of an Acquaintance that could be so easily forfeited. Thus, Sir, you have
the sincere Account of those Sayings, about which the Disputer has raised such
Tragical Stories. In them he has accused me of Atheistical Assertions, and
affirmed that I said, The Scripture was only written to men's phansies: Which
Proposition he has so ordered, as that many impious absurdities are deduced
from it, and those must go for my Opinions. When as it is so far from being
true, that that Proposition came from me, that I understand not what it means:
Only I can collect from it the Disputers Wrath, or somewhat he would be less
willing to acknowledge. For either he really believes the Proposition he
reports, to be the sense of mine, or he does not; If really he does, I cannot
excuse his Understanding; if not, I wonder at his Conscience. But that I may
together explicate what I meant, and defend it, I add a brief account of my
Saying, [That God did much apply himself to the Imagination of the Prophets;]
As to which, I observe,

That both the Schoolmen and others usually divide Prophecy into Intellectual
and Imaginary. The former is from a Light immediately infused into the
Understanding; the latter, when the Prophetic Spirit makes its first
Impressions on the Imagination, by sensible and material Representments. As for
the First, it was so rare, that not above one or two Instances are produced by
the Learned in the kind, viz. MOSES and St. PAVL. Now commonly the degree of
Mosaical Inspiration was distinguished from the Prophetical; and the difference
is plainly enough expressed Deuteronomy. xxxiv. x. And there arose not a Prophet since
in Israel like unto MOSES, whom the Lord knew face to face. For the other
Prophets, God says, I will make my self known unto him in a Vision, and will
speak unto him in a Dream: My Servant Moses is not so, with him I will speak
mouth to mouth, Number. xxii. v, vi. -- intimating a transcendent Privilege to
Moses above the Prophets, in the immediate way of application to his mind,
without the mediation of sensible Impressions. And upon this account it is said
in the New Testament, They have Moses and the Prophets; implying the difference
of the dignity and degree of their Inspiration.

As for the second Instance of St. Paul, his case mentioned ii Cor. xxii. was
Ecstasy, and may be omitted in our Discourse that concerns Prophetic
Revelation; But admitting it, this must be granted however, That the immediate
Intellectual way was very rare, and therefore by way of eminency and
distinction, it is among the Rabbis called the Gradus Mosaicus.

But for the second kind, viz. the Imaginary and Sensible, this was the
ordinary sort of Inspiration, and this the meaning of my Assertion. That it was
the usual way of influx upon the Prophets, appears from the mentioned place of
Deuteronomy. xxxiv. And I will make my self known unto him in a Vision, and speak unto
him in a Dream; which was most evidently fulfilled in the latter days of
Prophecy, when the Prophetic Illuminations went much this way. It might seem
superfluous labor to give particular Instances in Ieremiah's Boiling Pot, his
Rod, his Basket of Figs -- In Daniels Tree and Four Beasts -- In Ezechiel's
Chariot, Wheels, Living Creatures -- and such like, which in the Prophetic
Writings scarce leave a page without example. Now it will not I conceive be
denied by any one that understands what he says, that these Representations
were made upon the Stage of Imagination, and those Visa impressed on the Fancy.
Upon this account it was that the Enthusiasms of later Prophets were much in
Similitudes, Parables, and Allegories; and so Ezechiel complains, Ah Lord, they
say of me, Does he not speak in Parables? And a Lapide gives it for a general
Rule, Prophetarum Visions and Revelationes communiter fuerunt Sensiles, sive
Imaginary. Rabbi Albo calls Prophecy an Influence from God upon the Mind by
the mediation of the Fancy; and Maimonides says, That all the Degrees of
Prophecy are contained in those two, a Dream and a Vision; and Joel ii.
xxviii. mentions these as comprehensive of all the Degrees of Prophecy. But
this thing is every where so clear in the Scripture, in the Rabbis, and the
Writings of all Learned men that deal in those matters, that I think I need not
say much more for proof.

Only I take notice, That 'twas the general belief of the Jewish Writers, and
of the Christian Fathers and Schoolmen universally, confirmed by the Authority
of Scripture, That Angels were ordinarily the immediate Efficients by whose
Ministry the Scene of Prophetic Representations was dressed and ordered. This
has been evidently proved by the Learned Mr. Smith, in his Discourse of
Prophecy; and from hence I could infer, if there were need of more, That their
menage of this Affair does reasonably infer, That the Imagination had such a
concern in it as I affirm. For it is generally denied by the Schoolmen, whose
Authority no doubt is great with our Disputer and others, That Angels can
immediately imprint Conceptions and Apprehensions on the Understanding; which
indeed, among other absurdities that I omit, would infer, That they have that
grand Prerogative of the Omniscient, the (...), Knowledge of Hearts, which the
Scripture every where vindicates and appropriates to God only. What they do
therefore, must be by Phantasms and Idea's impressed on the Fancy. They are the
Internuncii and immediate Causes which present the Prophetic Visa; and
consequently, the Imagination and Sense are the chief Stage of their
Representations. Now this was done diverse ways, and the noble Picus Mirandula
has collected out of Maimonides no less than eleven, all which he calls Gradus
Imaginarii, in opposition to the Gradus Mosaicus, which is the Intellectual.

But it is not proper for me to insist longer on a thing that is extrinsick to
the main design of my Discourse. And it was too but the Conclusion and smallest
part of our Conference; Though the Disputer (as far as I can hear) reports
nothing else as the matter of our difference, but these two things, about the
Method of Scripture, and Gods applying to the Imagination of the Prophets;
either because he is ashamed to own the main Discourse, or else has a Design
to throw the odium upon me of Heterodoxy in Religion. When as indeed these came
in but accidentally, and we had but a short Contrast about them, which I have
faithfully related.

The CONCLUSION. Containing Observations about the Censure of Atheism, applied
to Philosophical Men; and the Authors Apology to the ROYAL SOCIETY, and other
generous Philosophers.
BY this I believe you see how little Reason there was in the Disputer's
Discourse, and how little Justice in his foul Imputation; upon the occasion of
which, if you are not quite tired already, I shall by way of Conclusion offer
you a Remarque or two concerning the Charge of Atheism, of which some fierce
People are very liberal.

About it I take notice, That Philosophical Men are usually dealt with by the
zealous, as the greatest Patrons of the Protestant Cause are by the Sects. For
as the Bishops and other Learned Persons, who have most strongly oppugned the
Romish Faith, have had the ill luck to be accused of Popery themselves; in like
manner it happens to the humblest and deepest Inquisitors into the Works of
God, who have the most and fullest Arguments of his existence, have raised
impregnable Ramparts with much industry and pious pains against the Atheists,
and are the only men that can with success serve Religion against the godless
Rout; These, Superstitious Ignorance has always made the loudest outcry
against, as if themselves were guilty of that which they have most happily
oppugned and defeated. And the certain way to be esteemed an Atheist by the
fierce and ignorant Devoto's, is to study to lay the Foundations of Religion
sure, and to be able to speak groundedly and to purpose against the desperate
Cause of the black Conspirators against Heaven. This I confess has been one of
the chief Employments of my time and thoughts; and on this account I reckon, I
must be content with my share in the abuse, when greater, and better, and
deeper men have been pelted with this Dirt, while they have been laboring in
the Trenches, and endeavoring to secure the Foundations of the Holy Fabric.

But besides I observe, That narrow, angry People take occasion to charge the
freer Spirits with Atheism, because they move in a larger Circle, and have no
such fond adherence to some Opinions which they adore and count Sacred. And for
my own part, I confess I have not Superstition enough in my Spirit or Nature,
to incline me to dote upon all the Principles I judge true, or to speak so
dogmatically about them as I perceive confident and disputing men are wont. But
contenting my self with a firm Assent to the few practical Fundamentals of
Faith, and having fixed that end of the Compass, I desire to preserve my
Liberty as to the rest, holding the other in such a posture, as may be ready to
draw those Lines, my Judgment meant informed by the Holy Oracles, the Articles
of our Church, the Apprehensions of wise Antiquity, and my particular Reason,
shall direct me to describe. And when I do that, it is for my self, and my own
satisfaction; but am not concerned to impose my Sentiments upon others: nor do
I care to endeavor the change of their minds, though I judge them mistaken, as
long as Virtue, the Interests of Religion, the Peace of the World and their own
are not prejudiced by their Errors. By this modest indifference I secure
Charity for all the diversities of Belief, and equally offer my Friendship and
Converses to the several Sects and Persuasions, that stick to the plain
Principles of the Gospel and a Virtuous Life, overlooking their particular
fondnesses and follies. This is the Temper of my Genius, and this some warm
Folks, who have more heat than light, are apt to call Skepticism and cold
Neutrality: But that it deserves better names, I have made appear in some
other. Papers; and I have a little Interest to remarque further,

That it is the misfortune of men of Philosophical inclination, where they
escape the reproach of the more desperate Atheism, at least to meet the
imputation of a bordering impiety, the Contempt of the Holy Scriptures. I am
not to answer for all the Pretenders to Philosophy: but this I can say, That
those of the graver and better Genius, have such an apprehension of the Divine
Oracles, as will effectually secure them from suffering diminution from any
Disclosures in Nature: And that is, That those Holy Records speak for the most
part in the Language of Sense, being suited to Plebeian Capacities, and intended
for Instructions in Life and Manners; not for nicer Informations in things of
deeper Speculation and Theory. Upon which accounts they reckon, that we are not
to expect from them the Propositions of Philosophy, nor to wonder or be
stumbled though the literal Text do not answer Philosophical exactness, which
is not the thing the inspired Book intends. So that whatever Discoveries are
made by the Inquirers into Nature, the Sacred Authority stands firm, while they
judge by this Rule of Interpretation. But of this again in a fitter place, at
present my own Concerns call upon me to say somewhat for my self; since my
enraged Antagonist has from our Discourse (how justly we have seen already)
reported me an Enemy to the Scriptures.

And now one would think it should be very needless and improper, that one who
Ministers in the eternal Gospel, should say any more than what he does twice
every Week in those Public Instructions drawn from the Sacred Volume, to
justify his being no despiser of it: But there are a sort of People with whom
one perverse, illogical, uncharitable deduction of their own will signify
more, to fasten an odious thing upon him that dissents from them, than a
thousand professions of his to the contrary can do to clear him from the
malicious Charge. For such, it is an happy turn that we are to be judged by a
more equal Tribunal than theirs, and they would be loath to be tried themselves
by such Measures. Were these the only Persons I have to deal with, I should
spare my self these pains; for I know, what I write will not be more plain and
credible than what I say. But others are to be considered, of more Christian
and candid tempers, upon whom envious Traducers may fasten some odd thoughts
and suspicions: To such I declare, That in my first Education I was continually
instructed into a Religious and fast adherence to every thing I was taught, and
a dread of dissenting in the least Article. This Discipline I underwent in my
younger days, and thought very strangely of those that believed any thing
different from the Opinions of my Instructors. But advancing in years, and
coming to a freer exercise of mine own mind, I began to make Reflections upon
the vast diversities and variety of Apprehensions and Religions in the World; I
considered, That they were all as confident in their way, as I in that wherein
I was instructed; and the greatest part had nothing but their Education for
their inducement. I thought how easy we are in our first Age; and that though
Children must believe, yet Men, especially those bred in the way of Study, must
Try. I considered what I should first advise an Heathen or Mohammedan to do, who
had been bred up to Idolatry and Fables; and upon the consult with my self,
concluded, That it should be to look about him, and to examine other Religions,
regarding his own with the same eye of indifferency and suspension, as if he
had never been born under that Faith, which was a thing extrinsick and
accidental, and therefore not fit to make an Argument to engage a reasonable
belief; and when I had so thought, I turned the Tables, and took the same
Counsel my self.

I therefore bent my chief Studies and Endeavors to know the Truth of the
Christian Faith; and after the Foundations laid, in the settling the grand
Article, The BEING OF A GOD, and the consequent Doctrines of Natural Theology,
I sat me down to inquire about the Authority of the Holy Scriptures; not that
I positively doubted or distrusted their veracity, but that I might have a firm
bottom, and be able to give an account of my Faith and Hope. In my Inquiry, the
first Discourses I met with on the Subject did not at all satisfy, but seemed
weak and hugely obnoxious: But in the progress of my search, I lighted on those
grounds which (I thank God). quieted my mind, and gave me the most
Demonstrative assurance that the nature of the thing could bear, of the truth
and certainty of those Sacred Writings, which undoubtedly contain the fullest
Discoveries of the Divine wisdom and Perfections, which I infinitely admire;
and shall eternally adore that Goodness that blessed the Sons of men with such
clear Discoveries of his Will. And though I perceive that the Follies and
Superstitions of Sects, who have the Holy Oracles always in their mouths, and
press them for the Service of their conceits, have prejudiced some of the
pretenders to Reason against them; yet this I see, That the wiser, freer,
better, and more reasonable any man is, the greater still is his Veneration of
those Holy Records, and the relish of them increases with our Improvements in
Virtue and Goodness. This Testimony I must give here, and more I have to say in
another place.

And now I had ended your trouble, but that upon the cast of my thoughts back I
have considered, that my main business being the Recommendation and Advancement
of the Modern Useful Knowledge, I need make an Apology to the generous Friends
of that way, and particularly the ROYAL SOCIETY, for my Discourse of Them, and
those their great Designs, in a Treatise that contains matter of difference and
contest, which are so fundamentally contrary to their Spirit and Endeavors;
and it may perhaps be feared, that some will take occasion hence to look on the
Neoterick Philosophers as but a new sort of Disputers. To which I say, That for
my public appearance in a Controversy, I have already given such an Account,
as may, I hope, satisfy the Candid and Ingenious of the necessity that
enforced it; and for the apprehension of raising mean and injurious thoughts of
the Practical Philosophers, by defending them in a Book of Difference, I hope
it is causeless, since I have from first to last represented their Aims and
Designs as things very different, yea perfectly opposite to that Spirit and
Genius; and I shall now for a close assure you again, That there is nothing
tends more to the undermining and supplanting the humor of Disputing, than
(the Experimental and Free Philosophy. For this inlargeth the Mind, and gives
it a prospect of the vastness of things, and the imperfections of our
Knowledge, the Difficulties that are to be incountred in the search of Truth,
and our liableness to deception, the stumbles of Confidence, the prejudices of
Education, the shortness of our Senses, the precipitancy of our Understandings,
and the malign influence of our Affections; I say, the Free and Real Philosophy
makes men deeply sensible of the infirmities of humane Intellect, and our
manifold hazards of mistaking, and so renders them wary and modest, diffident
of the certainty of their Conceptions, and averse to the boldness of peremptory
asserting. So that the Philosopher thinks much, and examines many things,
separates the Certainties from the Plausibilities, that which is presumed from
that which is proved, the Images of Sense, Fancy, and Education, from the
Dictates of genuine and impartial Reason. Thus he does before he Assents or
Denies; and then he takes with him also a Sense of his own Fallibility and
Defects, and never concludes but upon resolution to alter his mind upon
contrary evidence. Thus he conceives warily, and he speaks with as much caution
and reserve, in the humble Forms of [So I think, and In my opinion, and Perhaps
it is so -- ] with great difference to opposite Persuasion, candor to
dissenters, and calmness in contradictions, with readiness and desire to learn,
and great delight in the Discoveries of Truth, and Detections of his own
Mistakes. When he argues he gives his Reasons without passion, and shines
without flaming, discourses without wrangling, and differs without dividing. He
catches not at the Infirmities of his Opposite, but lays hold of his Strength,
and weighs the substance without blowing the dust in his eyes. He entertains
what he finds reasonable, and suspends his judgment when he does not clearly
understand. This is the Spirit with which men are inspired by the Philosophy I
recommend. It makes them so just, as to allow that liberty of judgment to
others, which themselves desire, and so prevents all imperious Dictates and
Imposings, all captious Quarrels and Notional Wars. And that this is the
Philosophic Genius, may be shown in a grand Instance, the ROYAL SOCIETY, which
is the Great Body of Practical Philosophers. In this Assembly though it be made
up of all kinds of Dispositions, Professions, and Opinions; yet has Philosophy
so rarely tempered the Constitution, that those that attend there, never see
the least inclination to any unhandsom opposition or uncivil reflection, no bold
obtrusions or confident sayings. The forbearing such Rudenesses is indeed a Law
of that Society, and their Designs and Methods of Inquiry naturally form men
into the modest temper, and secure them from the danger of the quarrelsome
Genius. This is palpable evidence of the sweet humor and ingenious Tendencies
of the Free Philosophy; and I believe 'twill be hard to show such another
Example in any so great a Body of differing Inclinations and Apprehensions.
Thus the Experimental Learning rectifies the grand abuse which the Notional
Knowledge has so long fostered and promoted, to the hinderance of Science, the
disturbance of the World, and the prejudice of the Christian Faith. And there
is no doubt but as it has altered and reformed the Genius in matters of
natural Research and Inquiry; so it will in its progress dispose men's Spirits
to more calmness and modesty, charity and prudence in the Differences of
Religion, and even silence Disputes there. For the free sensible Knowledge
tends to the altering the Crasis of men's minds, and so cures the Disease at the
root; and true Philosophy is a Specific against Disputes and Divisions.

Thus I might run out into a large Discourse on this Subject; but I have said
enough for my present purpose, and I doubt too much for your patience; and
therefore I shut up with the assurance of my being,

SIR, Your faithful Friend and Servant, JOS. GLANV^ILL.

ERRATA.
PAge 26. line 6. for Philophy read Philosophy. p. 30. l. 11. for Elipsis r.
Ellipsis. Id. l. 19. p. 33. l. 18. for adserted r. affected. p. 39. l. 5. r.
Anaximenes. p. 43. l. 16. r. one. Id. l. 24. r. Christophorus. p. 65. l. 26. r.
Vegetables. p. 133. l. 24. r. 2 Cor. xii.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. The INTRODUCTION. page 1. CHAP. II. The ways of Improving Useful
Knowledge proposed. The Advantages this Age has from the great Advancements of
Chemistry and Anatomy. p. 9. CHAP. III. Another great Advantage of late Times,
from the Improvements of Mathematics; particularly, of Arithmetic, Algebra,
and Geometry, discourst by Instances. p. 19. CHAP. IV. Improvements in Geometry
by Des Carts, Vieta, and Dr. Wallis. p. 31. CHAP. V. The late Improvements of
Astronomy. p. 38. CHAP. VI. Improvements of Optics and Geography. p. 46. CHAP.
VII. That Useful Knowledge is to be aided by Instruments. Modern Instances of
such. Of the Telescope, Microscope, and Thermometer. p. 51. CHAP. VIII. Of the
Barometer and Air-Pump, and what Advantages we have and may further expect from
these Instruments. p. 59. CHAP. IX. The Credit of Optick-Glasses vindicated,
against a Disputing Man who is afraid to believe his Eyes against Aristotle. p.
65. CHAP. X. Our Advantages for Knowledge from Modern Improvements of Natural
History. p. 71. CHAP. XI. The Advantages of late Ages for spreading and
communicating Knowledge. Three great Instances of it, in Printing, the Compass,
and the Royal Society. p. 75. CHAP. XII. Of the ROYAL SOCIETY. The Reasons of
the Institution, and their Designs. An Answer to the Question, What have they
done? p. 83. CHAP. XIII. An Account of what has beeen done by the Illustrious
Mr. Boil, for the promotion of Useful Knowledge. p. 92. CHAP. XIV. A further
Account of what that Gentleman of Honor has by him, not yet published, for
the Advantage and Improvement of Real Knowledge. The Reasons we have to hope
great Things from the Royal Society. p. 102. CHAP. XV. The Absurdity of making
Comparison between the Advantages Aristotle had for Knowledge, and those of
later Ages. p. 110. CHAP. XVI. The Reasons of some Men's Superstitious Adherence
to the Notional way; and of the Disputer that gave occasion to this Discourse.
p. 115. CHAP. XVII. Of the Peripatick Philosophy, and Aristotle, as he concerns
the Universities. p. 122. CHAP. XVIII. Some things else debated by the Author
with the Disputer, about the Prophets and the Scriptures. The Imagination was
ordinarily the immediate Subject of Prophetic Influx. p. 128. The CONCLUSION,
Containing Observations about the Censure of Atheism, applied to Philosophical
Men; and the Author's Apology to the ROYAL SOCIETY, and other generous
Philosophers. p. 137.
Books newly Printed for James Collins at the King's Head in Westminster Hall.
ABlow at Modern Sadducism, in some Philosophical Considerations about
witchcraft. To which is added, The Relation of the Famed Disturbance by the
Drummer, in the House of Mr. John Mompesson. With some Reflections on Drollery
and Atheism. By a Member of the Royal Society. 8o.

A Loyal Tear dropped on the Vault of our late Martyred Sovereign, in an
Anniversary Sermon on the Day of his Murder. 4o.

Two Discourses of Toleration, By Dr. Perrinchief: In Answer to two Discourses
of Mr. Corbet's. 4o.

A Discourse of Subterraneal Treasure. 12o.

The Practice of Serious Godliness: Affectionately recommended and directed in
some Religious Counsels of a Pious Mother to her dear Daughter. 12o.

The Triumphs of Rome over Despised Protestancy. 8o.

A Sermon preached before the Peers, in the Abby-Church at Westminster, October.
10. 1666. being the Fast Day for the late Fire. By Seth Lord Bishop of Exon. 4o.


