GLOVCESTER'S TRIUMPH AT THE Solemn PROCLAMATION OF King Charles the Second; On
Tuesday the 15th. day of May 1660.

LONDON, Printed by J. C. for H. Fletcher, at the three gilt Cups in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1660.

Gloucesters triumph, etc.
Noble Sir,
THe solemnity used by the City of Gloucester on Tuesday last, at the
Proclamation of his Majesty King CHARLES the second, was accompanied with such
demonstration of real affection to the business they went about, and of
undoubted loyalty to his Majesty, and of truly glad hearts at the revolution of
affairs into that hopeful posture wherein now they stand, that I could not but
take the opportunity, that is now offered, to acquaint you with a true
Narrative thereof. The manner, thus: In expectation of such an opportunity, the
Mayor of the City, Colonel Toby Jordan, gave Orders for the erecting of a
Scaffold before the Marketplace; which could not be finished before the
Proclamation came down: but being come, on Saturday last he sent for the
Lieutenants, Ensigns, and Sergeants of his own Regiment, and those also of
Colonel Twisleton's Regiment now in the City, together with the Drums of both
Regiments, to give public notice in every street at market-time by beat of
Drum, that the Tuesday following was appointed to proclaim the King: and to the
same purpose, some of the Militia-troops of the County were also invited to
attend the solemnity on the day appointed. By that time the day came, the
Scaffold was finished, being very large, and parted (as it were) into two
rooms; the first being lower then these old by three ascents; and both
accommodated with Utensils suitable, for the more stately sitting of each man
according to his quality; and the whole Scaffold (both above and below) was
round about hung with yellow cloth, as being the color of the
Militia-Regiment for the City and inCounty, commanded by Mr. Mayor. The place
behind the Mayors chair, was hung with Arras, adorned with his Majesty's
Atchievement-royal. Diverse other preparations there were. For the common sort,
the water was turned out of the three public Conduits of the City, and wine
was placed in the cisterns. Besides which, there were Runlets of wine, and
cakes provided for each Company and Troop: both the City, and some of the
Gentry, contributed their assistance largely this way.

The noist of this public notice of the day, and the preparations which were
made, drew a mighty concourse of people from all parts on the day appointed,
men, women and children; Many of the Gentry, Ministry, and people of all
qualities, to the number of scarce so few as ten thousand; so that I never saw
the City so crowded in all my life; all, both of the City and County,
unanimously testifying then joy for the appearance of this long-looked-for day.
Never were there more significant Expressions of gladded hearts appearing in
the very faces and countenances of all sorts of persons, then on that occasion.

Well, the day being come, and it being Lectureday, and the streets strowed
with green; the marketplaces adorned with Garlands, and the Kings board,
besides such ornaments, clothed round about with white cloth, the Mayor
appointed all the Masters and Wardens of the several Guilds and Fraternities,
with their Streamers and Trophies belonging to each Company, to wait upon him,
and the Aldermen and Common Council, (himself and the Aldermen, Sheriffs and
Sheriffs Peers in Scarlet, and all the rest in their several Garbs, befitting
their estate and degree) to the Cathedral Church, with trumpets sounding, and
the several Constables with the staves of their office walking before, each
arrayed with white scarffs tied with purple and green: whither when they were
come, Mr. Bartholomew, Minister of Cambden, (whose Lecture-turn it was)
preached an excellent and seasonable Sermon on Luke 7.21, 22. When the strong
man armed keeps his palace, his goods are in peace: but when a stronger then
he shall come upon him, and overcome him, he takes from him all his armor
wherein he trusted, and divides his spoil. Wherein he showed the proper drift
of the Text, (as his Lecture-work) in the beginning, and closed all with a
^uitable parallel in the close, (pro^er to the sol^mnity of that day) in all
expressing great affections to the occasion of that day^ ^ap^y meeting. Sermon
being ended, the Mayor in the ^k^ Equipage as before, re^ur^ed home; and a
while after, the Sheriffs* with their ^^pstaves, and the Aldermen, and others
of the Common Council fetched Mr. Mayor from his own house to the Tolsey: by
which time, nine Companies of foot were marched from the place of their
randezvouz into the City, and drawn up to the most convenient places for the
giving their Martial Euges to this work. And a little after, three Troops of
Horse drawn up with such convenience as the straightness of the place could
afford. All things being thus in a readiness, the Mayor in the like equipage as
before, marched from the Tolsey to the Scaffold (which besides the Ornaments
before mentioned, was now adorned with six Garlands after the form of Crowns,
born up with long white staves in the hands of six Virgins of the Gentry, in
six several places) whither and where he was attended by many of the Gentry of
the County, the Aldermen and Common Council of the City, in their respective
Robes; a very considerable number of grave Divines, the City Ministers being in
their Gowns. All being seated or placed as the Room would give leave, the
Trumpets sounded again and again; and at length, O yes, being made by Mr.
Sheriff Scudamore several times, Mr. Sheriff Snell read the Proclamation, and
the Senior Sheriff recited it after him with a distinct and audible voice.
Which being done, Mr. Mayor standing up upon his Chair, drew his Martial Sword
in the fight of all the people, for a token of his readiness to use it in the
defense of his Majesty, and for a signal to all the rest of the Officers and
Soldiers to do the like in that nick of time, and to the Companies in sight to
give fire. And they were no whit behind in their duty; for instantly this
signal was followed with the like by all in Arms, loud acclamations of all
sorts, Crying out, God save King CHARLES the second, Long live King CHARLES;
and exact Volleys of shot from the several Companies and Troops in such order
as was before devised, and these reiterated: so that we were in the midst of
fire and smoke for a long season (but without danger, and with such rejoycings
of all sorts as is unspeakable.) When things grew somewhat calm, another O yes
was made, and the Declaration of the Honorable House of Commons was read, which
was seconded with the like acclamations to his Majesty's welfare, and many
Volleys of shot. Which continued all the while they were on the Scaffold, and
there they stayed no small time: For unto them were brought Wine and Cakes,
where they rejoiced publicly, whilst much was distributed to Gentry and
strangers in houses, while the Conduits ran Claret, and the Soldiers in their
several Companies and Troops had their shares brought to them. This done,
several Companies and Troops marched by, giving their several volleys; and the
Assembly was dismissed. By this time the day was far spent, the Bells every where
ringing, and Bonfires every where flaming; in one of which, the States Arms
vanished into smoke. All the Solemnity was concluded with Fireworks, Rockets
of many sorts, flying, and running; an excellent peal of Reporters; and at last
the Wheel went round. The Wheel of State (God be thanked) is so, and come into
its right posture. It will be endless to tell you the rejoycings we here have.
You could not observe a sour look, or a dejected countenance that day; and yet
in all my observation (and it is the observation of many more, that) there were
few or none overtaken with drunkenness that day in all that great multitude:
which was one addition to the joy of them, who desire to rejoice in temporal
mercies, so as in the Lord. And I could wish, all would learn to honor God and
the King with the holiness of their lives and conversations; and that all
places were at unity within themselves, and united in their resolutions of
Loyalty, as this little City and populous County is.

The good affection your Honor bears to this City, made me willing to give
your Honor this rude account of what has passed among us in that days
transaction. The Lord preserve his Majesty long to Reign over us, and return
him to his Parliament and People with honor, and direct the Counsels of both
the Honorable Houses of Parliament, that there may be peace and truth in our
days. So prays

Gloucester, May 16. 1660. Your humble Orator.

FINIS.

