A LOYAL TEAR Dropped on the VAULT Of our late Martyred SOVEREIGN.

IN AN ANNIVERSARY SERMON On the Day of His Murder.



LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes, and are to be sold by I^mes Collins, at the Kings
head in Westminster Hall. 1667.

The STATIONERS Advertisement.
THe Author of this being averse to the Printing Sermons, a Friend of his, who
by his importunity had obtained a Copy of it, sent it to me, with his desire
that I would publish it. In which he was so earnest, that I could not deny him,
especially he having threatened, that if I would not some body else should do
it. I was loath to neglect an opportunity which I thought might help to the
curing the mentioned humor in the Author, and I knew would gratify his
Friends and others. Being therefore assured by this Gentleman that he would
procure me the Authors pardon for my printing this without his leave, I have
adventured to do so; and I hope, when he has perused it, I shall easily obtain
the Readers.

JAMES COLLINS

A FAST SERMON ON THE KINGS MARTYRDOM.
ROMANS XIII.2. -- And they that resist shall receive to themselves Damnation.


AS there are some Ages and Times that are more infested with unhappy
influences from the Heavens, and noxious reeks from the Earth, which by
poisoning the Air, Roots, and Herbs, propagate that deadly venom into men's
bodies, that even wearies Death, and gluts the Grave with its slaughters, and
was matter of our late miseries.

In like manner there are Times when poisonous Doctrines from the Pulpit, and
malign humors in the Populace, infect the Public Air, and spread a fatal
Contagion into men's Principles and Manners, which flies like Infection, and
destroys like the Plague.

And if ever Times were under cross and unlucky Aspects, if ever there were a
public Spirit of Frenzy and mischief in the World in any days, since the
first; certainly this Lot is fallen upon ours; wherein men's Principles and
Practices contend, which shall outdo the other in the degree of Evil. And it is
hard to say which are worse, Men's actions or opinions.

We are fallen into Times, wherein among some, it is a piece of Gallantry to
defy God, and a kind of Wit to be an Atheist; among others, it is Religion to
be Fantastic, and Conscience to be Turbulent and Ungovernable. Nor have men's
Practices come short of the malignity of their Belief; but if possible have
outdone it. Atheism has not rested in the judgment, but proceeded to all
enormities, and debauches. And we had not been called to the sad solemnity of
this Day, if Rebellion had slept in Opinion.

But alas the venom of the Asp has swollen into deadly Tumors; and those
seditious Principles have shot their poisonous atrows into the vitals of the
public Body. We yet feel the smart of those wounds, and the Generations to
come will wear the scarrs and the marks of our misery and our guilt.

What is past we may lament, but cannot remedy. What we may do, and what we
ought, is to inform our selves better of the Duty we owe to God, and those he
has appointed over us; and to endeavor the suppressing those principles and
a^^^^ctions which breathed the Plagues that destroyed the Nation, and would
again burn us up in hotter Flames than those. And if that fatal Fire which so
lately preyed upon our Peace, and our Properties, our Religion, and our
Government, our Persons and our Friends, has not yet convinced us of the evils
and danger of Resistance; yet there is another and a greater, as certain and
more fatal, threatened by the Apostle, They that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation.

Which words were spoken in the days of NERO, who besides that he was an
Heathen, was a Persecutor and a Tyrant, and the most infamous instance in
Nature; and yet this Monster is not excepted as to the Tribute of Obedience.
Whereas had this been said in the days of such a Prince as our CHARLES the
First, it might have been supposed that the virtue of the person claimed the
reverence and subjection, and not the capacity of the Prince. And that 'twas
damnable to resist because he was Good, not because he was Supreme; because he
was a Nursing Father of the Church, not because the Ruling Father of his
Country. 'Twas an happy coincidence therefore to secure the Authority of the
Magistrate, which answers the greatest pretensions of Rebellion. If Religion be
pretended, an Heathen must not be resisted. If Tyranny, it is damnation to
oppose a Nero. They that resist shall receive -- (...), the wrath and judgment
of God, which implies the guilt, and expresses the danger.

Now to resist the Authority Providence has set over us, is so sinful, and so
dangerous, principally upon this threefold account. RESISTANCE, 1 Affronts the
Authority of God. 2 It Is contrary to the Spirit of Religion. And 3 Destructive
to the Interest of Societies.


The two former express the Guilt, and the latter both the Sin and the
Punishment. And of them all in order.

1 Then RESISTANCE is an affront to the authority of God. (...), the Lord sets
up Kings, says the Father. And (...), Kings are from God, says the Heathen.
And a greater than both acknowledges Pilate's power to be from above.

The Scripture intitles God to all the Royal adjuncts, and both Christian and
Heathen Antiquity symbolize in this with the sacred Oracles; which has been
largely proved by an excellent Prelate, as I instance in some of his
Particulars.

1 The Kings person is said to be God's; Great deliverance gives He to HIS
King, 2 Samuel xxii.51. and He shall give strength unto HIS King, 1 Samuel ii.10.
Yea, I have said ye are Gods, says the Text; and consonantly Plato calls the
King, (...), a kind of God among men. And as the name of God is called upon his
person, so also is it (2) upon his Throne. Then Solomon sat upon the Throne of
the Lord as King, instead of DAVID his Father, 1 Chronicles. xxix.23. And says the
Queen of Sheba, Blessed be the Lord thy God which delights in thee, to set
thee on HIS Throne, 2 Chronicles ix.8. To a like sense also is that of Nestor to
Agamemnon in Homer; (...)
(...) --
Jove lent thee thy Scepter and Jurisdiction (3) The Kings Titles also relate
him to God, viz. those of Gods Anointed, and his Servant: The former given even
to Saul, 1 Samuel xii.3. and Cyrus, Isa. xlv.1. and the later to Nebuchadnezzar,
Ier. xxv.9. The same also Athanasius gives to Constantius the great Favourer of
the Arrians. (4) The Kings power likewise is from God; There is no power but of
God, and the powers that are, are ordained of God, says the Apostle. And the
Pythagorean, (...). God has given him Dominion. Upon which account also
Themistius, (...). God sent Regal Power from Heaven. And that a Kingdom is
(...), a Divine Good, is the assertion of Plato, and confession of Cyrus: All
the Kingdoms of the Earth has the Lord of Heaven given me, 2 Chronicles. xxxvi.
Yea, and Tiberius acknowledges, (...), our Kingdom is from God. And Daniel
minds Nebuchadnezzar, The God of Heaven has given thee a Kingdom, Power, and
Strength, and Glory, Dan. ii.27. And Athanasius in his Prayer for Constantius,
(...), Thou have given this Kingdom to Constantius thy servant.

These, I think, are testimonies enough to prove that Kings wear Gods Image and
Authority. And therefore Menander calls the King, (...), God's living Image;
and the Pythagorean, (...), The King is the Figure of God among Men. But
besides all this, there is evidence enough in the nature of the thing to prove,
that Kings have their Power and Authority from God, and are no Substitutes of
the People: which I thus infer.

God made the World, and consequently the World is his, and his alone is the
Right to Govern it. But he being of such immense perfections, that our Frailty
cannot bear his immediate converses: it is necessary that he rule us by men like
our selves, and put the Sword into the hands of Creatures of our own make. This
he does, and hence it follows, that they that Rule are Gods Substitutes, and no
Creatures of the People: For the People have no power to Govern themselves, and
consequently cannot devolve any upon another.

Upon the whole then I conclude, that the same Commands and Authority that
oblige us to obey God, bind us to revere those that so signally wear his Image:
and he that disobeys the Viceroy, affronts the Sovereign. He that resists,
resists the Ordinance of God, says the Apostle, and who can lift up himself
against the Lords Anointed and be guiltless? says David in the case of Saul.

And thus I have dispatched the first, viz. Resistance affronts the authority
of God, with which Kings are invested; as I think I have made evident from
testimony, and the nature of the thing.

Secondly, Then RESISTANCE is opposite to the Spirit of RELIGION. Religion is
of a calm and pacifick temper, like that of its Author, whose voice was not
heard in the street. It subdues our passions, and governs our appetites; it
destroys our pride and sordid selfishness; it allays the tempests, and speaks
down the storms of our natures; it sweetens our Humors, and pollisheth the
roughness of our tempers; it makes men gentle and peaceable, meek and
compliant. This was the Spirit of the great exemplar of our Religion; this was
the genius of his Doctrine and his Practice.

He commands the payment of all Duties to Caesar, He acknowledges Pilates
Power to be from above; He commands his Disciples to pray for their
Persecutors; He permits them to fly, not to oppose. He rebukes Peter's violence
to the High Priests servant; and the revenge of the Disciples, when they called
for Fire from Heaven.

He paid Tribute, submitted to the Laws of the Sanhedrim, and to that unjust
sentence against his life.

This was his temper: and the Apostles who lived among his enemies and theirs,
and met with severity enough to have sowred their Spirits, and exasperated
their Pens to contrary resolutions and instructions. Yet as true Followers of
their dear Lord, they faithfully transmit to us what they had learnt from him,
viz. That we should obey those that have the rule over us; submit to every
ordinance of man; pray for Kings and all in authority; submit to Principalities
and Powers, and to obey Magistrates.

And those Noble Spirits of the first Ages after, who began to be Martyrs as
soon as to be Christians; who lived in the Fire, and went to Heaven wrapped in
those Flames that had less ardor than their love. These, I say, amidst the
greatest and fiercest Fires that Cruelty and Barbarism had kindled, paid the
Tribute of a peaceable and quiet subjection to their Murderers, and made
unforced acknowledgments of the right they had to their obedience. Nor do we
ever read of any attempts they made to free themselves by resistance, though
(as Tertullian says) they were in powerful numbers mingled in their Villages,
and in their Cities; yea, in their Castles, and in their Armies. Yea, there is
an illustrious instance of passive obedience in the Thebaean Legion, whose
tenth man being executed for not offering Sacrifice to Idols, they quietly
submitted to the cruelty. And a second Decimation being commanded by
Maximinian, the Author of the first, one of their great Commanders, an
excellent Christian, persuades them to suffer it with the same patience:
because it was not with their Swords they could make their way to the Kingdom
of Heaven, but by another kind of Warfare.

And now if after all this, and infinitely more that might be said on the
subject, to pretend Religion, and plead Scripture for Rebellion, is impudent
and shameful, an affront to Religion, and a Lie in the face of Conscience. And
those that cannot discern those great lines of their Duty which are set upon
the High places, and shone upon with a full beam; and yet can find sin in
little harmless circumstances, which nothing has forbidden, but the coyness
and perverseness of their own humor; are like him that could see the Stars at
Noon, but could not see the Sun; and could spy the shadows made by the
Mountains in the Moon, but could not discern the greater spots upon its visible
surface. And for men to strain at the decency of an Habit, or the usage of a
Ceremony, when they can swallow Rebellion and Sacrilege without chewing; is to
be like him who durst not eat an Egg on Saturday, but made nothing to kill a
Man. Doubtless had the Scripture said by a thousand part so much for the Ius
Divinum of Presbytery, as it has for obedience to Authority; had there been
one plain word against Conformity, as there are many against Rebellion; that
would have been worn bare upon the tongue, and have filled the World with
endless importunities.

But the Injunctions and Commands of Obedience are against our humors and
opinions, against the darlings of our phansies, and the interest of our Party:
and therefore here we must shuffle and evade, cogg and interpret by Analogies
of our own making, by the Rules of our Sect, and the Authority we worship, by
Necessity and Providence, and any thing that will color Sin, and cozen
Conscience, that will turn Religion into the Current of our appetites, and make
Scripture speak the language of our humors.

Thus Religion and divine Authority shall be reverenced, and pleaded when they
agree with men's own measures, and send any light or advantage to the Favorites
of their affections: But when they cross their Models, oppose the people of
their imaginations, and call them upon duties that are displeasant; the case is
altered, the great motives of persuasion have lost their power and influence,
and Religion can do nothing with them.

Thus briefly of the two first Heads, viz. Resistance (1) affronts the
Authority of God, and (2) is opposite to the Spirit of Religion. From which I
come to the third, which makes resistance both a great sin, and a great
punishment, viz.

(3) It is ruinous to the INTEREST OF SOCIETIES. This I must more largely
prosecute, because it will lead us into the sad occasion of our present
meeting. Man is a Creature made for Society; and what is against the interest
of Societies, is destructive to Humane Nature. And if the greatness of a sin,
and a mischief be to be measured by its reference to the Public, for ought I
know, Rebellion will be the next sin to that which is unpardonable, in the
degree of guilt, as well as it is near it in the penalty threatened.

Now there are two great interests of Societies, viz. GOVERNMENT and RELIGION,
to both which Resistance both in doctrine and practice, is fatal.

To begin with Government in order.

(1) Then both doctrine and practice of resistance is destructive to
Government. For if Subjects may resist the Powers over them, no Government in
the World can stand longer, then till the next opportunity to overthrow it.
Every man will resist what he does not like, and endeavor to pluck down what
comports not with his humor. Thus every fit of discontent will stir up the
various and inconstant People to seek an alteration. And there was never any
Government so exactly framed in the World, but in the menage, and
administration of it, many things would displease. Now the generality of men
are lead by their present senses; and if they feel themselves pained by any
thing (and it may be too, the Grief is but in their Imagination) they are for
present deliverance from that Evil by any means; never considering whether the
way of Cure draws not greater Evils after it than the distemper: and so upon
every discontent the people are inflamed, and upon every occasion, rebel. And
thus is a Kingdom laid open to inevitable devastation and ruin: and by a dear
experience we have learnt, that it is better to endure any inconveniences in a
settled Government, than to endeavor violent alterations. When the Sword is
drawn, no man knows where, and when it will be sheathed. When the Stone is out
of a man's hand, he cannot direct it as he pleases. Men with Swords by their
sides, will do what likes themselves, and not what is enjoined them by those
that employ them.

Or, could we suppose what our own unhappy experience has confuted, that
Armies would be obedient; yet the Murders and Rapes, the Spoils and
devastations, which are the natural issues of a Civil War, are worse than any
inconveniences in any Government possible. And though, as my Lord Bacon notes,
Foreign War is like the heat of exercise, good and healthful for the Body; yet
Civil War is like the heat of a Fever, ruinous and destructive.

Besides, those that resist, either overcome the supreme Power, or are
conquered by it. If the former, their Instruments in all likelihood conquer
them, as well as those they served them against: and so from the just authority
of their lawful Rulers, they fall under the insolence of their licentious
Vassals. Or suppose they get the Government to themselves, all the evils will
follow, which usually do upon Competitions and variety of Claims, which will
breed everlasting disturbance, and eternal fears. Such evils will follow if the
resisters prevail: and if they chance to be suppressed and overcome by the Powers
they oppose, they can expect nothing less than to be crushed and ruined. So that
those that resist, whether they conquer, or are overcome, draw inevitable ruin
upon themselves, and probably on the common Body. For Laws and Government are
the great Charter of our Lives and Liberties, our Properties, and our All; and
as the Father, (...). Murders, rapes, violence, and all kind of mischief invade
the World with Anarchy and Disorder.

And how far all this has been verified in our Borders: a little recollection
will inform us. For,

WHEN fair Weather and a warm Sun, the indulgence of Heaven, and a long
tranquillity, had made us fat and frolic, rich and full, our prosperity made us
wanton, and our riches insolent. We began to murmur we knew not why; and to
complain, because we had nothing to complain of. Discontents grew upon the
stock of our ill Nature, and the perverseness of our humors; and every little
occasion was Fuel to the Fire that was kindling in the distempered Body. We
began to invade the Government with malicious whispers, and private
Preachments, with Libels and Declamations, with Insolences and Tumults. And
when Sedition had encouraged it self by Noise and Numbers, by Popular zeal and
talk of Reformation, it flew into the highest irreverencies toward the King,
and the most violent proceedings against his Ministers, that the nearest Trees
being removed, they might have a full stroke at the Cedar. Nor did things stop
here.

The Sparks grew into mighty Flames, and those Vapors into Thunder and
Tempests. The whispers of the Corner past into the noise of a Camp; and the
murmurs of the Street into the sound of the Trumpet. The Cloud like an hand,
became a Magazine of Storms, and our New lights set us all on Fire. The Pulpit
sounded as much War as the Drum; and the Preacher spit as much flame as the
Cannon. Curse ye Meroz was the Text, and Blood and Plunder the Comment and the
Use.

Thus began our happy Reformation. From Law to Licentiousness, from Religion to
Frenzy, from an happy Government to a wretched Hurry and Confusion: and the
progress and the end were suitable to those hopeful beginnings.

God was worshipped with the Devils Sacrifices, humane blood and slaughter: and
glorified by being affronted in his Authority and his Laws. The King was
honored by the persecution of his Person, and murder of his Friends; submisly
addressed by the civilities of a Rabble, and petitioned in the humble form of
Drums and Grenades. Welcomed at his Cities by the shutting of their Gates, and
entertained in the Country with the glittering of Swords, and the noise of War.
Fought against for his defense, and his life sought, for the preservation of
the King.

Thus happy were our Reformers in twisting Contradictions, and they would be so
indeed, could they reconcile one more, viz. That they are the good People and
sure Heirs of Heaven, because the Apostle says, They that resist shall receive
to themselves damnation.

But we are not yet at the end of the line, the most fatal part of the Story is
to come.

Therefore, after ten thousand butcheries and devastations, miseries and
disorders, which cannot be described, but they will in part be felt; prosperous
wickedness finally prevailed, the friends of Loyalty and Justice were scattered
and destroyed. Majesty is made a prey to the sons of a Dunghill; and afflicted
innocence falls into the hands of the Hunters. And after He had been infamously
sold like a Slave, and imprisoned like a vile Malefactor: after He had been
ravished from his Friends, blasphemed in his name, and robbed of the ensigns of
his dignity: after He had heen tossed up and down from one place to another,
according as the designs and insolences of his cruel Iaylors should call him:
after He had been mocked by Conditions of Peace, and terms of Accommodation,
that were never meant: after He had made concessions to all their Demands, and
for the sake of the Peace and Settlement of his Kingdoms, had granted things
that Subjects had never the insolence to ask. I say after these and a thousand
instances of barbarism and indignity more, that his cruel Persecutors might
transcend all examples of wickedness; that Generations to come might honor
them, as they do that HIGH COURT OF JUSTICE, whereof PONTIUS PILATE WAS
PRESIDENT, and that they might deserve a deeper damnation than that threatened
by the Apostle to bare Resisters. They summon their SOVEREIGN to their Bar, and
try Him by a company of Petty-fellows, that called themselves by a great Name:
They buffet him with their insolent Taunts, and bait him with the mercenary
noise of JUSTICE, JUSTICE, like CRUCIFY him, CRUCIFY him. They upbraid him
with their own faults, and charge him with the guilt of that blood which
themselves had spilt; that they might add the guilt of his, to all the rest;
which BLACK TREASON, not to be thought on without horror, nor named without a
tear, this Day they accomplished, beyond any president of former times, and
perhaps the belief of the future; contrary to their Allegiance, and their
Covenant, to their duty to God, and their professions to the People, to the
obligation of all Laws and Common Right.

Therefore let this Day be darkness, let the covering of the blackest Grief be
upon it; because this Day fell a Prince, one of the best, the wisest, and most
generous, and the most gracious that ever swayed these Scepters. He fell, and
fell by violence, and the violent hands of his own, who ought to have
sacrificed their lives to the preservation of His. He fell to the dishonor of
God, to the grief of good Men; to the scandal of Religion, to the shame of
Protestantism, to the overthrow of Government, and ruin of the Nation. This is
a Lamentation, and to all Generations it shall be for a LAMENTATION.

But Oh Heavens! oh Providence! must Virtue be dethroned, and Villainy be
crowned! must Victory and Success wait upon Treasons and Paracides, while
infamy and loss dog Innocence to the Grave! Must the most righteous of
Princes be the most miserable of Men; and Religion and a good Cause be the
only way to be unfortunate and undone! Will the Searcher of hearts abet
hypocrites; and Providence lend it self for an argument to legitimate
Rebellion! Shall the Pharisee pray, and prosper; and the righteous cry, and be
forsaken! Shall Treason carry Religion in Triumph upon its gilded Banners; and
shall the wicked lift up their hands in an appeal to Heaven, and bring them
down to the destruction of the Just! Shall Villainy raise its head to the
Clouds, and meet no Thunderbolts there; while the Devotions of the Innocent
return upon him in storms and flames!

Thus Sense and Nature would complain on this occasion. But Providence is just,
though we are blind. Prosperous Villainy crows and triumphs for a moment, but is
covered with shame, and eternal darkness in the issue. The end of things will
disentangle Providence, and rectify all disorders. Then shall we see that
afflicted Virtue shoots up on the other side the Grave, and sends its branches
into a flowring Paradise, where they shall be green and verdant in an eternal
Spring, while every Tree that Virtue has not planted shall be rooted up and
wither in a moment.

This briefly I thought fit to suggest as an Apology for Providence; lest the
successes of the wicked, and misfortunes of the Just, in instances so great and
so near, might tempt any to think, that there is no GOD that judges in the
Earth.

And thus I am arrived at the first period of the miseries that we brought upon
our selves by Resistance, which concludes in the ruin and dissolution of
Government, and this runs into all the mischiefs to which humane Nature is
obnoxious. For Government is the great interest of mankind; that which bounds
our passions, and secures our rights; prevents confusion, and that deluge of
Debauches that Anarchy lets in upon the World. And how far we felt this also in
the consequent Calamities, would be considered.

When the Nation then had lost its Head, and its Glory, 'twas turned with its
Heels upwards, and governed by a Thing as infamous in its Quality, as its Name.
The Dreggs of the Populace, the Creatures of a Sectarian Army, the worst part
of a Body, that was bad enough in its best; these were our Senators, and our
Patriots, the preservers of our Peace, and the Keepers of our Liberties: and
keep them they did, but not for us, but from us. And was not this a Liberty
worth the Blood and Treasure that was spent to purchase it.

O the blessed Reformation that filled our Pulpits, and emptied our Purses;
that quickened our endeavors, and inspired our zeal; and that was so glorious
in our mouths, and so pleasant in our hopes. Were not all miscarriages of
Government well mended, when Government was thrown up by the roots, and was not
the disease well cured, when the Body was destroyed? Were we not well freed
from evil Counselors, when we made Kings of the worst we had. And was not
Tyranny well extirpated, when we were under an Army of Tyrants.

But the glorious things are to come, and we must be cast into New Models. And
when the Birds of Prey have divided the Spoil, and satisfied the cravings of
their appetites and ambition, the Nation shall be made happy with New-nothings,
and golden Mountains; with Chimoeraes of Commonwealths, and fine names for
Slavery. In the mean while Loyalty must be scourged with the Scorpions that are
due to Rebellion. And those that feared the damnation of the Apostle, shall be
sure to incurr the damnation of the Reformers; and they that would not hazard
their Souls, must compound for their Estates.

But when the JUNCTO had run to the length of their Line; that is, as far as
their MASTER would permit them; when they were as odious as they deserved, and
his designs as ripe as he could wish; then up steps the single TYRANT, kicks
them out of their Seats, and BEELZEBUB dispossesseth the LEGION. He engrosseth
the prey to himself, and assumes the sole privilege of completing our
miseries. He made himself after the Image of a King, and invested his Sword
with the authority of Law. He ruled us with the Rod of Iron we deserved, and
made us feel a difference between the silken Reins of a lawful Authority, and
the heavy yoke of an insolent Usurpation.

And when Providence had freed us from this Plague, and called him to account
for his Villainies, we fell back into our old disorders; we reeled to and fro,
and staggered like a Drunken man, and were at our wits end. We knew not this
week, who would be our Lords the next; nor did our Lords themselves know to
day, by what Laws they would Rule to morrow. Confusion was in their Councils,
as well as Tyranny in their Actions; and there was but one thing they seemed to
be agreed upon, which was to inslave the Nation. And if we would not believe
that this was Liberty, we must be knocked in the head with our chains; if the
Sheep would not take the Wolves for their Guardians, 'twas fault enough, and
good reason why they should be devoured. And were not things come at length to
a pretty pass, when men in Buff durst proclaim themselves the only Legal
Authority of the Nation, when our Armed Masters murdered men in the Streets,
and threatened the ancient Metropolis of the Nation, with Gunpowder and
Grenades. Fire and Sword must be our portion, if we would not be in love with
infamous Usurpers, and a worse Powder Plot than Faux's was acting in the face
of the Sun. The strength, the riches, the beauty, yea, the almost All of the
Nation was designed a Sacrifice to the rage and revenge of our Oppressors; and
Plunder and Massacres were almost the least evils we feared.

Thus were we tossed up and down from one wave to another, and made the sport of
the proud and insulting billows, till Almighty Goodness settled us again upon
our old basis, and by a Miracle of Providence restored us our PRINCE and our
Government which our sins had deprived us of, to re-establish us upon the sure
Foundations of Righteousness and Peace.

These are some sprinklings of that deluge of Woe that we brought upon our
selves by resistance, which I have briefly described to this purpose, that the
remembrance of these miseries, may beget a sense of our sins, and the truth of
the particular Proposition I have been discoursing under this Head, viz. That
Resistance is fatal to Government.

And though Government may be fixed again upon its Foundations, and Laws turned
into their ancient Channel, after the violence they have suffered; yet they
lose much of their reverence and strength by such dissettlements. And the
People that have rebelled once, and successfully, will be ready to do so often.
As water that has been boiled, will boil again the sooner.

And thus we see how ruinous resistance is to Government, and how destructive
to that first great Interest of Societies, as it is also.

(2) TO RELIGION, which is the other. That Rebellion is contrary to the Spirit
of Religion, we have seen; and consequently, that it is destructive of its
Being, will not need much proof, since contraries destroy one another.
Rebellion lays the Reins on men's necks, and takes off the restraints of their
appetites; it opens the floodgates of Impiety, and lets loose the brats of
extravagant Imagination. It destroys the reverence of all things sacred, and
drives Virtue to Corners. It gathers men's lusts into a common storm, and fills
all things with Chaos and confusion. Religion cannot be heard in the noise of
battle, but is trampled under-foot in the hurry and the tumult. Faith and
love, humility and meekness, purity and patience are overcast and silenced by
Atheism and cruelty, pride and barbarism, lust and revenge. Thus Rebellion by
breaking up the foundations of the Earth, lets in an Hell upon us, and brings a
kind of present damnation upon the World. And that this is another fatal
mischief of Resistance, we have felt also by an experience that will keep it in
our memories. And what execution it has done upon Religion must be considered
next.

But now this is a tender thing, and I am willing to keep my self within bounds
that are charitable and sober; and therefore must premise to what I have to say
about it; that I charge not the whole Body of the People of the late Times,
with the guilt of all the Follies and corruptions I describe. Nor do I believe,
or say, that the whole Mass of their Religion was so monstrously vitiated and
depraved. I profess Universal Charity, and have perhaps, more for the worst of
them, than they generally will own for any that are not of their own party or
opinion. And therefore at present I shall say no more, than what the sober and
intelligent among themselves will acknowledge to be justly chargeable upon some
or other of the Sects bred by our late Disorders; and this will be enough for
my purpose, which is only to prove by near and deplorable instances, that
resistance brings mischiefs upon Religion; and not to expose to hatred or
contempt the persons of any that are serious in the way of their profession,
though I judge it never so obnoxious and mistaken. And having said this out of
a tender charity, that none may be wronged by misinterpretation, nor any
offended that are not concerned; I come with freedom to describe some of the
injuries our unhappy resistance has done Religion, notwithstanding that both
Arms and Tongues so highly pretended its defense.

And indeed men fought for Religion till they had destroyed it; and disputed
about it, till they had lost it. Multiplicity of Opinion had quite confounded
the simplicity of Life and Faith; and 'twas most peoples business to chatter
like Pyes, rather than to live like Christians, or like Men. And if Religion
had been computed by men's talk, and dispute about it, those later days of the
declining World had been its best; and this in its growth and ways of highest
improvement, when all things else were verging to their fatal Cell and Period.
But alas, the Tongue was the most, if not the only religious Member. And many
of the Pretenders, like the Egyptian Temples, were fair without, but Beasts
and Serpents, and Crocodiles within. Or like the Bird of Paradise, they had
Wings to fly in the Clouds of Imagination, but no Feet to walk on the Ground
of a virtuous practice. Yea, some had found the way to swim to Heaven in the
Current of their appetites, and to reconcile Covetousness, Rapine, Cruelty, and
Spiritual Pride, with the glorious names of the Elect, the People of God, the
Church of Christ, and the good Party. Religion with Rebellion, and Sacrilege
with Saintship. These had learnt to be godly without goodness, and Christians
without Christianity.

These were lovers of God, that were haters of their Brother: haters of open
Profaneness, but not of spiritual wickedness. Very godly though cruel, and
unjust. True penitents, though they returned to their sins, as soon as they had
complained and wept. Their hearts were good, though their actions were
dishonest; and they had the root of the matter in them, though that root were a
dry stump, and had no branches. They were regenerated, but not reformed;
converted, but not a jot the better. Devout Worshippers, but bad Neighbors.
Lovers of God, but no haters of Covetousness. Had power in Heaven, but none
over themselves. They were Gods Servants, though they obeyed their appetites:
and his children, though no better than those, that they accounted of their
Father the Devil. Thus had men got the knack to be religious without religion,
and were in the way to be saved, without salvation.

This was one of the grossest abuses of Religion that our Disorders brought
upon us, whereby it was taken from its foundation of Virtue and Holy living,
and placed in emotions, raptures, and swelling words of vanity.

And when these had kindled the imagination, and sent the fancy into the
Clouds to flutter there in mystical nonsense: and when it was mounted on the
Wings of the Wind, and got into the Revelations to loosen the seals, pour out
the vials, and phantastically to interpret the fates of Kingdoms; when it flew
into the Tongue in an extravagant ramble, and abused the Name and Word of God,
mingling it with canting, unintelligible babble. I say, when the diseased and
disturbed fancy thus variously displayed it self, many made themselves
believe that they were acted by the Spirit, and that those wild agitations of
sick Imagination, were divine motions. And when this fire was descended from
the fancy to the affections, and these being exceedingly moved by those vain
and proud conceits, caused tremblings and fomings, convulsions and ecstasies in
the body, (all which are but natural diseases, if not worse; and just like
those odd exstatical motions of the Devils Priests when they come foming from
his Altars) these, I say, the wild phantasticks had learnt to ascribe to the
blessed and adorable Spirit And when their phansies being full of turgid
notions, and their bodies in an ecstasy, they dreamed of strange sights,
voices, and wonderful discoveries, which were nothing but the unquiet
agitations of their own disordered brains. These also were taken for divine
Revelations, and the effects of the Spirit of God, showing it self miraculously
in them.

Briefly then, and in sum; Every humor and fantastic unaccountable motion,
was by some represented as the work of that Spirit, to which they are most
opposite. Thus when warm and brisk sanguine presented a cheerful Scene, and
filled the imagination with pleasant Dreams; these were divine Illapses, the
Joys and Incomes of the Holy Ghost. When heated Melancholy had kindled the
busy and active fancy, the Enthusiast talks of Illuminations, New Lights,
Revelations, and many wonderful fine things, which were ascribed to the same
Spirit. And when Phlegm prevailed, and had quenched the fantastic Fire,
rendering the Mad man more dull and unactive; then the Spirit was withdrawn, and
the man under spiritual darkness and desertion. And when again Choler was
boiled up into rage and fury against every thing that was not of the fond Cut
and Measure; this also was presumed to be an Holy Fervor kindled by that
Spirit, whose real Fruits are gentleness and love.

And now, after that which I have said on this occasion, it may perhaps be
necessary to add, that I hope none here will be so uncharitable, or so unjust,
as to think that I go about to disparage the Spirit of God and its influence;
which, as I ought, I adore and reverence: and because I do so, I think it fit
to represent, and shame the blasphemous abuses of it, which would expose the
most Divine things to scorn, and make them ridiculous. And that the Holy Spirit
has been thus traduced and injured, and is still by great numbers among us,
'twould be shameful not to acknowledge. And I add, that my zeal and reverence
for the realities, make me thus sharp and severe to the Counterfeits. Nor do I
think that folly and phantastry is to be spared, because they wear the stolen
Livery of things venerable and sacred.

Therefore to go on, this was a kind of Religion that the corruption of it bred
among us. A Religion conceived in the Imagination and begot by Pride and
Self-Love, which gilded the Professors of it with all the glorious names and
privileges of the Gospel. And when they had encircled their Heads with their
own fantastic rays, and swollen their Imaginations into a Tympany of
ridiculous greatness, they scornfully contemned all but their Darling-selves,
under the notion of the Formal, the Moral, and the Wicked: and proudly pitied
the poor and carnal World, that is, all that were not of their conceited pitch
and elevation. And having thus dignified themselves, and debased others: they
herded together, drew the Church into their little Corners, and withdrew from
the communion of others, who had less conceit, though more Christianity. They
bid us stand off, lest we should have polluted them by our unhallowed
approaches; and having made us as the Heathen and the Publican, they cried,
Come out from among them. The true Church, soundness of Judgment, purity of
Doctrine and of Worship (if men would believe them) was confined to their gang,
just as they were to the Corners of Africa of old, when their Friends the
Donatists were there. Thus did they swell and swagger in their Imaginations,
till some other Sect, as well conceited as themselves, endeavored to take
their Plumes from them, and to appropriate those glorious prerogatives to their
own party. And then they bussled and contended, Here, the Church, cried one;
nay, but it is here, cried another; till a third gave the Lie to them both: and
then the Scuffle grows warm of Pride against Hypocrisy; the Self-conceit of
one Sect, against the Pride of another, and all against Sobriety and Truth.

This among some was the power of Godliness, this the spirituality of Religion,
under pretense of which, all reverence to things sacred was destroyed. For when
this Spirit had got into the Pulpit, and set up the Cry of the Purity and
Spirituality of Worship, it never left canting on the Subject, till men's
Tongues and Minds were fired against every matter of decency and order, as
formal and Antichristian. And so far had it prevailed, as to drive those of
warm affections and weak heads, from all due external Reverence to God and Holy
things. And these well meaning people being frighted with the terrible noise of
Popery, Superstition, and Antichristianism, (things they had learnt to hate,
but not to understand) boggled and flew off from every thing their furious
Guides had marked with these abhorred Characters, though it were never so
innocent and becoming. And thus a rude and slovenly Religion had made its way
into the World, and such a sordid carelessness in matters of divine Worship,
that should a Stranger have come into the Assemblies that were acted by this
Spirit, he would not have imagined what they had been doing: and that they were
about Holy Offices, would perhaps have been one of the last things in his
Conjecture. Thus bold and saucy talk had crept into men's Prayers, under
pretense of Holy Familiarity with God, nauseous impertinent Gibberish, under
the notion of Praying by the Spirit, and all kind of irreverences in external
demeanor, under the shelter of a pretended spiritual Worship.

Thus had men subtilized Religion, till they had destroyed it, made it first
invisible, and then Nothing.

AND now to gather up all, Religion being thus multiplied, corrupted and
debaucht, being made the Game of the Tongue, and the Frolic of Imagination;
fantastic in its principles, sordid in its practices, separated from the
foundation of a virtuous life, and made to serve the ends of Pride and Avarice;
what was like to follow, according to the nature and order of things, but
Atheism and contempt of all Religion? And when one says, here is Religion, and
another says, there is Religion; a third will contemningly ask, where is
Religion, and what is Religion? When the Heathen Deities were so multiplied,
that every thing was made a God; Protagoras, Diagoras, and others, first began
to question, and next to affirm that there was NONE. Religions have been
multiplied in our days, as much as Gods in theirs; and we have seen much of
the same fatal event and issue. They made their Gods contemptible and vile, by
deifying things that were so, and we had no less detracted from the credit of
Religion, by bringing it down to things of the lowest and vilest rank and
nature. Our Idolized Opinions were no better than their Garlic and Onyons. The
diseases of the Mind, Frenzy and Enthusiasm, which our days have worshipped,
were no better than those of the Body which they adored. And they never raised
Altars to worse Vices than REBELLION, FRAUD, and VIOLENCE, which our Age has
hallowed and made sacred. So that notwithstanding all the glorious pretensions
of those Times, Religion was, among many, taken off all its Foundations, and
the World prepared for Atheism. The Follies and Divisions of one Age, make way
for Atheism in the next.

Thus also briefly of the Condition of our RELIGION.

AND thus I have shown how much RESISTANCE of the Authority that is over us, is
against our DUTY and our INTEREST. The former God has plainly told us; and the
latter we have sadly felt.

It remains that we humble our selves under the sense of the public guilt, as
well as complain of the consequent miseries. That we may not draw down new
judgments, by repeating old provocations; and adding our particular sins to the
common score. And I think we shall do well to consider, what we, who abhor
Rebellion, have contributed to the fatal evils that followed it. We can perhaps
be well enough content that the visible actors of of those mischiefs should be
lasht, and exposed; and it may be, are well pleased and tickled with our
reprehensions in which we think our selves not concerned. But if we will be
just, if we will have this Fast to signify, we must turn our reproofs upon our
selves also, and with grief and shame acknowledge that our sins and Debauches,
our contempt of God and scorn of Religion, have helped toward the plucking down
that sad judgment upon the Nation, which we lament this Day. And it must be
confessed, that there were those that fought against the KING, who yet spent
their blood in his service: and many by their vices, endeavored to engage
Heaven against that Cause, which themselves strove in another way, to less
purpose to promote. And therefore we ought not to think; that this Fast is
appointed to inveigh against the faults of others, and to make them and their
actions odious; but to humble our selves under the apprehension of our own, and
to teach us to show our love to the King, and readiness to obey him, by
subjecting our selves first unto God, whose Vicegerent HE is. And we may be
assured that they that are not Loyal to the UNIVERSAL LORD of all the World,
can scarce possibly be so to their particular SOVEREIGN. And 'twill need a
great deal of Charity to help us to believe, that those that make no scruple to
blaspheme the Name of God, and to break the plainest, most earnest, and most
express of his Laws, will be withheld by considerations of Duty or Conscience
from rebelling against their King, or affronting HIS, when there is any
powerful interest to oblige them to it. If therefore we would give any evidence
of a serious humiliation at present, or any security of a future loyalty, let
us do so by confessing our particular sins, and forsaking them; and then there
will be hope that the Authority of God may oblige us quietly and peaceably to
submit to his MINISTER; and in doing so we shall be blessed with his influence,
and deserve his protection. And thus demeaning our selves like Professors of
the Gospel of Peace, and Subjects of the Prince of Peace, the Peace He left
with his Disciples will be with us here, and everlasting Peace will encircle
our heads with rays of glory in the Kingdom of Peace. And so the Peace of God
which passes all understanding, keep your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus: To
whom with God the Father, and God the Holy Ghost, be ascribed all Glory,
Honor, and adoration henceforth and for ever. Amen and Amen.

FINIS.

