Festum Festorum* OR, A DISCOURSE Touching the Holy Feast OF EASTER. SHOWING
How it may be ESTABLISHED For EVER.

By JOHN GADBURY, Student in Physic and Astrology.

-- What Holy Institution soever Other (...) of the Year have received, some
from the Apostles, and some from the Fathers of the Church in succeeding Ages;
We may be sure that this Sa^^ed (...) was Instituted by the Divine Authority of
God and of (...) himself. Bishop of Durham's (...) of D^^. p. 223. Licensed,
December. 1st. 1686.

LONDON Printed by N. Tho^pson, for the Company of Stationers, M^CLXXXVII.

To My LORD, the LORD HENRY* EARL of PETERBOROW, Peer of ENGLAND, Lord MORDANT,
Lord Baron of TV^VEY, Groom of the STOLE and first Gentleman of His Majesty's
BEDCHAMBER, Lord High-Steward to the QUEEN, Lord Lieutenant of the County of
NORTHAMPTON* One of the Lords of His Majesty's Most Honorable PRIVY COUNCIL
and Knight of the most Noble Order of the GARTER. Health, Happiness, and Length
of Days be ever Wished.
My LORD,
HAVING attempted a Task of as great Use to the CHRISTIAN CHURCH, as of
difficulty to perform, viz. The Reformation of Our COMMON CALENDAR, and a Right
Stating of the Holy Feast of EASTER, (I hope,) for Ever, I do in all Humility
cast both my Self, and It at Your Lordships Feet, Imploring Your Honors
Protection of both, so far only as Your Lordship shall judge the Work, and
Author Deserving. It is a Subject that has caused more Heats in the Primitive
Times, than any Other, and not without the Expense of much SWEAT and BLOOD; So
Zealous were the Ancient Christians in Contending for the TRUTH. This Method
Once Embraced, as I hope, and am sure it will the sooner for Your Lordships
Owning, there will never need any more Quarrels or Contentions about it.

You are, (My Lord,) One of the Greatest Stars in our British Hemisphere, and
move in an ORB of Honor very near unto Royal PHOEBUS himself. Nay, I must, in
all Humility, beg leave to remember the ( Unthinking part of the) World, That,
to your very Great Honor now, and Greater Glory in Ages to come, Your Lordship
was Once nearly Eclipsed with Him too; Being Constrained to an Un^^^^onable
Travel in your Elder years for the Security of your Life and Liberty, when both
were boldy struck (...) by the EXCLUSIONERS of our late Perilous Times, that
bid so Fair for the Un^inging of the GOVERNMENT it self.

These things, (My Lord,) then being true, Your Lordship is the most Fit of
any, (if at least you shall judge my Mean, but Well-meant Pains, worthy so
great regard,) to bring this Mercurial Discovery to the KINGS most ROYAL EAR.
The Gogitating HERMES sometimes makes MONARCHS shine as Gloriously, as the
Valiant and Commanding Mavors: And the Ever Famous JULIUS CAESAR derives as
Lasting, (I will not say so Great,) an Honor from his Correction of the
CALENDAR, as from his Victory obtained in the Pharsalian Field.

And if this my Minute Attempt happen to be but Embraced by your Lordship, I
shall then hope to live to see MENSIS OCTOBRIS, (in our BRITISH CALENDAR, at
least,) Exchanger its Name, for that more Glorious and Auspicious One, of
MENSIS JACOBI: To which Remarkable Month your Lordship has a more then
Ordinary Title, as being most happily Born therein, and on a Day so near the
best of KINGS, and in Conjunction with a Most BLESSED EVANGELIST, though in
Different years.

Pardon, (My Lord,) I beseech you, my Great Confidence, in presuming to Think
That any thing I am able to Write should be Worthy of your Lordships Notice.
And if This my Humble ESSAY should fail of a General Approbation, Let it,
however, (with your Lordships Noble Favor,) stand me in this stead, viz. to
Tell the World, and your Lordship, how much I am, (according to my mean (...),)
willing to promote the English (...), and also, in a Just and Gra^e^^ Duty to
your Lordship, Record my self, by many Obligations,

(My LORD,) Your Lordships Meanest Servant, And Ever Faithful Honourer, JOHN
GADBURY

Festum Festorum* OR, A DISCOURSE Touching the ORIGIN and END Of the HOLY FEAST
of EASTER.
OF all the Feasts belonging to the Christian Calendar, we shall not incur
Error, if we Affirm, That the Holy Feast of EASTER is the Chief: It being as
Ancient as our Blessed Savior's Resurrection; In memory whereof, it was
declared, and instituted to be kept Holy, (says St. Augustine^) And, by virtue
thereof, all the SUNDAYS in the Tear besides. It is by the Primitive Fathers,
(as liberally quoted by the late Learned and Reverend Bishop of Durham,) termed
the FEAST of FEASTS, and the Solemnit^ of all Solemnities. And, hence it is
that the learned Divines, (though of Different Opinions, I must not say of
Different Churches, for CHRIST has but ONE CHURCH on Earth,) do therefore with
the Ancients term it, and that very justly -- The KING of DAYS, and QUEEN of
FEASTS.

As for the Name thereof, that is a compellation made up of a German, and an
English word, viz. O^st, and Star: The former of which the Saxons brought in
use among us, viz. Oest signifying ARISING, or the EAST. For that the Sun, and
all the Stars do Arise, or first show themselves in the EAST. The later, viz.
Star, alludes to our Blessed Savior, the Bright, and MORNING STAR, whose
Resurrection, or Arising from the GRAVE, was performed on this Day, for the
Salvation and Justification of all the Sons of ADAM, who claim the Benefit
thereof by a True and Lively FAITH.

Our English Glossographer, (Mr. Blunt) says, That EASTER is so named of
EOSTER, a Goddess of the Old Saxons, whose Feast they kept in April. Verstegan
says the same; and affirms, moreover, that at this present in Saxony, this
FEAST is called OSTERN, which comes of OSTERMONAET; their, and our Old Name of
APRIL; in which Month this Glorious Christian Feastival most commonly happens.
Howbeit, at sometimes we know it shifts place, according to the Moon's Motion,
the Epact, etc. on which it depends, and so may come to fall in MARCH, as in
this Year 1687. it does. Indeed this Sacred Feast of EASTER has certain Limits
assigned, which (without an Alteration by Authority) it can neither Transgress,
or Transpass; and commonly it makes its Progress or Perambulation between the
22th. day of MARCH, and the 26th. day of APRIL, according to the Cycles, etc.
on which it depends; and can therefore never go below the FORMER, or ascend
beyond the LATER And, because the Boundaries of this Holy Feast are not
commonly known, I will here present you with a Table of its proper Limits,
(according to the old Julian Correction) as I find it in that excellent
Collection of DEVOTIONS, published by the late Right Reverend Bishop of Durham.

Gold. Number. Easter Limit 1 April, 5 2 March, 25 3 April, 13 4 April, 2 5 March,
22 6 April, 10 7 March, 30 8 April, 18 9 April, 7 10 March, 27 11 April, 15 12
April, 4 13 March, 24 14 April, 12 15 April, 1 16 March, 21 17 April, 9 18
March, 29 19 April, 17

Here you are to observe, That Easter Sunday is not in this Table set down
against each Golden Number, but the Easter Limit only. And that it is the
Sunday following the said Easter Limit, which is always EASTER DAY with us here
in England. As for Example.

In this Year 1687. the Golden Number is 16. now entering the Table under the
Title of Golden Number, with 16. against it toward the right hand, I find March
21. which is the Easter Limit for this Year Now March the 21. happens on a
Monday; so that the Sunday following, which is March the 27th. must be EASTER
DAY. But if the Limit fall on a Sunday, it must not then be EASTER DAY, but the
Sunday following always. Et sic de cateris.

But to dilucidate this matter a little further; You may please to observe,
That the Golden Number is the ground of the EASTER LIMIT, with regard had to
the New, or Full Moon happening somewhat before, or after the VERNAL EQUINOX.
And in the Common Prayer Book, Printed Anno 1662. You have this plain and
general Rule laid down for the constant finding of EASTER.

EASTER DAY is always the first Sunday after the first FULL MOON; which happens
near after the One and Twentieth day of MARCH. Where you are to Note, That the
Full Moon here mentioned, is not the true Opposition of the Luminaries in an
Astrological, but in an Ecclesiastical sense only; as it has been expressed in
Common-Prayer-Books formerly, and is particularly mentioned in the MASS BOOK
Printed by Kingston and Sution, in Quarto, at London, Anno 1555; which was the
second year of Queen MARY; the Title whereof is, Missale ad usum Ecclesia
Sarisburiensis. In which is taught how to find EASTER DAY by New or Full Moons,
with these Directions.

Carmina docentia per Novilunia invenire Pascha.
Post regum festa, quaere Novilunia trina,
Post Dominica tertia, Pascha sacrum Celebra.
Aliud. Post veris Aequinoctium quaere Ple^ilunium
Et Dominica proxima sacrum celebra Pascha
Non verius inveniens, si mill legas codices.
The New Moon, (I say) here meant, is not the true ^ptica^ Conjunction of the
SUN and MOON, but the Day only of the MOON's Mean Conjunction, as it was above
1300 years ago, and is in that Book found merely by taking the Day against
which the proposed Year's GOLDEN NUMBER stands in the Margin of each Month. For
the Calculator of that CALENDAR knew well enough that That day would be four
Days after the NEW MOON of his own time, agreeable to the (...), or first
appearance of the MOON, and therefore directs us to begin at the Day so found,
and to tell upwards a Syllable to each Day, saying, In Caelis est hic; which if
you do, the Syllable hic, will fall four Days above your GOLDEN-NUMBER, and
there show you the Day of NEW MOON for your time.

The FULL MOON meant in those Verses are not so much as precise Day of the mean
Opposition of the SUN and MOON, but are to be found in this manner. To the Day
of that Ancient NEW MOON found by the GOLDEN-NUMBER. add 13. so have you the
14th. day of that Ecclesiastic CYCLIC Month. For, the GOLDEN-NUMBER of any
year set to some Day, between March the 7th. and April the 6th. declares that
Day to be the Ecclesiastical beginning of the year. And the grounds of this
CYCLE are these, -- March the 21st. was accounted the Day of the VERNAL
AEQUINOX, (as yet it is with those that follow the ROMAN CORRECTION.) Now if
this ( viz. March 8. the day succeeding the Boundary, March 7.) be the Earliest
NEW MOON that can be admitted for a (...) Month, or the (...) of the (...)
year: The next years FIRST MONTH will begin with March 27. And the Third years
FIRST MONTH will begin March 16. The Fourth years FIRST MONTH on April the 4th.
and so in order, as is here set down.

March. Apr. March. March. March. 8.27.16. 4. 23.12.31. 20.9. 28.17. Apr.
March. Apr. March. March. 5. 25.14. 2. 22. 11. 30. 19.

And then March the 8th. again, as at the first. The (...) returning after 19.
years very nearly to the same place again, as the (...) had been taught long
before they were (...); and as Astronomy also at (...) demonstrates.

I shall not here trouble my self to tell you why these 19. (...) or Beginnings
of the FIRST MONTH were not (always) reckoned in this order: For then I must
also undertake to show you how the CALENDARS in Missals and Common-Prayer-Books
were made; and likewise how they came to differ. (A great unhappiness sure, to
all that love Unity!) But this is certain, that the CALENDAR in our
Common Prayer Book, in the Edition of 1662. has its RED NUMBERS restored to
it; (in which there is no harm,) and the true Ecclesiastical NEW and FULL
MOONS, with their assistance, are truly stated, as in this following Table.

Aur. Number. -- 16.5.13. 2.10.18.7. N. Moon. Mar. 8.9.11. 12.14.16.17. F. Moon.
Mar. 21.22.24. 25.27.29.30. Aur. Number. 15.4.12.1. 9.17.6.14. 3.11.19.8. (...)
19.20.22.23. 25.27.28.30. 31.2.4.5. (...) April. 1.2.4.5. 7.9.10.12.
13.15.17.18

And thus we have explained unto you the 19. EASTER LIMITS, according to
Ecclesiastical appointment: Which many not knowing, are apt to quarrel with
Astrologers about the right timing of this HOLY FEAST in their Almanacks. These
are the Boundaries of EASTER, even as the 26th. of November is LIMIT of ADVENT;
upon which day Saviour-Sunday never falls, but as soon after as may be. And
EASTER you see has every year a different LIMIT; upon which this FEAST is not
to be celebrated, though it should fall on a SUNDAY, but upon the next SUNDAY
following. Unless Men will wilfully oppose the Establishment which Authority
has made, (as some conceited persons ambitiously do,) which is not only
unsafe, but very hold and temerarious.

And, here we may further Mer^^, That these LIMITS do not oppose those set down
by the late mentioned Renowned PRELATE, but are the same with His, in respect
of the FULL MOON; but in regard of the NEW MOON, much larger, as any one but
meanly skilled in Numbers may by Inspection perceive.

The beforesaid Right Reverend BISHOP. according to these LIMITS, calculated an
^ASTERTABLE for 80. years, beginning (...) 166^. and Printed it with his (...)
But because it is the same with my EASTER TABLE, supputated for Two Hundred and
odd years, (in respect at least of the Time un^^red,) I forbear Re-printing
thereof, and shall here present you with an abstract of my own (...).

An EASTER TABLE accommodated to the Julia^ and Gregorian Accounts for 204
years, beginning (...) 1677.
Anno Chri. Julian Account. Gregorian Account. 1677 April 14 April 18 1678
March 31 10 1679 April 20 2 1680 11 21 1681 3 6 1682 16 March 22 1683 8 April
18 1684 March 30 2 1685 April 19 21 1686 4 14 1687 March 27 March 30 1688 April
15 April 18 1689 March 31 10 1690 April 20 March 26 1691 12 April 15 1692 March
27 6 1693 April 16 March 22 1694 8 April 11 1695 March 24 3 1696 April 12 22
1697 4 7 School 24 March 23 1699 9 April 19 1700 March 31 10 1701 April 20 23
1702 5 15 1703 March 28 7 1704 April 16 March 22 1705 8 April 11 1706 March 24
3 1707 April 13 April 23 1708 4 7 1709 24 March 23 1710 9 April 19 1711 1 4
1712 20 23 1713 5 15 1714 March 28 March 31 1715 April 17 April 20 1716 1 11
1717 21 March 27 1718 13 April 16 1719 March 29 8 1720 April 17 March 23 1721 9
April 12 1722 March 25 4 1723 April 14 24 1724 5 15 1725 March 28 March 31 1726
April 10 April 20 1727 2 12 1728 21 March 27 1729 6 April 16 1730 March 29 8
1731 April 18 21 1732 9 12 1733 March 25 4 1734 April 14 24 1735 6 9 1736 25
March 24 1737 April 10 April 20 1738 2 5 1739 22 25 1740 6 16 1741 March 29 1
1742 April 18 21 1743 3 13 1744 March 25 4 1745 April 15 17 1746 March 30 9
1747 April 19 March 25 1748 10 April 13 1749 March 26 5 1750 April 15 25 1751 7
10 1752 March 29 1 1753 April 11 21 1754 3 13 1755 23 March 22 1756 14 April 17
1757 March 30 9 1758 April 19 March 25 1759 11 April 7 1760 March 26 5 1761 15
22 1762 7 10 1763 March 23 2 1764 April 11 21 1765 3 6 1766 23 March 22 1767 8
April 18 1768 March 30 2 1769 April 19 22 1770 4 14 1771 March 27 March 30 1772
April 15 April 18 1773 March 31 10 1774 April 26 March 26 1775 12 April 15 1776
3 6 1777 16 March 22 1778 8 April 18 1779 March 31 3 1780 April 19 22 1781 4 14
1782 March 27 March 30 1783 April 16 April 19 1784 March 31 10 1785 April 20
March 26 1786 12 April 15 1787 March 28 7 1788 April 16 March 22 1789 8 April
11 1790 March 24 3 1791 April 13 23 1792 4 7 1793 24 March 23 1794 9 April 19
1795 1 4 1796 20 March 29 1797 5 April 15 1798 March 28 7 1799 April 17 20 1800
8 11 1801 24 3 1802 13 23 1803 5 8 1804 24 March 23 1805 9 April 19 1806 1 4
1807 14 24 1808 5 15 1809 March 28 March 31 1810 April 17 April 20 1811 April 2
April 12 1812 21 March 27 1813 13 April 16 1814 March 29 8 1815 April 18 March
24 1816 9 April 12 1817 March 25 4 1818 April 14 24 1819 6 9 1820 March 28
March 31 1821 April 10 April 20 1822 2 12 1823 22 25 1824 6 16 1825 March 29 8
1826 April 18 21 1827 3 13 1828 25 14 1829 14 24 1830 6 9 1831 19 March 25 1832
10 April 21 1833 2 5 1834 22 25 1835 7 17 1836 March 29 1 1837 April 18 21 1838
3 13 1839 March 26 March 29 1840 April 14 April 17 1841 March 30 9 1842 April
19 March 25 1843 10 April 14 1844 March 26 5 1845 April 15 25 1846 April 7
April 10 1847 March 23 2 1848 April 11 21 1849 3 13 1850 23 March 22 1851 8
April 18 1852 March 31 9 1153 April 19 March 25 1854 11 April 14 1855 March 27
6 1856 April 15 25 1857 7 10 1858 March 23 2 1859 April 12 22 1860 3 6 1861 23
March 22 1862 8 April 18 1863 March 31 3 1864 April 19 22 1865 4 14 1866 March
27 March 30 1867 April 16 April 19 1868 March 31 10 1869 April 20 March 26 1870
12 April 15 1871 March 28 7 1872 April 16 March 22 1873 8 April 18 1874 March
31 3 1875 April 13 23 1876 4 14 1877 March 27 March 30 1878 April 16 April 19
1879 1 11 1880 20 March 26

This Table needs no Explanation; we will therefore proceed in our Discourse
of this Holy Feast^ And that we may be the more plainly understood, let it be
remembered, that there are Three kinds of EASTER, viz.

The PASC^^ (...) or the Jewish EASTER. The PASC^^ (...), (I wish it were so)
or our CASTER. The PASC^^ (...), or the (...). CASTER.
I. The (...) or Jewish Easter; which was called the PASSOVER (as some observe)
from the Hebrew word P^^ach, which signifies to Leap, or to Pas^ over, or (...)
[As our EASTER does Leap, or Pass from one Week, Month or (...) to another,
every year.] And it was instituted, A^no Mundi 2447. and ordained to be
Celebrated from the 15th. day of the (...) Month called ABIB, (or March) to the
21st. day of the same Inclusive. i. e. for VII. days together. Yet so, as that
the 15th. day, and 21st. day were held (...) Sacred then the rest.

We may take notice, That ABIB, or March is justly called the First Month of
the Year, by reason of the VERNAL EQUINOX its falling therein: In Honor
whereof, (the Year at that time being Renewed unto us, and Nature presenting us
with a new delightful Spring,) KINGS formerly were used to date their REIGNS
thence, as this Holy PASCHAL FEAST took its beginning: Whence one wittily
writes --

Of Months, and of New Fruits is ABIB Father,
Kings Reigns were Reckoned thence, and Feasts together.
The VII. Days were also called the Feast of Azymes; viz. A time in which it
was not Lawful to eat Unleavened Bread; and the First of the Pascha, or EASTER,
(...), because that thereon the PASCHAL LAMB was Slain, and Eaten, as a Type of
our Ever Blessed Savior's Passion and Resurrection: Who, as he was the (...)
of God, (...) from the Beginning of the World for Salvation to all the Sons of
ADAM, so he took away the (...) of the World, from all those that truly (...)
on him. But the (...) having thus appeared to us, we must not JU^^ZE, and still
rest in the (...) (i e.) we ought no longer to celebrate the Pass^ver after the
Jewish, but ^line.

I remember to have read somewhere of a (...) (I think 'twas S. Ignatius) who
says, He that keeps EASTER after the manner of the JEWS, is a Companion of them
that (...) our SAVIOOR. But the saying seems somewhat too strict, at least in
my Opinion; since to Commemorate the (...) at all, is a Duty of RELIGION, and
bespeaks a Veneration to the Memory of our (...) (whether in Type, or (...)) in
such as observe it Religi^^^y, though they do not Celebrate it as they ought:
It Is the (...) or Business of RELIGION to enjoin, and practice the keeping
thereof; but it is a MATH^MATICAL, performanc^ to appoint the right Tim^ of its
Observation.

II. The P^ (...) (for so it was, and sometimes, (yet but sometimes,) is still
so,) or That EASTER, which we observe, (if we believe (...)) was first ordained
322. years (...) ^stum, or after the (...) of our (...) SAVIOR. For (...)
Great, that God-like Christian Emperor^, (who, as History informs us) had so
great an Honor for the (...) Crucified Lord that on (...) he arose, and
bestowed the richest (...) and ^ties all over his EMPIRE And from His Example,
his (...) were wont to Releas^ all PRISONE^^ on this day, excepting such as
were Gui^^y of M^, or some other very H^i^^^s (...) And in the purer times of
Christianity, ^STIANS were constantly accustomed joyfully to Greet each other,
with an (...), Christ is risen. And the usual Response was, Christ is risen
indeed. Nay, those that were Enemies at this time, were Reconciled by the only
Pious Amulet of a Surrexit Christus, and so became Friends again. Oh! that so
Divine and Heavenly a Practice were Revived among us! This Noble Emperor, I
say, taking notice of diverse Errors, and Contentions which constantly happened
among Christians, after the days of the Apostles, about the Celebrating of this
HOLY FEAST of our Savior's Rising from the Grave; Assembled from all Nations
318 Bishops, and other Learned Persons, as well Greeks, as Latins, and
Aegrptians; such as could withal well determine of the Motions of the Heavenly
Bodies, upon which this HOLY FEAST depends: Among whom, EUSEBIUS Bishop of
Caesarea was chief; He being a most Excellent Astronomer, and Mathematician.
And he kept them together near two years at his own proper Costs and Charges.

And lo! in the year 323. they Instituted a NEW GOLDEN-NUMBER, differing from
that in use among the Romans; by which New Number or Cycle, this FEAST was
appointed to be Celebrated, not precisely upon the first FULL MOON of the FIRST
MONTH, (as before you heard) or after the VERNAL AEQUINOX, lest the World
should thereby be taught to Judaine, afresh, (as St. Austin well observes) but,
statim post presently after, viz. upon the Sunday next following the first FULL
MOON, that should happen after the VERNAL AEQUINOX. Terminis Paschalis (inquit
Scaliger) est quarta decima Luna mensis, Paschalis Christianiseculo Constantini
Magni.

But this Institution of EASTER, as if begun under a Moveable Horoscope, (to
speak like an Astrologer.) was not continued above Seven years after the great
Council of Nice. For Anno 330. post Christum, there arose many Differences
between the Greeks and Romans about it: Which Controversy growing unto so
great an height, and so many difficulties started therein; (Good ASTRONOMERS
sure were very scarce in those Days) that it continued near 200 Years before it
could admit of any Reconcilia^ian: To the great Gr^ef and Trouble of
CHRISTIANS, and Scandal of CHRIS^LAN^TY.

But at length, for the quieting of all Contentions about this SACRED FEAST, in
the time of JUSTINIAN the Emperor, viz. 527. there arose one DIONYSIUS ABBAS, a
Noble Roman, (and one certainly (...) by God, for so good and glorious a WORK!)
And he taking into consideration the many ERRORS broached about this HOLY
FEAST, began to frame Tables of EASTER, according to the mind of the for^er
Council; which he completed Anno 532, post Cr^s^um. And so happy and fortunate
was the Noble (...) in this his performance, That, the great Council of
CHALCEDON being satisfied with the Truth and Excellency thereof, were pleased
not only to approve of, and own it, but also to Enact, That whosoever held any
other EAS^^^, than tha^ which was (...) the Bl^^of Rome, (...) should be
rep^^ed and (...) against as an HE RETICK.

But before I proceed any further, I conceive it requisite, for the
satisfaction of those that are unacquainted with the Antiquity and Honor of
this SACRED FEAST; and of the many Troubles that have invaded the World, by
reason of its not being truly Observed, or Celebrated, to transcribe a few
(...) from the Learned Dr. CAVE, in his (...) concerning this matter, viz.

Of all the (...) observed in the Christian Church, EASTER challenges the
precedence, both for its Antiquity, and the great (...) about it; that in, and
from the very times of the APOSTLES (besides the weekly returns of the Lord's
Day,) there has been always an Anniversary Festival in memory of CHRIST's
RESURRECTION, no Man can doubt that has any insight into the Affairs of the
ANCIENT CHURCH. All the dispute was about the particular time when it was to be
kept; which became a matter of as famous a Controversy, as any that in those
Ages exercised the Christian World. The state of the Case was briefly this: The
Churches of Asia the Less kept their EASTER upon the same day whereon the Jews
Celebrated their PASSOVER, viz. upon the Fourteenth Day of the First Month
(which always began with the appearance of the MOON,) mostly answering to our
March; and this they did upon what Day of the Week soever it fell, and hence
were styled Quart^ Decimans, because keeping EASTER Quarto decima Lunae, upon
the Fourteenth Day after the (...), or Appearance of the. MOON The other
Churches and especially those of the WES^ did not follow this Custom, but kept
^^STER upon the (...) following the Day of the (...) partly the more to (...)
the (...) and partly to distinguish between (...) and (...) The (...) pleaded
for themselves the pra^tice of the Apostle^ (...) Bishop of S^nyrna, who had
lived and conversed with them, having kept it upon that Day, together with St.
(...) and the rest of the (...) as (...), (who himself knew (...) and doubtless
had it from his own mouth,) speaks in a Letter about this very thing, though
himself was on the other side. And POL^CRATES in a Letter to the same purpose,
instances, not only in St. JOHN, but St. PHILL^^ the (...) who himself, and his
whole (...) used to keep it, from whom it had been conveyed down in a constant
and un-interrupted Observance through all the Bishops of those places, some
whereof he there Enumerates; and tells us, That (...) of that place in a
cunstan^ (...) had been his Kinsmen, and himself the (...) and that it had
never been kept by them upon any other Day: This we are not so to understand,
as if St. (...) and the Apostle had Instituted this (...) and Commanded it to
be observed on that Day, but rather that they did it by way of (...)
accommodating their Practice in a matter Indifferent to the humor of the
AEWIS^ CONVERTS, (whose number in those Parts was very great) as they had done
before in several other Cases, and particularly in observing the (...) or
Saturday, The (...) Churches also, (says Eusebius,) had for their Patronage an
APOSTOLICAL TRADITION or at least pretended it; and were the much more Numerous
Party. This (...) was the Spring of great Blushern in the Church; for the
Bishops of Rome stickled hard to impose their Cust^^ upon the (...) Churches;
whereupon (...) comes over to (...) to confer with AN^CET^S who was then (...)
about it; And though they could not agree the matter, yet they parted fairly.
After this (...) renewed the Qu^^rel, and was so fierce and peremptory in the
Case, that he either actually did, or severely threatened to (...) the EASTERN
CHURCHES, for standing out against it. This Rath, and Bold attempt, was ill
resented by the Sober, and Moderate Men of his own Party, who writ to him about
it; and particularly (...), (a Man, as Eusebi^^ notes, truly answering his
Name, both in his (...) and his Life, QUIET and ^EAC^ABLE,) who gravely
reproved him for Renting the (...) of the CHURCH and troubling so many (...)
for observing the Cust^ms derived to them from their ANCESTORS; with much more
to the same purpose. But the ASIAN BI^^^^ little regarded what was either said,
or done at (...) and still went on in their (...), though by the diligent
Practices of the other Party, they lost ground; but yet still made shift to
keep the Cause on Foot, till the coming of (...), who finding this (...)
amongst others, much to (...) the (...) of the CHURCH, did for this, and some
other Reasons, Summon the Great Council of NICE; by whom this Question was
solemnly determined, and EASTER ordained to be (...) upon One, and the same Day
throughout the World, not according to the Customs of the JEWS, but upon the
LORD^DAY, and this Decree Ratified and Published by the Imperial Let^^^ to all
the (...) Thus far this Learned Author, (...) Part 1. cap. 7. page 185. etc.

To add one Testimony further in defense of this Argument, I find in a (...)
lately Printed by N. Thompson, Entitled, The State of Ch^rch-Affairs (...)
under the Romans, and British (...) viz. -- In this Council (of (...)) was
further Order made, for the (...) Observation of EASTER, upon the first Sunday
following the 14th. Day of the first MO^N after the VERNAL AEQUINON: For the
better finding out of which, it was recommended to the C^^e of the (...) of
^^^andria, every year to give notice to the Bishop of (...) upon what Day
EASTER was to be observed; and this was to be communicated unto all (...) MOTER
(...). And during MASS on the (...) a (...) with a loud Voice, declared the
following EASTER, whereby ^^NT and all other (...) were regulated: And
accordingly the (...) also were guided, until (...) from ROME was interrupted
by Domestic Brails, and the Invasion of the SAXONS. And when by such
interruption the Bri^ans varied from the Western Churches, they kept not ^ASTER
as the Quarto Deci^^^^, precisely upon the 14th. Day of the MOON after the
Jewish mode: But if that 14th. Day happened upon a Sunday, they did not defer
the Observation until the S^nday following, as other Catholic Christian
CHURCHES used to do.

This Little Quot^tion would bear a (...) which I could willingly afford to it,
did not I A^^ at Conciseness. But I refer you to the Book it self, which is
worth your perusal.

III. To reassume our former matter: The Correction by DIONYSIUS ABBAS, by
virtue of the Decree of the Council, not of VICE, (though that led to this,)
but of CHALCED^^, (as I mentioned before,) continued about 1050. years, without
so much as being once questioned, viz. unto the year 1582. No Man until that
time ever daring to presume to (...) the Celebration of this (...)

But then, viz. Anno (...) being so eminently obvious in the (...) of its
Celebration, (so hard and difficult a matter it is for Time and Truth long to
keep company together.) The word^ and worthy minded (...) the XIII. was (by
some Divine Impulse certainly) most happily moved to a Correction of the (...)
and so commanded the (...) to be framed; which after his Name, and in Memory of
so excellent a Service to the (...) was called the (...) For it was most
apparently seen that the Aequinones fled Backward, viz. from March the 21st.
day, unto Mar^^ the 11th. day, no less than Ten Days in time. (A great Error!
and was most fit to be amended.) By reason of which Anti^^^tion, there happened
two FULL MOONS after the Vernal Aequinow, before EASTER could be Celebrated:
And consequently there would be TWO EASTERS in One Year; or within the Compass
of 365 Days; as it still very often happens with us in England, and in other
Places, where ever the (...) Accoun^ is used, for want of a due Correction.

The observation of which (...) Er^an. (I say) occasioned the good POPE (...)
to alter the (...) which he did by substracting Ten Day^ from the Family Tray
of (...), to the Fifteenth Day thereof, Inclusive, Anno 1^82. for prevention of
so remarkable an Inconvenience as the common EASTERTA. ^^ES were chargeable
withal. Which Anticipa^^un of the (...) if continued, in process of time, Our
BLESNED (...) and St. JOHN BA^ ^^^, (as the skilful in Astronomy observe,) must
come to exchange their (...) and the (...) of ^^RTST's (...) fall in (...) when
the (...) is in Cancer; and that of the BAPTIST, in December, when the Sun is
in Capricorn. An ERROR which greatly behoved the then Christian Authority to
command a correction of.

And for prevention of this (...) (an offense even against the Law of Nature,
as charging the orderly motions of the STARS with disorder,) the (...) Church
have Reformed their CA^^^DAR, and PASCHAL TABLES to such a degree of certainty,
that they always produce their EASTER on the SUNDAY following the first
FULLMOON post Aequinoctium Vernalem: Nearly (not fully,) agreeable to the
Decree of the COUNCIL of NICE Unto which, the Rule for finding EASTER even in
our Common Prayer Book consents, though the TABLE of this HOLY FEAST therein be
very often contrary thereunto. As indeed to our shame it must, until we shall
be so happy as to obtain a CORRECTION of the (...)DAR, by which our great
FESTIVAL is at present governed.

But, what then? Is the emendation of POPE GREGORY exactly true? It were indeed
to be wished so, but we know it falls short of Verity, though not so much as
the JULIAN ACCOUNT: Yes, and calls also for a CORRECTION, though not so loudly
and strongly. It is a Younger Establishment, and therefore more vigorous and
similar to TRUTH. Whereas ours is as Antien^ as the good DIONY^IVS EXIGVVS, and
with Age grown very weak and decrepid, humbly imploring AUTHORITY to consider
its case, and yield it such relief, and support, as to their Wisdoms shall seem
most fit and convenient.

But although the Gregorian Account be not so complete and perfect as may be
wished, I will yet acknowledge (with Mr. Hooker, and others,) that it is much
more Correct and Certain than the JV^^AN. And that in several regards: First,
(as he well observes,) the Quantity of the Gregorian Year does better accord to
the Heavenly Motions. Secondly, for that the AEQUINOXES and SOLSTICES are
thereby more firmly bound to certain Days. And Thirdly, because EASTER is
(generally) more truly Celebrated, according to the mind of the Doctors and
Fathers of the NICENE COUNCIL.

Nevertheless we may complain, (with Clavius,) That the Solar year it self is
not exactly determined: The exact motion of the SUN is not truly known, as may
be seen by comparing Astronomical Tables, even of the best and latest Authors,
Kepler, Wing, Bullialdus, Shackerly, etc. Alas it is not the work of a private
Hand, or Head, that can conquer this HYDRA: It becomes the tremend Pains and
Endeavors of a General Council, with an EMPEROR or RING present at it, and in
the Head of it, thereby the better to give Encouragement to so Great and
Glorious a Work^ as in those of Nice, and Chalccdon. In the later of which,
when they came to an accord about this Holy Feast, they all with one Voice made
this Pious Acclamation, Vnum Pascha in Orbi Terrarum! There is but ONE EASTER
now all the World over.

What has been, may be, and we have the same God of Truth to rely on: The same
I^genuity to assist us: We want only the same Industry, (and I was about to say
the same Encouragement,) with them that have gone before us.

Let us observe further, That this Holy Feast of FASTER, both for its Name and
Use, of All Feasts ought to be most punctually and truly observed. Of the Name
we have spoken somewhat before, and something likewise of its Use. But it may
moreover be remembered, that the HOLY CHURCH, for the advantage of all Pl^^
Chr^^ians, has appointed it to be observed as a time of PACIFICATION, when to
bring our Peace Offerings to God, and to One Another. And it is therefore
justly styled FESTVM PACIS; the blessed Feast of Peace; because at this time
the Sun of Righteousness, and PRINCE of PEACE, arose from the Grave, (according
to what was Prophesied long before of him,) to bring PEACE and Salvation to all
Men. And how requisite it is to have a FEAST of so glorious a Memorandum, and
Immense Advantage to the World, truly Stated and Observed, I submit to the
Judgment of all Wise Men, and good Christians.

I well remember what a great Bustle, Anno 1664, there was in this Nation,
about the right observing of this HOLY FEAST. The KING and COUNCH were troubled
with complaints about it. And it was alleged to the Kings Majesty. that all
the Almanack-makers for that year were mistaken in the right timing of this
FEAST, and had imposed a wrong EASTER upon the World. Upon which noisy Charge,
the Learned Dr. PELL. Chaplain to the (then) Archbishop of Canterbury, wrote
an Ingenious Discourse in a Letter to a Friend in London, which was afterward
Printed, bearing this Title, EASTER not MISTIMED. In which, this worthy
Gentleman, plainly proved where the Errour-lay, and the Astrologers, or
Almanack-makers were also justly defended, as well in respect of the Truth of
their Art, as from an impossibility of their confederating together, to delude
the World with a False Easter, whereas many of them lived remote from London,
and from each other, and the most of them unknown One to the Other. And the
next year, viz. 1665. several of them that wrote Almanacks, as Mr. WHARTON, M.
WING, Mr. BOOKER, and my SELF, as sensible of the Injustice, as well as
Unreasonableness of that ridiculous CLAMOR, wrote a particular Defense of the
ART, as to that matter, in the several ALMANACKS of that year, as may be seen
by any that please to take the pains to peruse them.

But now, that we may not only talk of ERRORS, but teach how to set them Strait
and Even, let me here humbly and faithfully endeavor to show how they may be
amended.

How to keep EASTER truly for Ever.
In my pursuit of this Excellent VERITY, I have found out Two very Easy Ways,
whereby to accomplish this Illustrious End; (Nay, they are in several respects
the same, though seemingly different.) as proceeding from Two very Learned Men,
and Excellent Astronomers, even of our own Age. Which proves that the
Scientifical Genius of this Intelligent Nation is not at REST until it have not
only discovered, but done something of SERVICE to so great and glorious a
Truth, as is the right Establishment of this HOLY FEAST.

I. The first way I have met with for Establishing the right observation of
this HOLY FEAST, that it may no more be liable to Error, is from the Works of
that late Learned Gentleman, Sir GEORGE WHARTON, Baronet.

But before I discover the way, give me leave, from the same Author, to show
you what great Errors will occur, in case the CALENDAR be not corrected, viz.

Without a Correction of the Calendar, EASTER DAY will fall a week different
from the Time assigned by the Rule in the Common Prayer Book, as it has
happened since the Year of Christ, 1600. Twenty Times, to Anno 1664. viz. In
the Years 1602. 1609. 1610. 1613. 1616. 1619. 1620. 1623. 1626. 1630. 1637.
1640. 1643. 1646. 1647. 1650. 1653. 1657. 1661. 1664 And will so again, (says
this worthy Author) unless a Reformation be obtained,) in the Years 1667. 1669.
1673. 1677. 1681. 1684 1685. 1687. 1688. 1691. 1694. 1697. And Thirty One times
more before the Year 1800.

Nor is this all: For there oft-times happens a whole Monthy Error, as to the
time of the Celebration thereof, having already fallen out so (...) since that
of (...) viz. in the years 1625. 16^^ (...) and so will again, (without a (...)
of the ^^lendar) in the years (...) 1723. 174^. 1750. (...) and in the year
^^07. For in those years there will happen (from the (...)) two Full Moons
before our EASTER can be kept.

Nay, there falls out very often no less than 35. days, (or span^) ^^ROUR, in
the time of our EASTER, having already fallen out so no less than Eleven (...)
since the year (...) viz. in the years, (...) 1622. 16^^ (...) 1663. and so
will again, (without an amendment of the (...)) in the years, 16^^. (...) And
just (...) more before the year 1800.

But, in the years 2437. 2467. 2491. etc. there will be 42 days ERROR, and
some time afterward no less than 49 days: And after the year 2698. (if the old
Cale^dar should be still retained) it will Never again happen according to the
Rule of the Church: which fixes it on the Sunday following the first Full Moon
next after the VERNAL AEQUINOS. Vid. Calend. Carol. pro An. 1665.

Now, let us consider the way he teaches to (...), and prevent these ERRORS
for time to come; And that is this, viz. -- That if all the (...) were omitted
for Fi^^y (...), that alone would gradually, and insensibly, without the least
inconveniency, bring us (...) Day^ before the (...) ACCOUNT, and be exactly
agreeable to the SUNS place at the (...) of our (...) SAVIOR. Whereas the very
GREGO(...) (though now the Best and the Truest) would be Two day less Ex^^^;
That being only reduced to the (...) at (...).

And, if after this, the (...) be kept as before (except every 132. years,
wherein the ^EAF-DAY must be omitted for ever,) or else, that (...) Day be
struck off every 100 years (except in each 400.) for ever; there would need no
more to have our (...) of (...) (and all other (...) therein depending) kept
according to (...) Observation.

Se^ the Demonst^^^^^^.
For by supposing the (...) Year to be (after (...)) 365 Days, 5 Hours, 49
Minutes, 4 Seconds, 21 Thirds, the Annual (...) allowed it by (...) N^AR, will
be 10 Minutes, 55 Seconds, 39 Thirds, which (...) in 132 Years; and but 2
Minutes, 25 Seconds, 48 Thirds, over. And 3 Days in 400 Years, with 51 Minutes
over; which makes but One Day in 11294 Years, very inconsi^^rable.

And Oh! that our British Nation, (as Polite in Arts, etc. as any other
Country in Europe, or perhaps in the whole World.) might be but so happy as to
assume the Glory of a right Correction of the ^ALENDAR, even for ^ASTER's ^AKE^
A (...) most Sacred, as being of (...); and ever in use among Christine since
the Glorinas Resur^ (...) of our (...) and SAY^DUR.

The Good and Pio^s Emperor, CONSTANTINE the Great, termed it, and that truly,
The most (...) of ^EASTS. Even that CONSTANTINE which first gave Wings to
CHRISTIANITY; who after his having Embraced the (...) of the Ever BLESSED
JESUS, most worthily and happily Established it by a LAW.

True it is, there has been (as before was remembered,) many (...) between the
EASTERN and WESTERN Churches, about the right Observation of this HOLY FEAST,
and several Councils convened about it, who have endeavored to set it right.
But I say, (with that most Learned and Excellent Prelate, BISHOP ANDREWS,) they
met, not about the FEAST it self, (for that was never disputed by Christians)
but about the true time of its Celebration only. B^AST^^ himself, (though
guilty of Heresy in the business of this great STIVA^,) never denied an (...)
but questioned the (...) of its ^tion. As indeed any Man may reasonably do,
(provided he do not with (...) affront Authority) considering the many Errors
and (...) which have been broached about it; and never fear being Branded as an
(...) for so doing.

This (...) was the first Man that started the (...) of the QVARTO-DEC^ a (...)
that held it unlawful to keep (...) but upon the Fourteenth Day (...) (whence
it was denominated,) which was agreeable to the observation of the Jemish
Pass^ver: A Prail^^^ no way comporting with the Honor of Christianity, or of
our Blessed (...) Resurrection.

II. To return from what I digressed: Because I am entered upon so Excellent
and Divine (...), (fit for the Employment of a more Learned and Worthy Pen, I
confess.) I will omit nothing that may be necessary for the Correction, and
right keeping of this SACRED FEAST. I will therefore subjoyn another
D^^^^nstration of a (...) of the CALENDAR. Which, (that I may not incur the
hateful Censure of a (...),) I do own to have found Printed (...) (imperfectly)
with a (...) of the MOVEABLE FEA^TS for 532 years to come, from that time;
Calculated by some Curions (...) Hand, to me wholly unknown. I wish I knew the
Industrious and Laborious Author thereof, that I might, (Nomine,) pay him his
much merited respect. For had I been acquainted with that his worthy Work
sooner, it had saved me a vast deal of Pains in the compiling of my EASTER
TABLE for more than 200 years to come, from (...) 1677. (an Abstract whereof I
have before Inserted.) Which (...) I performed at the Command of the Honorable
GEORGE (...), Esquire, my most Noble (...) and (...) since deceased. -- It Is
this.

An (...) toward the Reformation of the (...) C^^^^dar.
The quantity of the Solar ^ear is said to consist of 365 Days, 5 Hours, 49
Minutes, 16 Seconds. Others will have it to be two or three Seconds more. I
conceive two or three Seconds in this case makes an (...) Variation. I shall
therefore adhere to the first, viz. That the quantity of the true Solar ^ear
is, 365 Days, 5 Hours, 49 Minutes, 16 Seconds.

h. m. se. 5 49 16 5 49 16 5 49 16 5 49 16 23 17 4

The odd 5 ho. 49. min. 16. sec. in 4 years, (as in the Margin,) makes but 23
h. 17 m. se. 4 Which 23 h. 17. m. 4 se. is less than a whole day, by 00 h. 42
m. 56 se. So that the making of the Fourth Tear to consist of 366 Days, (which
we call Leap-^ear) does thrust back the VERNAL AEQU^NOX the quantity of -- 00
h. 42 m. 56 se. And if there should be no Inter^alation of One Day in Four
Years, so that the Fourth Year should consist but of 365 Days; then will the
VERNAL AEQUINOX be thrust forward in Four years, the quantity of -- 23 h. 17 m.
04 se. In 1664. (the Number of Years Elapsed from the Birth of our SAVIOR, and
the particular Year which the AUTHOR made use of,) are contained 4, 6
Leap-Years; which 416 being multiplied by 42 m. 56 sec. do make 12 days, 9
hours, 40. min. 16. sec. so that by the observation of 416 Leap-Yers together,
without the omission of any one, the AEQUINOXES are thruse back in the Year of
our Lord 1664. the quantity of -- 12 d. 9 h. 40 m. 16 se.
And if the CALENDAR continue without Reformation for the space of 1664 Years
more, the VERNAL AEQUINOX will be in February For the Reformation whereof, I
offer this Expedient.

To Reduce the VERNAL AEQUINOX to the same Day upon which it was at the Birth
of CHRIST.
Let Thirteen Leap-Year. be omitted; that is, let the Year consist but of 365
Days, for Fisty two Years following the Year ^004, and the VERNAL AEQUINOX will
insensibly return on the same day it was at the Birth of CHRIST.

See the Demonstration
d. h. m. se. 00 23 17 04 00 23 17 04 00 23 17 04 00 23 17 04 00 23 17 04 00 23
17 04 00 23 17 04 00 23 17 04 00 23 17 04 00 23 17 04 00 23 17 04 00 23 17 04
00 23 17 04 12 14 41 52

It appears above, that the omision of one LEAP-YEARS does put forward the
AEQUINOX, the quantity of 23 h. 17 m. 4 sec. and therefore the omission of 13
LEAP-YEARS together, do make 12 days, 14 hours, 41 minutes, 52 seconds, (as in
the Margin,) so that the omission of 13 LEAP-YEARS together, will make the
^QUINO^ES to run forward the quantity of 12 d. 15 h. 51 m. 52 se. It appears
also above, That Anno 166^, the VERNAL AEQUINOX was run back the quantity of --
12 d. 9 h. 40 m. 16 se. So that substracting 12 d. 9 h. 40 m. 16 se. (the
quantity which the AEQUINOX was run (...), Anno, 166^.) from 12 d. 14 h. 41 m.
52 se. the quantity which the Omission of 13 LEAP-YEARS will thrust forward the
AEQUINOX, Anno 1716, the remainder is, 5 h. 1 m. 36 se. By which it plainly
appears, that if 13 LEAPYEARS be omitted, (as is before expressed) the
AEQUINOX, Anno. ^^16, will be (...) but only the quantity of -- 00 d. 5 h. 13
m. 6 se. The AEQUINOXS being thus (...) (or by what (...) it shall please His
Gracious Majesty to cause it to be (...)) it being once done, may be kept from
running Back, or Forward, the quantity of Twenty four Hours for Ever, after
this manner, viz.
To keep the AEQUINOXES from Anticipation.
Let every 34th. LEAP-TEAR be omitted, and the Anticipation will not be the
quantity of word^ in 10000 Years. The Demonstration whereof follows.

It is before Demonstrated, That the keeping of ONE LEAP-YEAR does put back the
^^^NOXES 42 min. 56 sec. and therefore the keeping of 33 LEAP-YEARS together,
does put them bark the quantity of -- 23 h. 36 m. 48 se.

Also by Omission of One LEAP-YEAR, (as is before expressed,) they are (...) --
23 h. 17 m. 04 se.

The Difference, or Anticipation therefore in 136 Years, is but -- 00 h. 19 m.
44 se.

So that it is (...) That if from reducing the AEQUINOX, viz. An. (...) three
LEAP-YEARS be kept, and the 34th. viz. (...) be omitted, the going (...) of the
AEQUINOXES in every 136 years, will be but 19 m. 44 sec. And taking the 19 min.
44 sec. (the quantity run back from the (...) to the year 1852.) from 5 ho. 1
min. 36 sec. (the (...) it was too forward Anno 1716.) the remainder that the
AEQUINOXES will be too forward, (...) will be the quantity of -- 04 h. 41 m. 52
se.

So that it will be above (...) after the (...) before the AEQUINOXES will be
put (...) the (...) of ONE MINUTE^ And in 9000 Years after that, if every 34th.
LEAP-YEAR be omitted, (as aforesaid,) the Anticipation will not be the quantity
of Twenty four Hours, and may then (by the Omission of another LEAP-YEAR more,)
be Reduced. Thus far this ENCELLENT AUTHOR.

Now, how requisite it is that AUTHORITY be humbly put in mind of a Matter so
August and Weighty, as is the right Observation of the HOLY FEAST of our
Blessed (...)'s Resurrection, will, I hope, most fully appear from the
soregoing Diss^urs^ as also by diverse pre-visional Consequences. For without a
Correction of the CALENDAR, we shall be Obnoxious to many ERRORS, and most
certainly find,

I. That within the compass of a very small Circuit of Years, viz. from this
very Year of 1687, to the Year 1702 (A short ^ime only) we shall be (...) of no
less than ^ight or Nine apparent ERRORS in respect of the right Timing of the
Holy. F^^st of EASTER. Almost as many ERRORS as Years. Not to mention what
more will certainly be found after that Year; which will, (indeed) be very
Numerous. As before you have plainly been informed.

II. In Tract of Time, if no Correction be obtained, the very Season of the
Year will be varied so much, that our WINTER will be found at ^^D-SUMMER; and
our Sum^^ or (...) Days. will appear at (...): and our BLESSED (...) and the
BAPTIST be forced to Exchange their TROPICKS. as before you have heard.

III. The (...), (though in it self not absolutely true,) will, (as indeed
already it frequently does,) carry the GARLAND from the Julian Account, and
make it to be looked on as a ^^anger to TRUTH

IV. If no Correction of our CALENDAR be made, we shall be commonly constrained
to the Keeping of Two EASTERS in O^e Year, or within the Compass of less than
365 Days. As it fell out A^^^ 1668, and must again the n^xt Year 1688, and very
often afterward.

V. Without a Correction of the CALENDAR, our Learned Divines, and
^^storians, as well as Ma^hematicians, will be at a Loss, in the right
assigning of EASTER, and stand liable to be Taxed, or T^^^ed with IGNORANCE in
the just, and proper LIMITS of this Sacred Feast; as the Learned and Noble
BARONIVS once was, by the Industrious Sethus Calvisius, that Excellent (...).

VI. For want of an ^mendation of the (...) CALENDAR, our CHURCH and STATE in
Time will be compelled to the like Tr^^ble, as once was the good Bishop of
Alexandria, viz. To send their Pascha(...) into all. Parts of His Majesty'^
Dominions to give Warning for the right Observation of EASTER. which must prove
a very great trouble.

But the Consideration of these things, and of many other Consequences, (not
readily foreseen,) hence arising, I most humbly submit to the Wisdom of those
in AUTHORITY over us, in CHURCH and STATE, who are (if GOD so please,) able,
not only to Compass, but Command so great and needful, as well as useful a
CORRECTION of the CALENDAR, which we at this Day, by Authority, must, and do
follow, though in it self very Erroneous and Defective.

According to this Essay, for an Emendation of the CALENDAR, I will here insert
a TABLE for the true finding out the Dominical Letter, and EASTERDAY, (upon
which all the other Moveable Feasts depend,) for Two hundred Tears yet to come:
Which if Authority shall vouchsafe to Approve of, and Countenance, may be
continued for Ever. It Is this which follows.

Anno Christ. Dom. Letter EASTER DAY 1665 The Thirteen Leapyears omitted,
according to the former Rule.
A March 26 1666 G April 15 1667 F 7 1668 E March 22 1669 D April 12 1670 C 4
1671 B 24 1672 A 9 1673 G 1 1674 F 14 1675 E 6 1676 D March 29 1677 C April 11
1678 B 3 1679 A 23 1680 G 8 1681 F March 31 1682 E April 20 1683 D 5 1684 C
March 28 1685 B April 17 1686 A 2 1687 G March 25 1688 F April 14 1689 E March
30 1690 D April 19 1691 C 11 1692 B March 27 1693 A April 16 1694 G 8 1695 F
March 24 1696 E April 13 1697 D 5 School C 25 1699 B 10 1700 A 2 1701 G 22 1702 F
April 7 1703 E March 30 1704 D April 19 1705 C 4 1706 B March 27 1707 A April
16 1708 G 1 1709 F 22 1710 E 6 1711 D March 29 1712 C April 18 1713 B 3 1714 A
March 26 1715 G April 15 1716 F March 31 1717 E April 20 1718 D 12 1719 C March
28 1720 Leap-years continued as before.
B A April 16 1721 G 8 1722 F March 31 1723 E April 13 1724 D C 4 1725 B March
27 1726 A April 16 1727 G 1 1728 F E 20 1729 D 12 1730 C March 28 1731 B April
17 1732 A G 8 1733 F March 24 1734 E April 13 1735 D 5 1736 C B 24 1737 A 9
1738 G 1 1739 F April 21 1740 E D 5 1741 C March 28 1742 B April 17 1743 A 2
1744 G ^ March 24 1745 E April 13 1746 D 5 1747 C 18 1748 B A 9 1749 G 1 1750 F
14 1751 E 6 1752 D C March 28 1753 B April 17 1754 A 2 1755 G 22 1756 ^ ^ 13
1757 D March 29 1758 C April 18 1759 B 10 1760 A C March 25 1761 F April 14
1762 E 6 1763 D March 22 1764 C ^ April 10 1765 A 2 1766 G 22 1767 F 7 1768 E D
March 29 1769 C April 18 1770 B 3 1771 A March 26 1772 ^ ^ April 14 1773 E 6
1774 D 19 1775 C 11 1776 B ^ April 2 1777 G 22 1778 F 7 1779 E March 30 1780 D
C April 18 1781 B 3 1782 A March 26 1783 G April 15 1784 ^ ^ March 30 1785 D
April 19 1786 C 11 1787 B March 27 1788 ^ ^ April 1 1789 F 7 1790 E March 23
1791 D April 12 1792 ^ ^ 3 1793 A 23 1794 G 8 1795 F March 31 1796 ^ ^ April 19
1797 C 11 1798 B March 27 1799 A April 16 1800 G F 7 1801 E March 23 1802 D
April 12 1803 C 4 1804 ^ ^ 23 1805 G 8 1806 F March 31 1807 E April 20 1808 ^ ^
4 1809 B March 27 1810 A April 16 1811 G 1 1812 ^ ^ 20 1813 D April 12 1814 C
March 28 1815 B April 17 1816 A G 8 1817 F March 31 1818 E April 13 1819 D 5
1820 C B March 27 1821 A April 16 8822 G 1 1823 F ^ 21 1824 ^ D 12 1825 C March
28 1826 B April 17 1827 A 19 1828 G ^ March 24 1829 E April 13 1830 D 5 1831 C
25 1832 B ^ 9 1833 G 1 1834 F 21 1835 E 6 1836 D C March 28 1837 B April 17
1838 A 2 1839 G March 25 1840 F E April 13 1841 D 5 1842 C 18 1843 B 10 1844 A
G 1 1845 F 14 1846 E 6 1847 D March 29 1848 C ^ April 17 1849 A 2 1850 G 22
1851 F April 14 1852 The Leap year omitted according to the former Rule.
E March 30 1853 D April 19 1854 C 11 1855 B March 27 1856 A G April 15 1857 F
7 1858 E March 23 1859 D April 12 1860 C B 3 1861 A 23 1862 G 8 1863 F March 31
1864 E D April 19 1865 C 4 1866 B March 27 1867 A April 16 1868 G F March 31
1869 E April 13 1870 D 12 1871 C 11 1872 R A 16 1873 G 8 1874 F March 31 1875 E
April 13 1876 D C 4 1877 B March 27 1878 A April 16 1879 G 1 1880 F E 20 1881 D
12 1882 C March 28 1883 B April 17 1884 A G 8 1885 F March 24 1886 E April 13
1887 D 5 1888 C ^ 24

Now if Authority shall think fit to approve hereof, the same GOLDEN-NUMBER,
AEPACT, etc. may still be continued, as is in Use with Us at the present, and
no other Alteration required in Either, than what is found by this NEW TABLE,
viz. by Omission of 13 LEAP-YEARS, according to the former Rule.

Let not any Ingenious Artist, or others wonder that this New Table differs
from the common EASTER TABLES, or our present Ephemerides, or the ordinary
Methods for the finding the Time of this HOLY FEAST; for so it must needs do,
since the LEAP-YEARS for 52 Years together are omitted, according to this New
Hypothesis for the Correcting of the present ERRORS attending it. By reason
whereof this HOLY FEAST, will sometimes, (seemingly,) fall upon different Days,
not only of the Monch, but Week, in respect of the present Establishment. And
so it will continue to do until Anno 1852. In which Year the LEAP-DAY,
(according to the former Rule,) again will be omitted, as you may see by the
TABLE. After which time the GOLDEN-NUMBER, and Dominital Letter, (as the Table
exhibits to your view,) will come into the (...) Order they were, as in for^er
Years, or as they are at the present. And then also the LEAP-YEARS will keep
their right Courses, as now, (except before excepted,) for many Ages to come,
and be subject to no Error at all.

To conclude, I have before mentioned One grand occasion of Errors happening
in the Time of this HOLY FEAST to be the Precession of the VERNAL AEQUINOX,
which from the first Council of Nice, to our Times, has Anticipated not fewer
than Eleven Days. It falling now on, or about the 10th Day of March; whereas at
the time of that ^^uncil, it was on the 21st. Day of the same Month, etc. But
there is another Ground also of this Error, (which I mentioned not before,)
viz. The Lunations or (...) of the (...) and Moon, which by reason of the too
great quantity allowed them, do, in every 19 Years Anticipate almost an Ho^^
and an Half; and in 132 Years and an half, One whole Day: And therefore not
Exactly to be found by the Golden-Number, although on those Lunations the Feast
of ^ASTER depends, as of It all the rest of the Mo^eable Feasts. Now both
these together were the just occasion of the Roman Emendation, whereby that
CHURCH does always produce EASTER on the Sunday following the first FULL MOON
next after the VERNAL AEQ^INOX agreeable to the Decree of the Nicene Council,
and also to the Rule for finding thereof in our English Common Prayer Book,

-- When He is come -- He will lead you into All Truth, ^. Joh. cap. 26. v. 13.
ERRATA.
Page 3. line 13. read MONAT. p. 5. l. 11. r. Right hand. p. 10. l. antepenult.
r. 31 April 2.4.5. p. 29. l. 2. r. as I find. p. 50. l. 19. in the Margin, r.
12 d. 14 h. 41 m. 52 se. p. 51. l. 13. in the Margin, r. 5. h. 1 m. 36 se.

POSTSCRIPT.
IF the Reader prove so Christianly kind, as to Correct the ERRORS of the Press
and Author. I have little to Apologize for: Excepting what may possibly be
Objected by some TENDER STOMACHS, about its being Printed with Red Letters. --
To satisfy the Soruple of such, I assure them, (1.) It was no SUPERSTITIOUS
conceit led me thereto, but as I discourse of the MOST HOLY of All CHRISTIAN
FEASTS, so I had a desire it should be Printed somewhat Semblable to the HOLY
RUBRIC, it being the most GLORIOUS FEASTIVAL therein. (2.) I was willing to
advance the Honor of the ENGLISH IMPRIMARY, and to show the Learned of our
Christian Church and Nation, That Common-Prayer-Books, Missals, Breviaries,
Manuels, etc. may be as Nobly and Gracefully PRINTED in ENGLAND, as in any
other part of the World. It Is hoped therefore that the Printing thereof thus,
may pass without any Sinister Construction, or Censure of Any.

FINIS.

