THE Deemon of Marleborough, OR, More News from VVilt-shire. In a most Exact
Account of the Aparition of the Ghost, or Spirit of Edward Aven.

Published heretofore, but now much Augmented, with many more Discoveries,
containing wonderful Passages, from its first Appearance there, to the 24th. of
Jan. 1674-75.

BEING The Examination of Thomas Godard, the said Avens Son in Law, taken
before the Major, and other Majestrates of that Borrough.

I the Underwritten did examine the Above Named Thomas Godord, who declared
the whole matter, as it is herein related, and he does affirm the same to be
true in all Circumstances, and to my knowledge he is a Man of a good
Understanding, Honest Life and Conversation.

VVitness my Hand, William Houldbrook.

Printed in the year. 1675.

SIR,
THis is to Certify you, that Edward Aven does still appear, and shows himself
to several people: First to Elizabeth Hibertt, next to one Goodman Butten,
otherwise Wiat, next to M. Richard Coleman's maid of this Town, and in the
same Clothes, which he wore in his life time; as a long White-Crown'd hatt,
Blew Clothes, and White Stockings: All this Last Week he was seen.

William Houlbrook.

A Relation of Tho. Godard, of Marleborough, in the County of Wills, Weaver;
made the 23. of November, 1674.
Who says, that the ninth Day of November, about nine of the clock in the
forenoon, being Monday, he (going hence to Ogburn, Sr. Andrew in the same
County, to one John Hawks in the same place, Husbandman, with a piece of serge,
which he had woven for the said John Howks) at a Style near Godres grounds in
Ogburn, near the Highway, there he saw the perfect apparition of Edward Aven,
late of this town Glover (with whose Daughter this relatant married) in the
shape of the same Clothes, Hat, Shoes, and Stockings, that he usually wot
whiles he lived; who to this Relatants own knowledge dyed at
Collingborn-Kingston, in this County, on the eleventh of May last, and was by
him, this relatant and others of his relations, brought thence, and buried here
in St. Mary's Churchyard, the next day, viz. the twelfth Day of May; and he
says, that the Apparition to his seeming, leaned over a style; and, when he
was come near the said style, the apparation did speak with an audable voice
these words, viz. Are you afraid? To which the relatant answered, I am thinking
of one who is dead and buried, which you are like to: to which the Apparition
answered with the like voice of Edward Aven, I am he that you was thinking of,
I am Edward Aven, your Father-in-Law, come near to me, and I will do you no
harm, and this relatant replied, viz. I trust in him, who has bought my soul
with his precious blood, you shall do me no harm, and the apparition said; How
stands cases at home, and the relatant said, what cases? and the apparition
said, How do Will and Mary, meaning this relatants Wife and her Brother, which
is the said Avens Son and Daughter, then the Apparition said, What? Tailor is
dead, meaning as this relatant supposed, one John Tailor of London, Shoemaker,
who had married Sarah another of the said Avens daughters, which said Tailor as
this relatant has heard, dyed about Michaelmas last past; Then the Apparition
held out his hand, and in it as this relatant supposed money about twenty or 30
shillings in silver, and it said, with the like audable voice, take this money
and send it Sarah, for I shut up my bowels of compassion toward her in the
time of my life, and now here is some money for her, and further said, Mary is
troubled for me, but tell her that God has showed mercy to me beyond my
deserts, and this relatant said, upon offering of the said money to him, he
replied to the said Apparition; In the name of Jesus Christ I refuse all such
moneys. Then it spoke these words; I perceive you are afraid, I will meet you
some other time, then immediately as this relatant perceived it went up the
Lane; whereupon this relatant went over the style as aforesaid, being in much
fear, and for that time saw him no more: And this relatant further says, that
he being at work at his Loom in his own house about seven a clock in the
Evening of the same Day the said Apparation lift up the lid of his window, and
finding it to be the same apparition that he had met the same Day at Ogborn
style as aforesaid being in much fear, run out of his shop, and saw no more of
it that night, but says; that the next night after this relatant went forth
into his back side about the same hour with a candle in his hand to make water,
and as he was so doing the like Apparation came round his Wood house, and this
relatant also being in a fear and his Candle waxing out, he run into his house,
and said he saw it no more that night, but says further, that on Thursday the
12th. of this instant November, as this relatant was riding homeward from Sir
Bolstrock VVhitelocks house, in Chilton Lodge in this County about 3 or 4 a
clock in the Afternoon in the bottom near Ramsberry Manner-house, as he was
riding down the hill there to his apprehension he saw a Hare running out of the
old Park, there a thwart in the highway into the Cops, at which the relatants
horse afrighted, and rared on his hinder legs, overthrew into the dirt, and as
soon as he could recover on his legs, he saw the like apparition standing about
8 foot from him, directly in the way before him, and said with the like voice.
Thomas you have tarried long, and then said to this relatant, Thomas bid Will
Aven take the sword that he had of me which is now in his house, and carry it
to the wood as we go to Alton to the upper end of the wood, which lies by the
Way side, for with that sword I did wrong above 30 years ago, and he never
prospered since he has had the sword, and bid Will Aven give his Sister Sarah
20 shillings of the money which he had of me, and do you talk with Edward
Laurence, for I borrowed 20 shillings of him several years ago, and did say
that I had paid him it when I did not pay it him, and I cannot be at rest till
the 20s. be paid, and I would desire you to pay him the 20s. out of the money
which you had of James Elliot at 2 payments. Which money he this relatant
affirms was 5 Pound, which he the said James Elliot a Baker of this Town owed
him the said Aven whiles he lived upon bond, which money this relatant received
from the said James Elliot since Michaelmas last at a payments, viz, 35
shillings at one time, and 35 shillings at another, and then the Apparition
further said to this relatant. Tell Margret, meaning as this relatant confereth
it might be, the said Avens wife, that I would desire her to deliver the Kettel
which I gave to little Sarah Tailor to the little child, or to anyone that she
will entrust for it, but if she will not speak to Edward Laurence to persuade
her, but if she will not, then tell her I will see her suddenly, and said, see
that this be done within twelve months and a day after my Death, and peace be
with you; and so it went away over the rail into the Wood there, as any man may
go over a style, to this relatant's apprehension; and so this relatant saw it
no more at that time; and this relatant further says, that accordingly he has
paid the said Edward Lawrence the 20s. who also was here present, affirms,
that he had lent the said Aven 20 s. above 20 y. ago, and that none knew
thereof but the said Lawrence and his Wife; and the said Aven and his Wife; and
this relatant further says, that the last night he making relation of the said
Apparition and passages unto Christopher Lipperd now Mayjor of this Town and
others he was advised by them to order William Aven to carry the said sword to
the said Copps near Alton, and that this relatant should go with him thither;
whereupon the relatant and the said Aven did resolve to go as on Tuesday
following, which was on the morrow, and says, that he this relatant and his
Brother-in-law, as he affirms, were both very much troubled in mind to see,
that they could not sleep until they were both resolved to carry the sword to
the said Copps on that day; and accordingly both did, and says; that both of
them coming to the said Cops about 9 of the clock in the morning, the said
William Aven took the sword, and laid it down near the place, as this relatant
was directed by the said Apparition; and both of them turning about to come
away from thence, this relatant looking back saw the Apparition in like habit
of cloth as aforesaid; which when this relatant discovered, he said to his
brother-in-Law, Here is the Apparition of Father; but he said, I see it not; so
this relatant falling on his knees, praying to God to preserve them both,
asking his said Brother-in-law, whether he did see it, who said, No; and then
he said, Lord open his eyes that he may see it; who then replied, Lord grant
that I may not see it if it be thy blessed will; and then the Apparition
beckned his hand to him to come to it, and this relatant then said, In the name
of the Father, Sn, and Holy Ghost what would you have me to do? and the
Apparition said to this relatant. Thomas, take up the sword and follow me, and
this relatant said, Should both of us come, or one of us, to which it said,
Thomas do you take up the Sword; so this relatant took up the sword, and the
Apparition went on before him further into the Copps-Wood about 20 lugs; and
this relatant then following it, the Apparition turning back, he this relatant
stood about a lug and a half from it, his said brother standing near the place,
where he first laid down the sword, and this relatant laid down the sword upon
the ground, and saw something like a Mastiff-Dog of a brown color, and the
Apparition waving toward this relatant, he stepped back about 3 steps, and the
Apparition said, Do not be afraid Thomas, for I have a permission for to reveal
things unto thee, but have a Commission not to touch you; and when it had taken
up the sword, and went back to the place, at which before it stood, when this
relatant saw the Mastiff-Dog which as before, the Apparition pointed the top of
the sword into the ground, and said, In this place lies buried the bones of
him that I murdered in the year 1635. which are now rotten and turned unto
dust, Whereupon the relatant said, I adjure in the name of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, wherefore did you this murder; and it said, I took money from him,
and he contended with me for to keep it, and I was too hard for him, and so I
murdered him with his own sword, which is this, and this relatant asked it,
who was confederate with him in this murder, this relatant being directed by
the said Mayjor so to do; to which the Apparition said, None: but my self; and
this relatant said, what would you have me to do in this business or thing? and
the Apparition said, this, that the world may know, that I murdered a man, and
buried him in this place in the year 1655. Then the Apparition laid down the
Sword immediately upon the bare Ground; whereon grew nothing, but appeared to
this Relatant a naked piece of ground, like a grave sunk in, and then the
Apparion, rushing further into the said Copps, Vanished out of his sight, and
he saw it no more; whereupon this Relatant, and his said Brother-in-Law, Will.
Aven, leaving the Sword, and both coming away, this Relatant's Brother-in-Law,
Will. Aven, asserted, that he heard and understood what he said, and heard
some other Voice, distinctly from this Relatant's, but could not understand a
word of it, and he saw no Apparition at all, as the said Will. Aven, affirms,
All which this Relatant affirms, and does attest it to be true under his hand
the Day and Year abovesaid, and shall be ready to testify the same upon Oath,
when he shall be required:

VVitness his Hand, Tho. Goddard. In the presence of Mr. Christopher Lipyard,
Major: And Joshua Sethcenerel Minister of St. Peter's in Marleborough. And
Master Rolf Bailey, Town-Clark of the said Borough. And many other persons of
credit.


FINIS.

