A Praefatory ANSWER TO Mr. Henry Stubbe, The Doctor of Warwick. WHEREIN The
Malignity of his Temper, The Hypocrisy of his Pretenses, The Falsehood of his
Reports,
AND THE Impertinency of his Arguings and Quotations In his ANIMADVERSIONS ON
PLUS VLTRA, Are discovered.

By JOS. GLANVILL.

-- A Rod for the Fools back.
Sol. London, Printed by A. Clark, for I Collins, at the Kings Arms in
Ludgate Street, near the West End of S. Paul's; and at the Kings Head in
Westminster Hall. 1671.

PREFACE.
WHen I am ask't the reason of M. Stubbe's fierceness against the ROYAL
SOCIETY, and the favorers of that Institution; my usual answer is, There are
creatures that will bark against those who never hurt or provoked them, and
'^is in vain to ask^ Why? It Is the nature of those Animals, and that is the only
account can be given.

M. Stubbe has kept a noise ever since he could open, against all men, except
M. Hobbs, and the Republicans; and all things, but Quakerism and Democracy. He
has fallen with a vehemence suitable to his nature upon Monarchy, Ministry,
Universities, and Humane Learning; provoking all men to whom those interests
were dear. But perceiving he had the fate of old Alexander Ross, to be despised
by those, he had affron^ed; and seeing that no one thought him worthy of
Confu^ation, he turns about and confutes himself: he pu^s on a mighty zeal for
those things, which he had endeavored to w^rrey; and there being nothing of
note left which he had not assaulted before, he falls at last upon the R. S.
with his usual noise and vehemence: He clamours, that this Institution is
destructive to Monarchy, Church of England, Universities, and all ancient
Literature; and follows his confident accusations with loud outc^ies, and
restless importunities, and numerous reproaches; persecuting that illustrious
Company with such wild ravings, and impetuous eagerness, as if it were an Army
of Painims that had invaded us, and he the only man that saw the danger, and
was concerned for the common safety.

By his earnest noise, he frights some that know not the nature of the
Creature; and has possessed diverse, who are not well informed concerning the
Institution of the ROYAL SOCIETY, with terrible apprehensions of it. This is
all M. Stubbe ha^h or c^n do: his main force is in the boldness and vehemence
of his accusations; his pretenses of proof are contemptible and ridiculous, and
can persuade none but those he has scared into an incapacity of right judgment.

For this reason I have thought it requisite to begin my answer in an account
of his temper and genius out of his own Writings; and when that is known, his
greatest force is disabled: for his impudent censures will be no longer heeded,
in which his chief power lies. And therefore it is not here, as in ordinary
cases, when reflections that expose the person, signify little to the cause.
But on the contrary, the Representation I have made of this Adversary, is one
of the most proper services can be done it; and if I should say nothing else,
it were an Answer. For he that proves an Accuser to have been a continual P^st
to his Neighbors, a constant Slanderer, and malicious Teller of untruths, does
enough to assert his Vindication against his enemies unproved accusations. I
say, I thought ^it to endeavor this first, since by it I shall break that part
of his strength which consists in those slanders and contempts which he pours
upon the Experimental Philosophers; and after that, his Other Arguments^ will
prove like Swords of Flags and Spears of Bulrush, as will appear in that part
where I make trial of their strength.

This my design, of which I have now given the reason, might, it is like, be
some occasion of the figment over which he so courageously insults, viz [That
the Uirtuosi intended to write his life;] when I dare say, there was never more
thought of ^o this purpose, than some such collection out of his Writings and I
have made; and therefore he might have forborne the Complements of mean spirits,
and pitiful, ridiculous Mechanics, which he bestows on them on this occasion:
For there are none of those Gentlemen but scorn to be so dirty, impertinent,
and so like M. Stubbe, as to meddle with any passages of his Life, which do not
tend to the weakening him in that unworthy cause in which his pride and spite
have engaged him.

But he is resolved, he says, to prevent the Virtuosi, and to write his Life
himself; and it is like the Comical Wits will thank him for a story that would
ou^ do Guzman and Don Quixot. But, alas! they are not to expect it; he is too
modest to do himself right. What he has done as to his Life, is a De^ence of
those passages that he apprehended most ^bnoxious, and I shall here animadvert
upon his Apology, by which he thinks he has prevented that part of my account
which relates to his egregious exploits in the late times. Let us consider that
a little, and see what his defense signifies.

IT might have been expected from one, that has trampled on the ashes of his
Martyred Sovereign, defended and adored his Murderers, styled all our Kings a
Succession of Usurpers, endeavored the extirpation of Monarchy, and the
planting a Democracy of Independents, Anabaptists, Fi^th Monarchy men, and
Quakers, in its room: That has represented the meekest, justest, and best of
Kings, as an hateful Tyrant, and called our now Sovereign an Usurper; that has
written maliciously against Ministry, Universities, Churches, and Humane
Learning; and vindicated the Quakers, and the rest of the wildest and most
dangerous Phanaticks. I say, it might have been expected that such a man as
this, when he would be thought a Convert, should renounce those horrid
villainies, and humble himself by deep professions of repentance, and declare
his shame for those abominable treasons and impieties, and beg pardon of God
and good men for those detestable enormities. But these were below the
gallantry of M. Stubbe's spirit; he has another method to express his
repentance: he falls with his old rage upon his Majesty's Institution, out of a
pretended concern for Monarchy and Religion. The King, he phancies, has
erected a Society that will undermine Monarchy; and those Bishops and Divines
that are imbodied in it, are managing a design to overthrow Religion: therefore
M. Stubbe stands up in a mighty zeal, and defends Monarchy against the KING,
and Religion against the DIVINES; no doubt with a purpose to do a mischief to
both. This is ONE way of his repentance, to act as much as he dares, for the
same ends he served before.

And ANOTHER is to justify himself in all that he has done; which in a
swaggering, insulting way he impud^ntly attempts in the Preface to his Book
against the History of the Royal Society: and he has done it so, that it is
hard to say which is the greater crime, his confessed wickedness, or his Apology.
The sum of it is this:

He served his Patron Sir Hen. Vane, by whom he was transcendently obliged, and
he is ashamed that he has done so little, rather than that he has done so
much for him. He confess^th himself a Uassal and a Slave, and such he says are
exempt from ignominy, though their masters might be accounted traitors. He
pleads the example of the friend of Gracchus, who justified his treason by his
friendship, and said he should have burnt the Capitol if Gracchus had bid him.
Thus he tells us he has Apologized for himself a thousand times.

And having said this, he is whole, the Virtuosi are prevented in the design of
writing his life, and none of his former pranks must be mentioned, though in
another way he is doing the same things again. How little ado will serve to
wipe off the foulest guilt from M. Stubbe? and how easily can he translate it
upon the clearest innocence? But, by his leave, I shall a little reflect on his
Apology, though he is pleased to say that the Virtuosi understand not the
grounds of his actions, nor have they Learning enough, or skill in Casuistical
Divinity to condemn them. [Pref. to his Legends.] For however ignorant they
were of his grounds before, he has now enlightened them with that knowledge,
though his Casuistical Divinity is yet in the dark to them.

The ground of all is, [ He served a Patron:] and does this justify him
acco^ding to the rules of his Casuistical Divinity? Could the favors of any
particular Benefactor null his obligations to his SOVEREIGN, his RELIGION, his
COUNTRY? Might not the most hellish villainies be excused this way? And might
not such an Apology be made for Fau^, Ravi^^a^, and the Stubbe's that were
hanged for treason in former Reigns? Could not the Black Executioner of the
blessed K. Charles the Martyr, have justified his accursed Parricide by the
same Apology? And if Judas had been transcendently obliged by any of the
Scribes and Pharisees, he was blameless, according to this Apologists
Casuistical Divinity. Such a Divinity as this indeed, it is to be hoped the
Virtuosi do not understand; It Is a sort very fit for such a conscience as he
has that pleads it: and what a Divinity must that be, that will justify Judas
and M. Stubbe? Let him propagate it as fast as he is able, he will need no
other engine to effect the bravest of his purposes. If the remaining Regicides
have any projects to equal their former, M. Stubbe will furnish any man with an
Apology, that dare^ venture upon the execution of them: he shall be exempt from
infamy, though he outdo the Powder Treason, as long as he served a Patron: and
thus even Witches are justified for serving the Devil, while he gratifies and
obliges them. Come hither then, O ye Sons of Rebellion and Mischief: Here Is a
Casuist for your purpose: your outrages and treasons are gallantries, if you
served a Patron: M. Stubbe has a Divinity that will defend and absolve you; a
Divinity, in which there is no such thing as conscience toward God; it is all
gratitude to Patrons and Benefactors; and though they were Traitors and
Regicides, you are exempt from ignominy or blame.

Is not this man now very penitent for his vile practices, when he bailds his
glory upon them, gives them in as proofs of his gallantry, and calls them Brave
Acknowledgments? Does he not deserve favor and forgiveness, when, after his
blaspheming the best of Kings, and libelling the most excellent of Governments;
after his endeavors to bring in eternal Anarchy and confusion into his native
Country, and vile attempts to overthrow all Learning, Order and Religion to
gratify Paricides and Usurpers; he has the confidence to tell the world, that
He is ashamed he has done so little? When those Patrons have occasion for him
again, he will do the rest, if any thing more be possible. What a Penitent is
this, who is sorry that his crimes (which were highly capital) had not been
more and greater, and that lays a foundation for the defense of the blackest
villainies, in his very Repentance and Recantations?

But he has a president to warrant him: BLESSIUS pleaded his friendship to
GRACCHUS to justify his seditions, and would have burnt the Capitol if
Gracchus had bid him: Thus M. Stubbe says, he has apologized for himself a
thousand times: he served Sir H. Vane, and was (as he owns himself) his Slave,
and so he is cleared from all imputations: Yea, if his Patron had bid him, he
would have killed his Father, and murdered his Sovereign. This is the sense of
his Apology. What poor, easy fools does he suppose his Readers, when he
endeavors to reconcile himself to their good opinion by such silly and such
vile excuses?

These are some of the expressions of M. Stubbe's repentance. And yet farther
to show what a friend he is to MONARCHY, notwithstanding the former practices,
in the same Preface against the History of the Royal Society, p 3. he tells his
Reader, That it is Prudence in every particular person to contribute all he can
to the support of the Monarchy against all Anarchical projects, and
Democratical contrivances, whereof a debauched and ungenerous Nation is not
capable. It Is Prudence to endeavor the support of the MONARCHY now as things
are, not Duty. The want of virtue and generosity, makes the Nation incapable of
Democracy for the present: but when it is reclaimed from its debauches, and
grown generous, (as it was in the times of M. Stubbe^^ former Patrons) then
Democracy will be the only proper Government. Monarchy may serve for a
debauched and ungenerous Nation; but Democracy is the Government of the
virtuous and generous. This is the Interpretation of the quoted period; and
thus M. Stubbe cunningly recommends himself to his Democratical friends, even
when he is pretending friendship to Monarchy: so that should his old Patrons
return again to their insolent Reign, (which Heaven forbid) there is no doubt
but this Paragraph would be pleaded to prove, that he never deserted their
principles; and there is a Quotation in the Margin of the same page, to assure
his kindness to Democracy, even when 'twas prudent to make a show for Monarchy;
-- Ut verissime dixerit Cosinus Medices Cardinali Salviato, In tanta opum
i^^qualitate, morumque corruptione Florentinam Rempublicam non esse amplius
Libertatis Capacem, quae optati potius, quam spera^i debeat.

You see, O ye Patriots of the Good Old Cause, M. Stubbe is constant to you;
Democracy is the only Liberty, it is the Government to be desired, though little
to be hoped for in such a corruption of manners: your Slave does but jest with
Monarchy, and show his prudence in flattering it a little, till a good occasion
shall serve for him to return again to you, his Patrons and Benefactors: yea,
he intimates what he could do for you in the words that immediately follow his
Apology, [ I think this defense the most proper and seasonable that I can now
make:] in a ^itter time he could justify his obsequiousness to Sir H. Vane and
the Cause, after another manner than by this come off, that He served a Patron:
He could lay all things that have the name of Royal, as fla^ as the Royal
Society: But he prudently tells you, [ib. Prae. p. 12.] I will not suffer my
self to be engaged in any disputes that may contribute to the dissetlement of
this Nation, and Monarchy.] If he wou^d dispute, he could shake our Monarchy
and Setlemen^s: But the Nation is not yet virtuous and generous enough to
deserve his favors: other Justifications would be better than this of a
Patron, but they would not be seasonable nor proper for this time.

Was ever Villainy so impudent when it sought pardon? Did ever confidence flout
a Government so, when it pretended to plead its Cause? Can we desire greater
proof of M. Stubbe's hypocrisy and disloyal inclination, than he gives in this
Preface? And will he not despise the silly easiness of those, that shall accept
of his Apology? Certainly he must needs swell with venom, that cannot forbear
spitting in the face of that Government which it is his present interest to
^latter. This it is evident enough he has done in the recited periods, and it
would have appeared farther, if those who had his Book to License had not
expunged some more impudent passages. M. Stubbe made a great stir in the
Country with his complaints that the Royal Society had castrated his Book, and
deprived it of its strength. I was lately told by a Licenser, one of my Lord of
Londons Chaplains, that it was well for him that those things were blotted out,
for he assured me they were such as deserved the Gaol, and a Pillory at least.
For he impudently upbraided the King with the example of Queen Elizabeth in
forbidding the King of France to build ships; jeered the Illustrious Duke of
York about his Sea-Engagement with the Dutch: and twitted his Majesty with the
management of that war. These were the things that were put out, but not by the
Royal Society, (as M. Stubbe fabled) but by other Licensers to whom he owes
thanks for the present possession of his ears.

This is the zealous Defender of the Government against the Virtuosi; let him
now put his malicious, cavilling wit upon the Tenters; let him improve every
dream of a shadow, and fetch what consequ^nces he can from every little
appearance; and if after all, he can show that the Royal Society have ever said
or done any thing so ^adutiful, or disrespectful to the Government, as any one
of these passages, which he vents in his greatest fit of kindness to it, I Will
for ever renounce the Virtuosi, and become his humble proselyte.

Upon the whole carriage, for my part I am persuaded that M. Stubbe intends no
more in his present pretenses for Monarchy, than to jeer it, and to try whether
the friends of the Government are such pitiful Ignoramus's as to be satisfied
with his ridiculous and almost treasonable excuses. If there be any he can
content so, there is no doubt but he will laugh with his Democratical friends
at the good nature of those tender-headed people that will be so easily
ca^oll'd. And those others that are less soft and fa^il, must needs laugh at
him, when they see how ridiculously the pretense of Loyalty sits upon him, and
how he over-acts in his zeal.

In testimony of his great love and devotion to the King, he thus subscribe^
the Title of his rare Book of Chocolata, By Hen. Stubbe Physician for his
Majesty in the Island of Iamaica; Now (no doubt) he is Physician for his
Majes^y too in the Town of Warwick; and he intends to be Physician for his
Majesty in the City of London, when he has run down the Royal Society: for
then, he says, he will remove thither, and get all the practice. But further,
in testimony of his Loyalty, he calls one sort of his Chocolet, Chocolata
Royal; this was that Chocolata that was the universal Medicine which cured all
diseases in Iamaica, when he made and sold it there; and he thinks fit to
honor Monarchy by calling it ROYAL. I have an hundred very pleasant things to
say of this Chocoletman of Iamaica; as of his spitting fire in a fever, and
reading by the light of his spittle, and other such wonders, which he did and
saw: but they are not for my present purpose.

And now when I reflect upon the impudence, and weakness, malignity and impiety
of M. Stubbe's Apology for his former vile writings, I cannot but wonder much
at the strange incogitancy of some, that take the excuse of his serving a
Patron, and go away contented with it; when this plea is pregnant with infinite
villainies and mischiefs, and is one of the most shameless Apologies that ever
was offered in the world. This I suppose I have proved: but if any have so much
favor for M. Stubbe, upon the account of his present undertakings, as to
swallow such a morsel, I shall no further oppose their kindness, but only to
desire them, to look a little forward into my Book, and to see there what the
things are for which he needs their candor and pardon; and if, after they are
informed, they shall take the excuse of serving a Patron for a justification of
his crimes, let them but consider too, whether it be not probable he is serving
some Patron now, and whether any heed be to be given to the ranting vehemencies
and clamours of a confessed mercenary Scribler.

And thus I think I have sufficiently chastised his APOLOGY, by which he
thought he had secured himself against all designs to represent him: this I
have undertaken, for caution to those that might otherwise be in some danger of
heeding him, and of being misled by his pretended zeal for Monarchy and
Religion, into an ill opinion of the Royal Institution, which he maliciou^ly
slinders; and having done this, my following Representation of his pestilent
spirit and temper will bear, and I hope signify to the purpose for which I
intend it. It Is true, personal matters in Controversies should, as much as is
possible, be avoided, and I dislike them much; but M. Stubbe has made them
necessary in this; and the account of him which I am to give, will not be
without its pleasure, since it is a description of a very strange Animal, and
such a one as is seldom seen out of Africa, or the Country of Cannibals.

Having thus defeated M. Stubbe's excuses, it may be thought fit that I make
one for my self: For the bare recital of the abominable things he has
disgorged, cannot but raise a stench that is loathsome and offensive; but, I
hope, it will be considered, that I could not have given sufficient caution
against the malignity of this troubler of men, without opening those Ulcers,
and letting the world see what filth and venom there is under the fairness of
his pretenses.

If any man think I have handled this Adversary with too much bitterness and
severity, he seems to forget that I have to do with M. Stubbe; Russians and
swaggering Hectors are not to be treated with gentleness and soft words; and, I
know, should I deal with this Antagonist in a way of lenity and smoothness, it
would encourage his insolence, and make him fancy that he is feared. I have
therefore thought sit to express my self here with more smartness, than I do
allow of toward men of common civility and good manners; and it is not my
passion, but judgment prompted me to it.

And now, lest it should be suspected that my dealing so much with M. Stubbe
has infected me with the spirit of detraction, I shall next give him those
acknowledgments that I think may be his due. I confess therefore that he is a
man that has READ; he was for some years Sub-librarian at Oxford, and so by
his employment was chained among the Books: from thence he got great knowledge
of Titles and Indexes; and by that can, upon any occasion, let out a great
apparatus of Authors, and fill his margin with Quotations: this must be
acknowledged, and it is no small advantage for show and vainglory; and by this
means he will seem to have the better of any man he shall oppose, among such as
are not able, or not concerned to examine how he uses his Authors, and how he
applies them. But whoever does this, will find, that notwithstanding his
pretense to great Reading, he reads by Indexes, and only collects those
passages from Authors which he can suborn to serve his mischievous purposes:
That he understands not, or wilfully perverts the Writers he cites: That after
he has swaggered with their names, and recited several scraps out of their
works, his Quotations prove nothing but that M. Stubbe is malicious and
impertinent, and makes the sayings and opinions he fights against: of all this,
I have given specimens of proof in diverse of the ensuing sheets; by which it
will appear, that this confident man is one of the most notorious Impertinents
that ever writ a Book.

And whoever attentively considers his Writings, and observes the way of his
Discourse, must needs see, that whatever he pretends to reading, he is
extremely defective in judgment, and understands not the way of close, coherent
reasoning: Nor indeed can it be expected from one of his temper of brain; his
head is red-hot, and consequently his thoughts are desultory and flirting; so
that he affirms suddenly whatever comes into his fancy, not considering how
it agrees with what he said before; what it makes for his purpose, or how it
may be well proved. He has not the patience to ponder any thing deeply, nor
the judgment and staidness to weigh consequences; and therefore writes and
speaks in a vein of infinite impertinence and inconsistency. This I may be
permitted to say here, because I have proved it in the following Papers. And
now what can such a man's pretended Learning signify? It may make him proud and
troublesome, captious and censorious, but will never enable him to serve the
world with any useful informations: Nor is any man's reading any further to be
valued, than as it improves and assists his reason; where it does not this,
it is either a feather in a Fools cap, or a sword in a mad-mans hand; a vain
glorious impertinence, or an instrument of mischief.

But I perceive my Preface begins to swell, and therefore I only add further,
That whereas M. Stubbe reports in several places of his Books, that the
Virtuosi contributed to my PLUS ULTRA, I will acquit those Gentlemen from being
concerned in the composure of a Discourse against which the impertinent
Animadverter raises such a clamor; and assure the Reader, that this his
report is false. And whereas in his Book against Doctor Sp^att, he says, That
some some saw my Papers remitted to me blotted and altered, this affirmation is
a gross untruth also, or a contemptible impertinence. If he means (as he
designed to insinuate) that the Virtu^s^ remitted them to me blotted and
altered by them, or any other person, it is a loud falsehood. No man, except my
Transcriber, ever saw my Book till it was printed, nor did I alter any one word
upon any man^ suggestion; so that his report in that sense, which would have
signified to his purpose, is a shameless Legend: in an other sense indeed it is
true, but impertinent; my Papers were sent home to me blotted and altered; but
they were remitted by my Aman^ensis, as I sent them to him blotted and altered
by my own hand, without any other^ knowledge or direction; and what can malice
make of this?

It Is a pretty artifice I observe in M. Stubbe, to entitle every thing any man
does in favor of the Royal Society, to that whole Body, or at least to a Club
of the Vi^tuosi; that so, if he gain any advantages over any private member, it
may redound to the disparagement of the Society, and raise the glory of his
performances; and therefore I must expect that much of this following Account
shall be imputed to the assistance and contributions that he will say I had
from the Virtuosi: But to prevent his belying those Gentlemen in this, and the
concerning them in any of my failures, I declare I consulted none of them for
any of these Reflections; I did not submit my Copy to their alterations, nor
did they, or any other person, ever see these Papers till they were printed: so
that whatever wrath they kindle in him, it ought all to be directed against me;
and I assure him I despise both his displeasure and his favor.

I had other things to have added here, but I cast them into the Postscript;
and I advertise but this more, That there is a late printed Letter of the
Learned Doctor Meric Causabons, written to Doctor Peter du Moulin, upon the
occasion of my Plus Ultra, and containing some Reflections on it: I have
answered the Strictures of that Reverend man in a particular Discourse, which I
think to publish when I next reckon with M. Stubbe.

TO MY Much Honored Friend Francis Godolphin, Esquire;
SIR,
I Was just upon the Close of a short Treatise of the Religious Temper and
Tendencies of the Modern Philosophy, when M. Stubb's Book against me came to my
hands. I was glad to see that this Adversary at last appeared in the open
Light. For I love not Sculking and base Assaults in the Dark. I had much rather
be called to an Account for any thing I have written, before the Learned and
Judicious, than to be confuted in Corners, among those, whose Judgments are
either prepossest or incompetent; This latter has for some time been my hard
Fate.

For after M. Crosse's Fardel against me, was rejected by the Licensers both at
Oxford and London for its incomparable Railing, and impertinence; He
endeavored to expose me among his Cronies and Confederates by the Manuscript
Libel. He carrried it about from place to place, and like a Scotch Merchant,
opened his Pack at each House in his Circuit: He told his Tales to every
Country-Farmer, and acquainted every Mechanic with his mighty Deeds and
Purposes: So that for a time, there was no other Subject handled on Alebenches,
and in Coffee-Houses, in all this Neighborhood. Besides which Practices, He
pelted me with Doggerel Rhimes innumerable; and a pretended Answer to the Chue
Gazett was read privately to those that had a mind to hear such Stuff, and so I
was confuted: But great Care was taken that I should not know in what, for fear
I should spoil the Triumphs, and write a second part of the Legends of the
Disputer.

Much after the same manner M. Stubb for a year and upwards dealt with me, and
diverse excellent Persons, with whom I am not worthy to be mentioned. He
traveled up and down to tell his Stories of the Royal Society, and to vent his
spite against that Honorable Assembly. He took care to inform every Tapster of
the Danger of their Designs; and would scarce take his Horse out of an
Hostler's hands, till he had first let him know how he had confuted the
Virtuosi. He set his everlasting Tongue at work in every Coffee-House, and drew
the Apron-men about him, as Ballad-singers do the Rout in ^airs and Markets:
They admired the man, and wondered what the strange thing called the Royal
Society should be; till at last being informed by this zealous Patriot of
Religion, they saw clearly that They were a Committee of Projectors to bring in
Popery: He assured them that the first Design was laid by a Jesuit, and
discovered the whole Plot upon Religion, which he declared his pious
Resolutions to vindicate against this Dangerous Combination.

All this Time while he fought (like his Masters of the Good Old Cause) with
vulgar Rumors, which he raised, he was impregnable. There Is no contending with
Specter and Apparitions. But at last he renders himself more palpable and
consistent, so that now he may be dealt with: And since he has made me the
first Object of his fierce Wrath, in this Quarrel with the Royal Society, I
shall endeavor to make my Defense, and to disarm the Fury of this Guy of
Warwick: By which, I hope, I shall let the World see that this Hector is so far
from being a competent Adversary for that Illustrious Company; that all the
Force his Rage and Malice can raise, is not able to oppress, or as much as hurt
the least considerable Member of that Body.

This I intend in a full and particular ANSWER to his Book against my PLUS
VLTRA, and shall let this Man of Battles (who is used to triumph before he
strikes a blow) see, that he has nonplus'd me no where, but in his Title. But
my Affairs will not permit me to fall on that work, so soon as I am willing you
should have an Account of this Undertaker; and therefore I shall now send you a
few general Remarques concerning the Author and his Work: By which you will
perceive, that it is not at all to be wondered at, that he treats so many
excellent Persons with such Insolence and Scorn, so many Taunts of Ignorance,
Illiterateness, and what comes next; since I shall show, that this is his
constant, natural Style, and has always been his use in his early Oppositions
of some of the most famous men of our Nation: So that you are to reckon that
the reproachful Characters he gives, import only, that the man is angry; and
ignorant and illiterate in his Mouth and Pen signify but one that is not of
his mind, or at least not of that mind, which he has a present Humor and
Interest to oppose. And yet I must confess that after I heard of M. Stubb's
Intentions of falling on my Book, I expected more Railing and greater
Vehemence, more opprobrious Names, and spightful Sayings; because I knew the
man and his Genius: And though some perhaps can scarce apprehend a greater
excess in these good Qualities, then are to be met in this Piece, yet I can
very well conceive such, as are incomparably greater, having so lately been
made acquainted with the Civilities of M. Cross, in comparison to whom, This
Adversary writes like a Christian and a Gentleman; and that you may see how
much there is of these, in this Author, and judge of the other by Him, I shall
now immediately give you the Account of M. Stubb, reserving that of M. Cross to
another season.

That I may proceed distinctly, I shall represent Him in (1.) His TEMPER, (2.)
DESIGNS, and (3.) MANAGEMENT of them in his last Book. In describing these I
shall not have recourse to such base Artifices, as He, and his Friend M. Cross
have used against me, viz. idle Legends and Fictions of their own Brains: Nor
shall I reflect upon those infinite Discourses he has had in very public
places often, and sometimes in my hearing, from which a Character full enough
might be drawn of him, (for I think it not generous or handsome to make them
more public than he has done himself, except I am unavoidably forced upon it)
But I shall take all my Accounts of the Undertaker out of his published
Writings, and give you him in his own Words, nakedly as they are, quoted to a
Page. In order to which, I think fit to present you with a List of those Books
he has written, with a short touch of the Subjects that are handled in them.

ONE of the First of his Essays, while he was yet but a Youngster in Oxford,
was a DEFENSE of M. HOBBS against the Reverend Dr. Wallis, the learned and
famous Geometry-Professor of that University. The Subject we have in the
Account he gives of his Performance, [p. 18. of the second Alphabet] where he
says he has Proved irrefragably, that Cum is the proper Preposition of the
Ablative of the manner: That praetendit scire is no Anglicism: That he has
Demonstrated, that Motus and Magnitudo -- Consideravimus is good Latin: as
also, that Propositiones falsae sunt -- and multa ejusmodi is elegant: That he
has evinced Tanquam to signify As if; and that Tanquam si is not one word:
That he has said so much about adduco, that nothing is wanting but Pantagruel'
s Hug: That the Professor may learn of him to put (...) together in
Composition: That N may come before a Labial, and particularly before P: That
(...) is a visible Point, and used for a Mark with a hot iron.

These Exploits he has done, and these, he says, are the Points he undertook
to maintain. Weighty matter for a public Quarrel; and so weighty, it seems,
the Undertaker accounted it, as to be worthy his Passion, which broke out upon
the Doctor in these Expressions of Civility, (...), Pigmy, Quacksalver, and
Mountebank; Critical Bravo, Witty-poll, of no Credit, lost to all Persons of
Learning, and a contemptible Adversary, ignorant, intolerably ignorant; and a
world more to the same purpose, of which in its due place, with the references
to the particular Page. How fit a man is this to undertake the Vindication of
M. Cross? But I must go on with the Catalogue of his Works. The next is

An ESSAY in DEFENSE of the good old Cause] The most glorious Cause in the
World, accompanied with no less Success, p. 2. of the second Alphabet. [And a
VINDICATION of the Honorable Sir Hen. Uane] whom not to honor and admire is
to be an Enemy to all that is good and virtuous, p. 7. second Alphabet [from
the false Aspersions of M. BAXTER] A Philistim, Shimei, Rabshakeh, p. 11. 2d.
Alph.

A LETTER to an Officer of the Army concerning a select Senate; which is to
consist, according to His Model, of Independents, Anabaptists, Fifth
Monarchy-men and Quakers; excluding all PAPISTS, PRELATICAL, and PRESBYTERIAN
Persons. p. 61.

A LIGHT SHINING OVT OF DARKNESS, a Book against Ministry, p. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc.
Universities, p. 92, 93. and 139, 140. School Divinity, and Knowledge of
Tongues, 94, 95, 96. Humane Learning, p. 101, 102. Aristotle's Philosophy, p.
105. Public Churches, 106. Churchyards, 110. Division into Parishes and
Tiths, p. 112, 113. Bells, 138. University Habits, and Degrees, p. 14.2.143.
Black Coats, p. 147. Gowns, 148. Respect of Persons, Complemental Addresses,
and your Servant, p. 163. Swearing before a Magistrate, p. 165, 166. Containing
also an express Apology for the Quakers, p. 55.56. I quote from the second
Edition.

An ACCOUNT OF CHOCOLATA, by which he wholly obliges Manking. [Pref. p. last.]

An ACCOUNT of M. GREATARICK, who wrought real Miracles, p. 8.10. And did
things that never man did, except Christ and the Apostles, p. 27. These
miraculous things he wrought by the Temperament and Composure of his Body, p.
11. And ancient Miracles and modern ones have been wrought by the efficacy of a
corporal Touch, p. 11. This of M. Greatarick did not indeed always succeed, and
there were some Diseases, as well as some Devils, which even the Apostles could
not cast out, p. 5.

A CENSVRE upon certain Passages contained in the History of the Royal Society,
which he says are impious and pernicious, p. 1. contrary to the Analogy of
Faith and Scripture, p. 36. a Congeries of gross Untruths, tending to the
Dishonor of God, and the Destruction of the Protestant Religion, introducing a
Popish Implicit Faith, or something that in effect is the same, but attended
with more ridiculous Circumstances, p. 40. directly contrary to the
Constitutions of our Church, and better becoming a Socinian from Poland and
Amsterdam, than a Divine of our Church, p. 53.

Has not Religion and the Church of England, think you, an excellent Champion,
in this DEFENDER of M. Hobbs, Sir Hen. Uane, and the Quakers?

But lastly, He has writ a SPECIMEN of SOME ANIMADVERSIONS UPON THE PLUS ULTRA
OF M. GLANVILL; in which he proves, That the Ancients were able to cure cut
fingers; as particularly Podalirius and Machaon in Homer; and Galen compounded
several Medicines to that purpose, as Diapalma, Tripharmacon, and another hard
word, p. 3. and again 159. That it is a very difficult Journey to the Moon, and
a great way, p. 175. and many other things, that are as much to his purpose, as
these, as will be shown in the Sequel. For the present I only say, concerning
this Piece in general, That with a great deal of Noise and Labor, the
Animadverter has proved nothing; For all his Force is employed either against
Castles in the Air of his own raising, or incidental passages that are little
or nothing to the Cause I undertook, and of no concern to the main body of my
Book.

And yet I must confess that when I compare this Adversary with my other
Antagonist M. Cross, I think there are acknowledgments due to him, for the
Reading, and show of Learning, that I find in his Discourse; and I may say of
it, as one did of an impertinent Disputer, that was very brisk and fluent in
his Argument, Been disputat, sed nihil ad rem. But the Papers of my other
Assailant deserve not as much as this; For they contain nothing, but
opprobrious Names, gross Falsehoods, and contemptible Puerilities; no Learning,
nor any show of any, but such, as a Boy of 18 would despise.

Thus briefly, and in general of the Writings of this Aggressor: out of Them I
now come to give you some more particular Accounts of his Spirit and Temper.
And because I resolve to abstain from all Expressions that look like the
Rhetoric and Civility of M. Cross, and his Champion M. Stubb, I shall not give
those hard Names to the Qualifications I discover, that every man else will
think they deserve: But only make a kind and sober Enquiry after some of the
remarkable Virtues he discloseth in his Works. I shall only insist here on two.

And because he tells his Reader in the first Page of the Preface to his Light
shining out of Darkness, [Edition the first] That HE IS ONE THAT DESIRES TO LIE
LOW IN HIS OWN EYES, I shall begin these Enquiries by taking notice,

(1.) OF his singular Modesty; This is exceeding eminent in every Leaf of his
Writings: In his Attempts, while but a Boy, upon the Reverend Dr. Wallis, and
M. Baxter; and now he has made it more remarkable by his Assault upon the
Royal Society His Majesty's Institution, and an Assembly, consisting of Persons
of the greatest Honor, Gravity, and Learning, while he is yet but a young
Country Physician; as he styles himself in his Preface against my Book, Plus
ultra: And above all, it is notorious, what a modest man this is, in his early
Oppositions of MONARCHY, and Proposals of a MODEL for the GOVERNMENT of three
Nations, and Extirpation of those Ancient Laws, which had had been made and
confirmed by the Wisdom of so many Kings, and successive Parliaments, in his
Impugnations of MINISTRY, UNIVERSITIES, CHVRCHES, HVMANE LEARNING, and all
ORDERS, and CONSTITVTIONS whatsoever, as Popish and Antichristian.

But let us take a view of his singular Humility and Lowness in his own Eyes,
in some Expressions in his Writings; I shall recite a few Instances among
numerous others, which for Brevity I must omit, by which you may judge, how he
excels in this Virtue.

In the first Page of his Book against Dr. Wallis in Defense of M. Hobbs, He
expresses himself to his Friend in these words, I have penned a further
Discourse upon that Subject, which you may suppress from going any further, if
you find that my early Repute abroad does not call for the Publication, nor the
Applause of the Ingenious, whose Praises were the more to be regarded, because
they were directed to the Piece which was public, not the Author that was
concealed. It seems he had writ an Anonymous Book, which, he tells the World,
raised him an early Repute, and the Applauses and Praises of the Ingenious.
Very modest! And as lowly is that other Saying, p. 5. If I find the Doctor
produce more Grammars against us, I will allow him two to one, and venture my
Reputation against his no Credit: Great Odds! M. Stubb' s Reputation, that
early Reputation abroad against the no Credit of Dr. Wallis! He must needs be
certain, that would lay such a Wager. Well! The Geometry-Professor of Oxford is
a Person of no Credit, and the Young man of Christ-church attaqu'd and weakened
it: This he tells us he had done, in his Preface, p. 3. He valiantly attaqu'd
nothing, and made it as weak, as Water: And sooner he had done it, but for a
good Reason; 'Twas long, says he, ere my Laughter upon the reading of Dr. W.
would permit me to use a Pen, ibid. And what should the man do, while the Fit
of Laughter was upon him? As soon as he could for Laughing, he assures us, he
prepared for Triumph. And being then rather to proclaim my Victory, than to
gain one, I supposed I might have a greater time to prepare for Triumph, than
had been otherwise necessary to the Dispute, ibid. p. 3. Well! But what need of
so much Triumph, and such Preparations for it, if this Adversary were so
ridiculous? He tells us in the words that follow, Nor do I now go about to
Triumph over the single Doctor, (The Conquest is too mean) no doubt modest
Harry! But over all those whose Interest or Ignorance may lead them to approve
his Writings, who are numerous at least; and since the Vogue of the People will
have them deserving too, I have thought them worthy the Passion of thy
affectionate Friend and Servant. So he concludes to the understanding Reader:
But that Friend of his may ask, that since the Approvers of the Doctors
Writings are numerous, and they have the Vogue of the People for deserving too;
How should it come to pass that He is a Person of no Credit, as p. 5. and a
contemptible Adversary? as [p. 8. second Part.] If he had made his Address to
the Courteous instead of the Understanding Reader, some of that sort probably
might not have observed this Fit of Forgetfulness: And he that does, must pass
such slips over, or he will find work enough for his Patience on this Account, as
well as others, in the Writings of the Undertaker. But it is not my business to
note any of these here; His Modesty and the Lowliness of his Mind, (for which
he would have recommended himself to those meek ones of the Earth, Lambert's
Army, and the Committee of Safety) are my present Subject: of these but an
Instance o^ two more.

He tells us in his Preface to his Animadversions on my Book, p. 5. That The
Comical Wits, (so he pleases to call the Fellows of the Royal Society) were so
alarmed at the Specimen of his Animadversions on Dr. Sprat and M. Glanvill,
that They employed all their Artifices to divert him: Great Sir GVY! how that
Host trembles before Thee! How do their Spirits fail, and their Courage sink at
thy Summons! How They weakly fly to Artifices to put by thy formidable Force,
when they have not strength to stand before it! Well may They fear that
redoubted Arm that has slain so many Monsters; Antichrist, and all his Limbs,
Monarchy, Churches, Universities, Ministry, and the rest: This Pigmy Troop
cannot stand under one Blow of thy more than Herculean Club.

Therefore the Cowards, mean Spirits, pitiful Mechaniciens, (as with valiant
Despite he calls them) endeavor to wave the Combat by disingenious
Proceedings, ibid. contrary (it seems) to all generous Laws of Chivalry; They
treacherously design (he tells us) not only upon his Fortunes, but Life: They
cannot be secure while He is above ground. Well! But he knows his Advantages,
and assures us that They are at his Mercy; The Obligation (as he says) would
be lost in sparing them, He resolves therefore to take the daring Counsel; and
though they should oppress him by treacherous power, it would be said, That he
fell their Uictor and their Martyr, [ib. p. 5.] Thus dying Samson plucked the
House upon the Philistims. And no doubt M. Stubb is as much a Victor, as he is
like to be a Martyr. For, what a Conqueror is He in Title-Pages and Prefaces?
With what ease does he get Victories? Vidi, Vici; He only laughed at Dr. Wallis,
and prepares for Triumph, as soon as the Merriment was over: He dispatched a
Specimen of Animadversions against Dr. Sprat, and M. Glanvill, and presently
the Royal Society are at his mercy; and I, for my part, am reduced to a
Nonplus in his first Sentence, and designed for a Sacrifice to public
Obloquy, in the second leaf of his Preface. It seems he has the Wind of
public Fame in a Bag, and can direct Reputation or Reproach as he pleases.
The general Sense of Mankind depends upon his Pen, which is none of the common
ones, to which from henceforth I am to be given up, as he threatens, p. 2. Now
I see with how much reason he says, That the Expectation of all men was
impatient to see his Animadversions, [Pref. p. 7.] No doubt 'twas that they
might know what they were to judge of the Virtuosi. He has at last obliged
Mankind with them, as he promises to do by his Observations about Chocolata,
[Disc. of Choc. Pref. p. last.] and now he expects without Question, that the
Comical Wits should be odious to the Kingdom, as he tells us he designed to
make them. [ Nonplus, Pref. p. 4.] The Kingdom, it is like, will love and hate
as he would have it. He gives the Stamp of odious or amiable, and the Character
is indelible.

This, Sir, is a short Description of the modest man, that was so low in his
own Eyes, when he stood before his Patrons of the GOOD OLD CAUSE. And from this
remarkable Virtue of his we may pass to an Enquiry about another as eminent,
viz.

(II.) HIS Civility and dutiful Demeanor toward his Betters: of this He gives
great Instances in his Expressions toward all sorts of Superiors. Concerning
our KINGS he says, That Their whole Succession was a continued Usurpation,
[Pref. to the Good old Cause, p. 2.] Of the Glorious KING CHARLES the MARTYR;
That All his evil Council did ride upon one Horse, ibid. And adds, That the
Patriots of the Long Parliament and Army executed Justice upon Him. [Vind.
against M. Baxter, p. 59.] Our present SOVEREIGN he styles an Usurper, and
mates him with Cromwell in the infamy of that Title; For speaking of the Day of
the Tyrants Death, He says, It was famous for the Vanquishing of one, and the
Death of an other Usurper. [against M. Baxt. p. 53.] And every one knows That
was the third of September, the Day also of the Kings Final Overthrow at
Worcester. And in his Letter to an Officer of the Army, p. 14. speaking of a
Cloud out of the North, which (he says) was more dreadful to tender
Consciences, than the Romish Inquisition; He adds, That in comparison thereof,
the Return of Charles Stuart and his Bishops would prove a moderate Desire: In
which Expression he thought, no doubt, he had raised the Dreadfulness of that
Cloud to the most Hyperbolical Height possible, and much beyond the Comparison
with the Inquisition. And whether that may not go for a Civility to his
Majesty, (since He is returned by happy and miraculous Providence with his
Bishops) which he prates of [p. 21. of his late Book against me] let the Reader
judge. To set off the Advantages Aristotle had for the compiling of his History
of Animals; he speaks of the greatness of Alexander, his Impatience to effect
his Purposes, his Generosity in acknowledging Services, his Understanding what
was done and omitted; And then our Author intimates That the Royal Society have
not such a PATRON in the KING, as ARISTOTLE had in ALEXANDER: How much Respect
and Affection to his Majesty was meant by this Comparison, let those think,
that consider the approved Loyalty of this Defender of the Good old Cause.

And having spoken of his Civility to our KINGS, (if you do not like that sort)
I may here acquaint you, that he had another kind for Sir Hen. Uane, and his
Accomplices in the Cause, which in M. Stubb's Opinion, was the most glorious in
the World. [p. 2. against M. Baxt.] These conducted us in our Way to Freedom,
p. 3. and a glorious Freedom they led us to, for by their Help we were
delivered from the Norman Yoke. [Pref. to Good old Cause, p. 10.] And how heavy
and intolerable that was, he expresses [ ibid.] in these words, I often
communing with mine own Soul in private, use to parallel our Bondage under the
Norman Yoke, and our Deliverance therefrom, to the Continuance of the Children
of Israel in Egypt, and their Escape at last from that slavish Condition. This
put him in mind to compare our Deliverers (forsooth) to MOSES, and 'twas not,
he says, One Moses, But many illustrious Personages, whose Memory (he
prophesies) shall live, when that of Thrasybulus, Timoleon, Epaminondas,
Brutus, Valerius, or any Worthies Greece or old Rome could ever boast of, shall
cease to be mentioned. [against M. B. p. 3.] What a Seer was M. Stubb! Their
Memories live, and will, no doubt, continue as long as the Records of Tybourn:
And till all Trading fail there, Those Patriots of the long Parliament and
Army, who executed Justice upon the late KING, shall never cease to be
mentioned. Thus he celebrates the Illustrious Regicides.

And of Sir H. Uane he says, That not to have heard of him is to be a Stranger
in this Land; and not to honor and admire him, is to be an Enemy to all that
is good and virtuous, [Vind. of Sir H. V. against M. B. p. 7.] and adds
further, that he is one, whose Integrity, whose Vprightness in the greatest
Employments has secured him from the Effects of their Hatred, in whom his
sincere Piety, Zeal for the Public, and singular Wisdom may have raised Envy
and Dread. [ibid.] And in the following Page he assures us, That Sir H. has
discovered the most glorious Truths that have been witnessed unto these 1500
Years and more, in a manner as extraordinary; I mean (says he) not in the
persuasive words of Humane Wisdom, not in the Sophistry of School-Learning, not
as the Scribes and Pharisees, but as one having Authority, and in the Evidence
and Demonstration of the Spirit, viz. like Christ Jesus, and the Apostles
working Miracles for the Evidence and Demonstration of their Doctrines; So that
here Sir Harry is advanced to a kind of Equality with Christ and the Apostles,
as They elsewhere are brought down by him to a Level with M. Greatarick. [in
his Miraculous Conformist] And now Sir H. Uane being a Person of such a
Character, we need not wonder, That Respect should be due to him from all the
World, as he tells us it is, in the Preface to his Vindication.

And little less in his Opinion is due to M. Harrington for the
Commonwealth-Model in his Oceana, of which, he says, in the Preface to his
Good old Cause, p. 16. I admire his Model, and am ready to cry out, as if it
were the Pattern in the Mount. And [ p. 26.] he declares his Judgment for the
promoting M. Harrington's Model, In the Praises whereof (says he) I would
enlarge, did I not think my self too inconsiderable (an humble Fit) to add any
thing to those applauds, which the understanding Part of the World must bestow
upon him, (They must and can not choose, since M. Stubb has professed to admire
it) and which, as he goes on, though Eloquence it self should turn Panegyrist,
he not only merits, but transcends. It Is pity but M. Stubb had made some
Provision in his Elogy for the Change of times, as no doubt he would, could he
have foreseen, That his Eloquence might have had an occasion to turn Panegyrist
for Monarchy. The wary Modesty of M. P. had been worth his Imitation here; who
concludes some of his immortal Poetry with this excellent Distich,

This was the Opinion of William P. in the Year of our Lord one thousand six
hundred thirty three.

But who could have thought that a Nation delivered from the Vassallage of the
Norman Yoke, would again have chosen a Linsy Woolsy Monarchy, [Vind. of Sir H.
V. p. 42.] rather than the Pattern in the Mount? Who would have dreamt that we
should have preferred Charles Stuart and his Bishops [ ut supr.] to the
PATRIOTS of the LONG PARLIAMENT and ARMY that executed Justice upon the late
King? [Vind. of Sir H. V. p. 59.] That the same should befall us as did the
Children of Israel after they had cast off Pharaoh' s Yoke, [Vind. of Sir H. V.
p. 3.] Yea, that at last, we should return not to Goshen, but the most dismal
parts of Egypt, rather than proceed to our Felicity. [p. 5.] These things were
so far from being likely, that notwithstanding all the Discouragements the Good
old Cause met with, which are paralleled to those befell the Israelites in their
Journey, p. 4. yet our Prophetic Rumper heartens himself in these Words, I
assure my self that these are but the Pangs of that Birth, in which we shall at
last cry out, a Man-Child is born, [p. 4, 5.] For Confirmation of which he
adds, that God will not lose his own Mercies, and all is but as the wandering
Jews in the Desert, or as the going back of the Sun upon the Dial of Ahaz ten
Degrees, which was a sign of Recovery to disconsolate and languishing
Hezechias, p. 5. and so he grows confident of the final issue of things, and
the Prisoners of Hope shall receive double Satisfaction, and the ransomed of
the Lord shall return, ib. This is the man, Sir, that cries out in Astonishment
at my Puritanism and Fanaticism [p. 11. of his Book against me] because I call
some of the Aristotelian Doctrines, Heathen Notions.

But I have not yet done with his Courtships of his Friends of the Cause; Those
I have mentioned concern the GRANDEES and PATRIOTS: The People in common have
their share also of his Favors, These he calls the good People, the Salt of
this Land, [Pref. to Good old Cause, p. 32.] The faithful Ones, Pref. p. 30.
The Honest Party, p. 31. The true Anointed Ones of the Lord, [Vind. of Sir H.
V. p. 2.] Honest and faithful Souls, [Pref. to Good old Cause, p. 16.] and
infinite more of such Elogies he bestows upon them. But nothing of all this is
Fanaticism, nothing like my Canting in calling some of Aristotle's Dictates,
Heathen Notions. This brief Specimen I have given you of M. Stubb's best kind
of Civilities.

I shall now offer you some further Account of those of the First Sort. Dr.
WALLIS you know, is a Person of great and deserved Fame for Learning both at
home and abroad: upon that excellent man M. Stubb first fastened in a Defense of
M. Hobbs against him; I had occasion before to touch some instances of his
Courtships bestowed on this learned Doctor; then I promised more, and with the
particular Quotations of those; This I intend now briefly.

In the Preface He tells his Reader, That the Doctor is one, who has so
merited by his Scurrility and Obscenity, that his English Writings may become
Appendixes to Pasquil' s Jests, or the merry Tales of Mother Bunch, p. 1. The
Doctor is one of his Comical Wits, no doubt. And p. 2. he says, one of us two
is grossly ignorant, viz. either Dr. Wallis, the man of no Credit, p. 5. or M.
Stubb one of early Reputation abroad. p. 2. Let the understanding Reader judge
which it is; and that he may not mistake, our Author kindly directs his
Judgment, [p. 6.49. and second Part, p. 1.3.5.8.] In which and other places, he
charge the Doctor with Ignorance, Want of Learning, intolerable Ignorance,
and Ignorance in the Principles of his Profession: So that the Reader, if he be
not grossly blind, must needs see which of them two it is that M. Stubb thinks
to be grossly ignorant. And further to express his Civility and favorable
Opinion of the Doctor, he says, He has afforded us nothing hitherto, but
Falsities and Falsifications, p. 5. calls him peevish Doctor, p. 15. (...)
Pigmy, p. 20. Witty-poll, p. 24. Quacksalver, and Mountebank, p. 25. Critical
Bravo, p. 49. Tender-fronted Theologue, [p. 5. of the second Part] Contemptible
Adversary, p. 8. Scribe among the Pharisees, Iournyman to Adoniram, p. 9. Full
of Impertinencies, Paralogisms, and Gibberish in Divinity; So notorious a
Falsificatour and Teller of Untruths, so void of Humanity in this Contest, and
ordinary Civility, That I can scarce hold (says he) from telling you, You are
of your Father the Devil, ib. And he goes on to mind the Doctor of his Pride,
Ambition, and Disgraceful Speeches against the Godly Party, and that Remnant
the Army, which under the Conduct of the Lord of Hosts upheld the Cause, ibid.

Thus briefly of some Civilities toward Dr. Wallis, the First of those Comical
Wits, whom M. Stubb undertook to make ridiculous and odious to the Kingdom, (to
speak in his Phrase.)

Let us see next with what Ingenuity and Fairness he carried himself toward M.
BAXTER in his Defense of Sir H. V. against Him. This Reverend Divine was
another of those he resolved to sacrifice to public Obloquy, as he has done
me, [Pref. of N. P.] But let us see what way he takes to do it; his old Method
no doubt, and so we find it. Let us hear him Rhetoricate then; One that is no
Scholar at all, not skilled in Latin, Greek, or Hebrew, not versed in
Ecclesiastical History, or Philosophy, etc. But a mere Glowworm in Literature,
who borrowed his Light from the Darkness of the Night, and the Ignorance of
those he converseth with. [p. 32, 33. of the Pref. to Good old Cause,] Whifler
in Theology, p. 33. one that transcribed Aulicus, and the Grub-street Pamphlets
to frame a Legend for the Catholics of Kederminster, p. 32. A Philistim, or
Shimei, or Rabsha^^h, [Vind. of Sir H. V. p. 11.] whose Language against the
Vanists may justly deserve that Reply of Michael to the Devil, THE LORD REBUKE
THEE, ibid. Tedious, impertinent, p. 13. State-Tinker, p. 37. Retailer of other
men's Readings, and Quoter of Quotations, p. 43. His Discretion cannot be so
little, but his Abilities are less, ibid. He charge him with Ignorance, in
the Preface to the Good old Cause; and (which is very pleasant) he says, he
remits it to others to demonstrate the Charge. And before I have done with him,
I shall make him wish, he had taken the same Course, in reference to the
Virtuosi. He says, [p. 18. of his Vindication of Sir H. V.] That he may
suppose M. Baxter is totally ignorant of Syriack and Arabic, and that his
Skill in Hebrew is as little, which he referrs to M. Robertson to prove, and
thereupon he takes it for granted, insulting in these following Words, Dare He
boast unto the World, what time he spent in Impertinencies, viz. Reading the
Fathers and Schoolmen, p. 13. and yet be ignorant of that, which is almost the
Unum Necessarium in his Function? viz. Hebrew. But why M. Harry must that be
the almost Vnum Necessarium to M. Baxter's Function, which not one of the
Fathers in the Nicene Council (whose Creed is so famous) understood? as you
tell us in your Apology for the Quakers, [p. 85. of Light out of Darkness.] But
Hebrew and other Langu^ges shall be necessary or not, as the saying this, or
the Contrary will serve his turn. And it is pretty to see how he charge M.
Baxter with Ignorance in Syriack and Arabic, which, he says, are of great Use
for the Understanding the Scripture, [ibid. p. 18.] and yet implicitly
affirms, [Quer. 13. of his Light out of Darkness,] That the Knowledge of
Tongues leads us to many Senses of Scripture, and to put our Trust in Man: and
again, [Qu. 18.] That the first Christians were ignorant of Humane Learning,
and Heathenish Authors, and that it was not only the Effect of Julian the
Apostates Malice, but Christian Prudence, that went about to keep the People of
God from reading Heathen Writers: And yet these two Books, speaking such
contradictory things, bear date the same Year; only indeed, the Designs were
very different, and M. Stubb was to serve a diverse Interest in them; in the one
to recommend himself to the Quakers and other wild Fanatics; and in the other
to vent his Malice against M. Baxter: And things in his Divinity must be
affirmed or denied, as there is occasion. He is still consistent with one
Principle, Self; But never was yet steady to any other.

Besides the Civilities mentioned, I might recite innumerable others; but I
must hasten from this head: Therefore of some few more briefly. He calls Sir K.
DIGBY, That eminent Virtuoso, the Pliny of our Age for Lying, [p. 161. of his
Animad. upon Plus Vltra.] and yet p. 20. he lays much stress upon the Authority
of Pliny. He styles the excellent History of the R. S. a nonsensical and
illiterate History, p. 173. And Pr. p. 4. He says, he observed the Tendency of
it to be so pernicious, that, if the first Provocation (viz. that which he had
from my Book.) had made him angry, he was now become obstinate, and he goes on,
In that famed Work I encountered with so many illiterate Passages, that the
Credit of our Nation seemed concerned in the Refuting it; Yea, he adds, that
the Interest of the present Monarchy, the Protestant Religion, and the
Emolument of each private Person was concerned; And when these were at stake,
was it fit for M. Stubb to be silent? His Zeal for the Credit of the Nation,
Monarchy and Religion would have destroyed him, if it had not had vent; He must
speak or burst; And all this Zeal was kindled by a sense of Duty, (as we may
believe) for he tells us, He ought not to be silent; and those that know him
may think, 'twere impossible ^e should.

But for an Instance or two more, DESCARTES his Book De Homine is ridiculous,
p. 18. And the MATHEMATICIANS in a Cluster are reckoned with the Illiterate, p.
115. Let illiterate Persons and Mathematicians be swayed against plain Proof,
by these Arguments. Any Arguments will sway Mathematicians; For They seldom if
ever prove Metaphysicians, Religieuse, or otherwise of tolerable Ratiocination;
p. 17. For the Geometricians either reject as false, frivolous, and
indemonstrable those Reasonings and Studies according to which Humane Affairs
are regulated; or else ignorantly run into Whimsies and fantastical ways of
arguing, ibid. And therefore the Mathematics in general are concluded less
necessary, and inutile, ibid. What pity it is now that Aristotle should be a
Geometrician? as p. 18. And how come the Mathematics to be so inutile, as they
were just now, p. 17. when in this 18th. it is said, That Aristotle supposes
his Scholars not ignorant in Geometry, since without that Knowledge they could
not understand his Analyticks, nor that part of his Ethics, where he
illustrates Justice by Arithmetical and Geometrical Proportions. Well! The
Methods of Ratiocination laid down by Aristotle are general, as to public and
private use, p. 17. Those Methods cannot be known without Geometry according to
Aristotle himself, p. 18. and yet Mathematics are inutile, p. 17.

For M. Stubb to rail at that in one Book, which he cries up and defends in
another, we must allow him; He affirms and denies what comes into his head next
to serve his present Spite and Interest; and we are not to look for any more
Consistency in his Books, than in his Dreams: But some would expect that the
same Treatise, or at least the same Leaf should be consistent with it self:
This may chance to happen, but he has good Luck when it does; For he tells us
in his Prefaces, that he sends away some sheets before others are written, and
a man may judge by his Writings that he no more remembers what he penned last
Week, than what he dreamt last Night was Twelvemonth.

But the most pleasant Complement of all is behind. In the Preface to his Book
against me, p. 3. He calls the Virtuosi, Prattle-boxes, and p. 1. mentions one,
who, as it is usual (says he) with that sort of Virtuosi, instantly usurped all
the Discourse, and, no doubt, he made have; But where did that wonderful
Virtuoso dwell, that could usurp the Discourse, when M. Stubb was present?
Certainly 'twas one of the most nimble among the Prattle-boxes, there cannot be
such another in the whole Set: One would wonder what M. Stubb should be doing,
when the Virtuoso usurped the Discourse? He tells us this was done at a Person
of Honor's Table, and that it was at the very Beginning of Dinner, it appears,
in that the Gentleman usurped the Discourse instantly; So that we may judge
that M. Stubb's Teeth would not give his Tongue leave; But as soon as that was
at Liberty, he paid the barbarous Opiniatour, p. 3. for usurping his Province.
If M. Stubb had hated all Usurpers, as he does the Usurpers of Discourse, we
had never had a Defense of the Good old Cause. But why should he be so much
concerned about this sort of Usurpers? Their Discourse can no more be heard in
the lurry of his, than a soft Voice can, amidst the Clutter and Noise of a
Mill; So that he has no need of the Wax and Wool he prescribes against the
buzze of the Prattle-boxes; his Tongue will better defend his Ears from that
danger; (though I cannot promise that it will never expose them to other and
worse Hazards) And he is never like to meet such an Usurper of Discourse, as
the Virtuoso at the Person of Honors Table did; except the Doctor of Warwick
could meet Harry Stubb of Christ-church.

Thus I have given some Account of the rare Civilities of the Courtly
Anti-Virtuoso, and upon review of them, I cannot but wonder, that this man, who
had so early a Reputation abroad, as he told us, and was so applauded by the
ingenious, should sully his Fame by the Choice of such pitiful Adversaries: Dr.
Wallis was ignorant, grossly ignorant, intolerably ignorant, ignorant in his own
Profession: M. Baxter, no Scholar at all, not skilled in Latin, Greek, or
Hebrew, Ecclesiastical History, or Philosophy, a Whiffler in Theology, and
Glowworm in Literature: Dr. Sprat's History, Illiterate and Nonsensical; The
Virtuosi, Prattle-boxes, and Ignoramus's; and I, ignorant of every thing.

What means this Man of Renown to choose out such despicable Adversaries? Why
does he disparage his Puissance by employing it against such feeble Foes? what
poor Quarry are these for such a Noble Bird of Prey? He told us, heretofore,
that it was Zeal for the Cause; and now it is the Interest of Monarchy,
Protestant Religion, the Church of England and Universities, that have engaged
this publick-spirited man to so great Condescensions; and how much reason we
have to believe, that these were the true Motives to his Assaults, we shall see
by and by.

I shall now shut up this Head by taking notice, what a fit Second this is for
M. Cross: They are nobile par, and extremely alike in sundry particulars of
their Genius and Performances; only it must be confessed, that M. Stubb has as
much the more Learning, as he is guilty of the less Scurrility; And indeed the
Civilities of this kind, which the Physician of Warwick has bestowed upon all
his Adversaries, are not equal to those my other Antagonist has liberally
given me singly. And though I pass immediately from looking over the Collection
of Complements I have presented you from M. Stubb, yet when I cast my eyes from
it upon M. Crosses Papers, (a Transcript of which I have) I cannot choose but
bless my self, and cry out in astonishment. For there is scarce a word of
Reproach in the Dictionary, but he has found it for me; yea he has made
diverse that are span-new, to serve his purpose, and ventured upon Barbarisms to
miscall me by, when all the usual Names of Disparagement and Infamy were spent.
But I shall have a fitter place to reckon with that Billingsgate Orator. I
return to his Patron M. Stubb; and having given you a short Representation of
his Spirit and Genius, out of his own published Writings, I come next to

(II.) HIS Designs; of these I shall briefly give his own Account out of his
latest Books. They were (if we may believe him) the securing and promoting the
Interest of the present Monarchy. [Pref. against Plus Vltra, p. 4.] Protestant
Religion [ibid.] and the Church of England, [Title, Pref. etc. against Dr.
Sprat.] School Divinity, [p. 1. against Plus Vltra.] Universities. [p. 1.2.13.]
In order to the carrying on these great Intendments, He designed further to
make the Virtuosi really ridiculous and odious to the Kingdom, [Pref. p. 4.] to
avenge his Faculty upon M. Glanvill, and by Sacrificing that Virtuoso to
public Obloquy to establish general Repose and Tranquillity. [Pref. p. 3.]
Smile not o Tres-haute and tres-agreeable Comediants. [Pref. 6.] M. Marchamont
Stubb is the PILLAR of MONARCHY, and the PATRIOT of PROTESTANT Religion; But
you must not ask how long he has been of this Loyal and Religious Inclination?
He has no longer a Concern for Sir H. Vane, [Disc. of Choc.] You may choose
whether you will admire Him now, and yet be no Enemy to all that is good and
virtuous; nor is he concerned for the other Patriots of the long Parliament and
Army, that were to be so famous, when the Worthies of Greece and old Rome
should cease to be mentioned: ut supra, Tower Hill and Tybourn have altered the
Case. The Good old Cause cease to be the most glorious in the World; and
Monarchy to be the Norman Yoke, more intolerable than the Egyptian Bondage:
Our Kings are not now a Succession of Usurpers; nor is Their Government the
most dismal Part of Egypt: We hear no more of Charles Stuart and his Bishops
compared to the Inquisition; nor of executing Justice upon the late KING. No,
the Interest of the present Monarchy, and the Church of England are now the
Cause, the glorious Cause, (and next to the Good old one) no doubt the most
glorious that ever was. M. Politicus is better informed, his Eyes are opened,
and now Monarchy may be as good a Government as M. Harrington's Model, that was
so like the Pattern in the Mount; and General MONK may be as good a Patriot as
Sir H. Vane, and the Rumpers. Thus we hear Sir Hudibras is turned zealous
Royalist; and our Sir. Marchamont will pay the Comical Wits for the Prejudice
They do the present Monarchy and the Church of England.

HOW like it is (1.) that the Interest of Monarchy should be one ground of M.
Stubb's Quarrel with the Virtuosi we have seen already; or if it do not yet
fully appear from what has been recited before, give me leave to propose to
your further Consideration a Paragraph of his in the Beginning of his
Vindication of Sir H. V. p. 1.2.

The Age (says he) wherein we live, has been all Miracles; and the coming
forth of the Woman out of the Wilderness has been attended with so many
Wonders, that a pious Heart can never want employment in its Contemplation. We
have seen, and our Eyes bear witness of the Actings of our God, the overturning
of a Monarchy settled upon the Foundation and Usage of many hundreds of Years,
strengthened by what Humane Policy could contribute to its Establishments, and
what of Buttress a complying Clergy could assist it with out of the Pulpit; Yet
have we seen a Change so brought about by our Jehovah, that he may in
extraordinary Acknowledgments be proclaimed wonderful Counselor, the mighty
God, the everlasting Father, Prince of Peace: We have seen the most glorious
Cause in the World, accompanied with no less Success, and the Lord in his Mercy
to us, and Justice to them, has bound our Kings in Chains, and Nobles in
Fetters of Iron, such as wherewith they had formerly oppressed the good People of
this Land. This Honor have all his Saints, (Psalm. 149.9.) Vengeance has he
returned upon their heads, and their own Shame has covered them. The true
anointed ones of the Lord have appeared, for their sakes has he rebuked
Monarchs, and the former have repeated the Fruits of that Holiness, and
Sacriety, whereunto the latter vainly pretended.

In this Strain he goes on, in imitation of the reformed Style of those Times,
which is not Canting, but the holy Language of the anointed ones, for whose
sake our King was bound in Chains, and our Nobles in Fetters of Iron. And are
we not to believe that this Anointed Rumper is a Zealot for the Interest of the
present Monarchy? We have his word for it, and he has told me, that he can say
more for Monarchy than all the Virtuosi: No doubt! It would be very much, if M.
Stubb could not say more for any thing than the Ignoramus's. He knows the man,
that uses to brag, what he can say for MAHOMET, and what an Inclination he
has to write the Life of that Brave Fellow; And if Turcism were among us, I
know where the Alcoran would have a Defender, and one that can say as much for
it, as for Monarchy, or the Church of England, if he may be credited himself;
but of that no more now.

We have seen some things whereby we may judge, how dear the Interest of
Monarchy is to our Anti-Virtuoso; and how much Reason we have to believe that
to be one ground of his Quarrel with the Royal Society.

LET us inquire next, (2.) how probable it is, that he should be kindled
against them by the Consideration of the Church of England and Religion.

There was a time, you know, when the Church of England was in a worse
Condi^ion, than it is in now; and Religion in a more ruinous Posture.
Independents, Anabaptists, Fifth Monarchymen, and Quakers were as formidable
People to both, as the Virtuosi; and all things were fallen under their
destructive Power. What did this pious Vindicatour of the Church of England and
Religion in that unhappy season? No doubt, his Zeal burnt like fire; and he was
sensible then, as he is now, [Pref. p. 4.] that he ought not to be silent. Then
it was that his Light broke out of Darkness, that disclosed Truths little less
admirable than those Sir H. Vane discovered, that were the most glorious that
have been witnessed to these 1500 Years, and more, [ut sup.] They are proposed
modestly in Queries, for he tells us, They are from one who desires to lie low
in his own eyes. But the Testimonies and Proof are all for the Heterodox Part,
for which he declares he had the most esteem^ and that he had a tender Regard
to those, who made the Subject of those Queries their Assertions; These
passages make part of the Preface to the first; but are in the Conclusion of
the second Edition, which I now use. We shall see in these Queries, how he
showed his Friendship to Religion, and the Church of England in the Time of
their greatest Extremity.

The first Query is this,

Q. 1. Whether there be any certain or peculiar Name in the New Testament, that
signifies a Minister? or any Name whence an Office may be convincingly
inferred? If there be not, (as there is just Cause to doubt) whether the
present Ministers are not to blame, while they pretend to an Office and
Function grounded upon Divine Right, which has no other Foundation, than the
Hay and Stubble of Humane Invention. p. 12.

In the second Query thus, (they are too large for me to transcribe all)

Q. 2. Is it not an Act of Arrogance in them, who would be the Apostles
Successors in ordinary, -- ordinary Ambassadors from the most High, to assume a
Name of greater Latitude than that of Apostle, or Ambassador extraordinary? or
at least is it not as absurd, as if the Ant should assume the single Name of
Animal; and the Lacquey that of Servant. p. 3, 4.

Query 5. Thus.

Q. 5. Whether the present Ministry, (supposing them generally Presbyterians,
or Episcoparians) do not pretend to be Ministers of the Church Catholic?
whether there be any mention of such a Church in Scripture, or in any ancient
Creed of the first Ages? and whether Luther did not place in stead thereof in
his Creed the Christian Church? whether any body can tell what is the
determinate meaning of that Word? whether the Ordainers and Ordained now-adays
deal conscientiously in giving, or receiving, and acting really by Virtue of a
Power from and over the Catholic Church, whilst the Existence and
Signification thereof is so controverted amongst themselves and others? p. 19.

Q. 6. Whether Ecclesia (which is a Word signifying a Church) be not a Law-Term
deduced from Free-States, in which Commonwealths, the supreme Popular Assembly
acted organized by the Archon and Proedri (as a Church formed and presbyterated
by a Minister and Elders) which did not rule but preside, p. 27.

Q. 7. Whether such a Sense of the Word Ecclesia, or Church does not unchurch
all the Parochial Churches in England, and unminister all their Ministers? ibid.

Q. 8. Whether the Ministers do well to derive their Succession unto Christ by
the means of Antichrist? p. 29.

Q. 9. Whether the Arguments of the first^ Reformers about their Vocation do
not justify any, that shall take upon them to preach? p. 52.

Q. 20. Whether the first Christians had any Churches, or did not assemble only
in Private Houses? whether their Want hereof can be attributed to their being
under Persecution, since they never made that Excuse for themselves to the
Pagans, who objected it to them? p. 106, 107.

Q. 21. Whether Christianity it self be not termed Heresy in Scripture?
Whether Tertullian do not frequently call the Christians a Sect? and whether
the Christian Emperors do not so likewise in their Constitutions even against
Heretics? whether the Meeting-Places of the first Christians were not termed
Conventicles? p. 107.

Q. 22. Whether if there were Heresies in the Apostles days and Schisms, it
does follow that there are any Heretics and Schismatics now, when there are
n^ Apostles? -- p. 108.

Q. 23. Whether they used in the Primitive times to bury in Places such as we
now call Churchyards? and whether the introducing of such a Custom had not a
superstitious Original? p. 110.

Q. 24. -- Whether, if to preach publicly be to teach, as it is now practiced,
the Apostles did ever teach publicly? p. 112.

Q. 25. Whether the Division into Parishes was not introduced by the Pope
Dionysius? and whether the Ancient Christians paid Tithes? if they did,
whether they did not pay them as Alms? ibid.

Q. 29. Whether the Predecessors of the Protestants, and those who have so
honorable a mention in our Books of Martyrs, and other Writings for witnessing
against Popish and other Antichristian Abuses, did allow of Tithes, and their
Divine Right? p. 120.

Q. 30. Whether they had the Use of Bells in the Primitive Times? and whether
the Bells in England that remain ever since the Reformation, have not been
popishly and superstitiously Christened? p. 138.

Q. 31. Whether it were not an Act of Superstition in former times to build
Churches and Chapels in the Form or Fashion of a Cross? whether it were not a
Sin of the like Nature in Ancient Times to build their Churches East and West,
that so the People might bow and pray toward the East? -- And whether both
these Superstitions have not been renewed, and practiced lately in one of the
Reformed Colleges of Oxford, viz. Brasen-Nose College, as in the Margin. p. 139.

Q. 42. Whether the Ministers do well to go in black, or the Universities to
command it? p. 147.

Q. 43. Whether there were not of old amongst the Jews a sort of men called
Cheramims, or black Coats? whether those were the People of God? and whether
the Translatours of the Bible did well to conceal the true meaning of this Word
by putting another for it, or the very Word it self in English Letters? p. 148.

Q. 47. Whether those things which had a good Original and Use (if they be not
still necessary or commanded by God) when once they have been abused to
Idolatry, and Superstition, are not quite to be abolished? p. 149.

Q. 48. Whether the Singing of David' s Psalms be a part of Divine Worship?
whether that Practice was introduced in England for a spiritual End, or only to
preserve the Estimation and Knowledge of the laudable Science of Music? p.
151. elsewhere called Fidling. Q. 41.

Q. 50. Whether it be not a very great Abuse put upon the Independents, to say
that they or their Tenants came from Amsterdam? Do not the Doctors that are got
among them, their Stickling for the upholding the present formalized
University, and a Tithe-receiving Ministry, (whom yet not long ago they styled
abominable) and Parish Priests, and their Demeanor toward the Quakers in Oxon
(agreeable to a persecuting rather than a persecuted Spirit) sufficiently
acquit them from having any Affinity with those other Precious Souls? p. 156.

Q. 53. Whether it be a peculiar Practice of our modern Anabaptists and
Quakers, that they will not swear, no, not before a Magistrate? or whether it
were not an Opinion of the Waldenses Antecessors of the Protestants? p. 166.

What sort of Persons these Queries were intended to gratify, it is very easy
to apprehend. But lest those Friends he had a mind to make, should be so dull
as not to perceive it; He writes an express Apology for the Quakers beginning
at p. 55. continued to p. 92. In which he tells us, that he durst not condemn
the Quakers, whether they reprove openly or walk naked through the Streets,
denouncing Woes and Menaces, p. 91. and he goes on; It is a sufficient Argument
for me, that what God bids is not undecent, nor do they any thing for which
they have not a like Example, and (possibly) resembling Commands. Did not the
Protestant Martyrs so disturb the Popish Priests, as the present Ministers are
disturbed? and that when the Laws were against them? Yea many of the first
Christians dealt so with the Heathens and their Priests. ib. And again, p. 92.
If Balzac or Rutgersius had written his Character of the Ancient Christian, the
Quaker would not have stood in need of an Apology.

Whether these Passages, and the Discourse were more intended to recommend the
Quakers, or to make the first Christians, Protestants, and Martyrs,
contemptible and ridiculous by the Comparison; Let those that know M. Stubb,
and have ever heard him discourse about Religion, judge. For my part I am
satisfied. It Is a pleasant Passage and to the same purpose, which I meet in his
Vindication of Sir Hen. Vane, p. 36. He tells M. Baxter that it was ignorantly
said of Him, That the Quakers had no being in the World till a few Years ago:
and in contradiction to it, he says, As to the Generality of their Opinions
and Deportment I DO AVOW it out of as sure and good Records, as any can be
produced, that they can plead more for themselves for the first 270 Years, then
M. Baxter for the present Orthodox Religion laid down in the SAINTS EVERLASTING
REST, or the CONFESSION of the Assembly.

You may please to mark that he speaks not of any particular Opinions of M.
Baxter and the Assembly, which have less to be said for them out of primitive
Antiquity, than the Quakers, but of their Religion. And when M. Stubb has
proved what he has here Avowed, men are like to have as good an Opinion of
Christianity, as he can wish: And how good a one that is, I am loath to call in
the Vouchee he cites for M. Cross, viz. general Fame, to testify. He declares
it too frequently in the whole Contexture of his Light out of Darkness; and
since, in his Account of Greatarick, he gives hint enough of the Degree of his
Faith. Christ Jesus, and his Apostles appeal continually to their Works, those
miraculous ones they performed, as evidencing the Divineness of their
Commission, and the Truth of their Doctrines; and M. Stubb tells us, [p. 10.]
That all Religions have had their real Miracles; and so let them dispute, or
fight it out as they can, Miracles must be tried by Truth, not Truth by
Miracles, [ibid.] But how the Truth shall be tried, viz. that of a Divine
Commission, or Authority: it is not for the Interest of one of his Principles,
or rather of his no Principles, to tell us. And when he has taken away the
Testimony of the Spirit in Miracles, he knows well enough what will become of
Christianity: This he endeavors here, by many very odd Suggestions. M.
Greatarick did things miraculous, [p. 8.] and these he performed by the
Temperament and Composure of his Body, [p. 11.] So that Healing Miracles are
the Effects of the Effluvia of a particular Ferment, [p. 11.] And so Christ
Jesus showed nothing of Divinity in curing Diseases by his Touch. Yea, M.
Greatarick is mated with Him, and the Apostles, [p. 26.] He did the things that
never man did, but Christ and his Apostles; He cured Diseases by the
Temperament and Composure of his Body, [ut sup.] but no man ever did so
besides; only the Son of God, and his Disciples had the Privilege. And yet [p.
10.] this in express Words is plainly contradicted; for we hear there of others
that did the same things with Christ Jesus, and M. Greatarick, The Alexicaci,
Salutatores, or Bensedevios, that cure by anointing with Spittle, and by
breathing and stroaking of the Patient. [p. 10.] And in Turkey also and Africa
they have Persons of the like Qualifications, [ibid.] But it is nothing for M.
Stubb to affirm Contradictions, and I wish that were the worst could be justly
laid to his Charge; I have a great deal more to say of his Friendship to
Religion, which I keep for a Reserve. He tells us, p. 15. of his Book against
my Plus Vltra, That Mahomet taking advantage of the Brutal Lives, and Ignorance
of the Catholics depending upon the Patriarch of Constantinople, did advance
the Sect of Christians called Mahometans: I wish some do not think that a
certain Defender of Religion and the Church of England, is a Christian by the
same Figure as are those Disciples of Mahomet. If a man of Learning, and
tolerably in his Wits endeavor to make the first Christians, Martyrs, and
Reformers like the Quakers in their Opinions and Deportment, He cannot be
supposed primarily to design the Crediting those distracted Enthusiasts, but to
vilify all Christians, except some of M. Stubb's sort called Mahometans; and
our Defender of Religion knows well enough that the Testimonies he alleges to
prove those sickbrain'd People to be like all the best Christians, will prove
as much, that the best Christians were like Them; and so a more desperate Enemy
than the Quakers is gratified: How far he intended this, let those conjecture,
who have heard of his Kindness and Concern for M. Hobbs: And how far he designs
the promoting the Interest of Religion, and the Church of England, let the most
charitable man alive judge upon the whole.

I, but (3.) he tells us how much he is for School Divinity, and how far some
great matters of Faith are concerned in it; we derive great Benefits from
Controversal Divinity, for the Quieting the Conscience, and Convincing our
Adversaries; and whoever has any sense of these must detest the Enterprise of
M. Glanvill, [ Non Plus, p. 1.] This He did because he had a Value for the
Peace of his Conscience, which is to be settled by School Divinity.

But how different from this was his Opinion of it, when he writ against M.
Baxter, Then School Divinity was apt to create everlasting Disputes rather than
Rest, and made no part of the Rest of the Primitive, whether Christians, or
Antichristians; these are his Words, [p. 18.] M. Stubb had another way to quiet
his Conscience at that time, but now School Divinity is the only Expedient.

And whereas in the same first Page of his Book against me, he tells us, The
Distinction of the Trinity, of Essence, and Personality, the Hypostatical Union
of the two Natures in our Savior, and the meritoriousness of his Death (which
depends thereupon) are undermined with School Divinity. In that he writ against
M. Baxter, he says of it, That it is an upstart Study, unknown to the purer
times, modeled and professed by that Order, which now manageth the Inquisition,
and was at first erected for the suppressing the Truth in the Albigenses; [p.
13.] M. Stubb in his last Book greatly applauds Metaphysics, if he can find
any Distinctions in that Learning to solve his own Contradictions, he shall
have my Vote for the greatest Metaphysician in the World. He does so directly
and in terms every where almost affront himself, that I cannot possibly write
more point blank against him, than Harry does against Stubb; and some think,
that if he be let alone, the next time he scribbles he will reduce even his last
Book to a Nonplus, and confute this also, as he has already done by most of
his other Writings. The Truth is, M. Stubb has wanted an Adversary to appear
publicly against him, and therefore he has challenged, and provoked all men
that came in his way; but those he has assaulted have been of Opinion, it
seems, that it is no good fighting with Dray-men in a Puddle, and therefore have
received his Dirt and passed by: This, no doubt, has troubled him much, and
that he might not want Exercise, and Employment for his Humor, when no body
else would undertake him, he has fallen upon himself, and tried his Fists one
against another. But these Remarques are only ^n passant. To return.

School Divinity creates Everlasting Disputes, rather than Rest, and is an
upstart Study modeled by those that managed the Inquisition, and erected for
the Suppression of Truth; when M. Baxter lays any Claim to it; and presently it
supports Christianity, and affords the Benefits of quieting the Conscience, and
convincing Adversaries; when the Virtuosi show less inclination for that sort
of Learning. We may judge by this what a Zealot M. Stubb is for School Divinity.

And yet, that we may see a little further, How probable it is that the
Interest of this sort of Knowledge did contribute to inflame him against me,
and the rest whom he calls the Comical Wits; Let us cast our eyes into his
Light out of Darkness; He there recites several Testimonies out of Luther and
Melancthon against it, [p. 93, 94, 95, 96, etc.] viz. Melancthon saying, As for
Universities we need not trouble our selves at them, the very School Divinity,
which they uphold, shows that all such Schools are Heretical. p. 93, 94. and M.
Stubb adds, [ may not one upon the like Conviction speak as irreverently of
Oxford or Cambridge?] He cites Melancthon further calling the Universities the
Dwellings of Lies, Priests, Monks and Schoolmen; Pharisees and Sadducees, and
giving the Epithete of wicked to School Divinity, [ibid.] And as the Articles
of Martin Luther, he gives us these, 1. That Scholastical Divinity is a
misunderstanding the Holy Scripture and Sacraments, and has exiled us from the
sincere and true Divinity. (2.) When the School or mock-Divinity began, then
was the Divinity of the Cross of Christ rendered of no effect, and all things
became perverted. (3.) It is now almost 300 Years since the School-Divines have
corrupted the Scriptures, to the incomparable Detriment of the Church. [p. 95.]
To this he annexeth Melancthon's Apology for Luther in Opposition to the
Censure of the Sorbonists against those Articles, containing much to the same
purpose, spoken with all Contempt and Vehemence imaginable against that
Divinity; In which he says, that if once it be admitted, there is nothing
safe, nothing sound in the Church of God, The Gospel is obscured, Faith
extinguished, Free Will and good Works introduced, and instead of professing
Christianity we become not Followers of the Law, but Adherents of Aristotle. --
[p. 96.] M. Stubb concludes their Testimonies thus, Believe it, Reader, if thou
art of this judgment, thou have the most glorious Martyrs, the most renowned
Christians, and as Learned Men as any to defend thee, [ibid.] And therefore his
Query is, p. 95. Whether School Divinity be not a novel thing, slighted and
condemned by Learned and Godly men in all Ages since it was first introduced?
If it were not, in M. Stubb's Opinion it deserved to be so, for he calls it the
Iargon of the Schoolmen in his Preface against Dr. Wallis, p. 2. where also he
tells us of the Burlesque of the Fathers, and the Gallimaufrey of Critical
Learning.

Thus we see how serious also we may believe him to have been in his Designs
for School Divinity.

BUT (4.) the Universities and their Learning are much beholden to him; and he
writes against the new-fashion'd Philosophers, because it was a work necessary
to the Universities and all Learning. [Non plus, p. 2.]

Now because M. Stubb pretends himself a Defender of the Universities, as well
as of Monarchy and Religion; and would fain expose the Royal Society, and the
Favorers of that Institution, as Enemies to those ancient Nurseries of
Knowledge, I shall enquire briefly, what Reason there is to think, that the
Virtuosi have any Enmity to the Universities, or that M. Stubb has any
Friendship for Them.

As for the First, whatever may be suggested by those that are prompted to
think amiss of Them either by Malice, or Vnacquaintance with their Designs,
There is certainly no good Pretense for the Censure. For They have done nothing
to the Universities Prejudice, nor spoken any thing to their Disparagement;
They declare upon all occasions their Esteem for those learned Foundations, and
endeavor to vindicate their own Institution from being any ways prejudicial or
offensive to Those; The greatest part of them have been Members of the
Universities, and some at this time have eminent Relations to Them. The very
way of Knowledge They are in, cannot well be improved to any great purposes,
without the preparative Academical Studies; And these Philosophers acknowledge
general Notions necessary for the regulating and using particular Observations
and Enquiries; Upon which accounts I must pronounce, That it is either Spite or
Ignorance, that creates and foments Iealousies in the Universities, of an
Innocent as well as Honorable Assembly, that loves and respects them heartily,
and no way interferes with Them or their Concerns, but I dare say would be most
ready to serve Them in any of their public Interests. Of this Inclination (If
I may not mention the glorious Gift of our most munificent and Learned
ARCHBISHOP, an Illustrious Member of the Royal Society, to the University of
Oxford) yet I may give the Instance of the most Noble the Lord HENRY HOWARD's
Favor to the same University, in bestowing upon It those rare and celebrated
Pieces of Antiquity the Marmora Arundeliana, with which the Area of the Theater
is adorned, and the affectionate Kindness of that learned and excellent Person
M. Evelyn in his effectual Solicitations to procure them: And you know, Sir,
that both that Illustrious Lord, and this ingenious and accomplished Gentleman,
are Members of the Royal Society, zealously concerned for its Interests.

I might mention further, what Care is taken in the History of the Society to
clear It and Its Designs from all thoughts of Its being hurtful to the
Universities, and their useful Learning: He that has a mind to know, may see
there himself; and he that is resolved he will not be informed, is not like to
be convinced, though I should transcribe that ingenious and satisfactory
Apology.

As to what concerns my self, M. Stubb and his Admirer M. Cross are resolved
that I shall go for an Enemy to the Universities, say what I will; They both
know, what frequent and public Professions I have made of the great Honor I
have for those famous Schools of Piety and Knowledge; particularly in the
Entrance of the Letter concerning Aristotle (which M. Stubb says he has
answered) They may find the highest Expressions of Love and Zeal toward the
Universities, which were within the Compass of my poor and narrow Invention,
and my solicitous Endeavors to defend my self from the vile Suspicion of my
being guilty of so base an Ingratitude, as these ingenuous Adversaries would
fain fasten on me. It Is true indeed, I have opposed the Peripatetick
Physiology, and made some Remarques on Aristotle; But when I have done thi^, I
have declared also, that I intended only to persuade men off from implicit
Adherences to Aristotle's bare Word, and Authority, not to discourage the
Reading of his Works, or receiving any useful Informations from Him: To
dissuade capable and ingenious Spirits from fixing upon the Peripatetick
Notions, as the immovable Foundations of Truth and Certainty, without
enquiring into God's Works, or any other of the Methods of Natural Knowledge,
not to dishearten the Youth from studying those Hypotheseis, the uses of which
in the Universities I have acknowledged. So that the Academical Education is
not at all concerned in what I have said, and intended only for men, who were
past those preliminary Studies. To this purpose I have spoken in my Defense
against the Learned White, in my Letter concerning Aristotle, and also in my
Plus Vltra: If, for all this, I must be reckoned as an Enemy to the
Universities, who can help it? But let M. Stubb, and his Confederate M. Cross
think what they please, I care as little what they think, as they do what they
say; and as little for what they say, as for the Hoo, Hoo, of the next
broad-faced Bird, that sits in an Ivy-bush: And, I believe, most that
understand them value their Thoughts and Sayings at the same rate, as I do. But
because there are those that do not know this rare pair of Authors, and so may
be in danger of believing them; I solemnly protest that I have a just and most
sincere Esteem for those Venerable Seats, and Fountains of Learning, The
Universities; and do most cheerfully own, and am ready to celebrate the great
Advantages they afford for all sorts of Knowledge, and I verily believe that
the other Members of the Royal Society have like Sentiments of them.

But now whether Their Defender M. Stubb be so much their Friend, as those
their pretended Enemies and Underminers, is to be our next Enquiry; In the
Management of it I assure you (as I did once before) that I shall not fly to
Fictions and bold Slanders after the manner of this Antagonist and Legendary M.
Cross, but (as I have done all along) take accounts from his public Writings.
Let us consult then his Light out of Darkness; and in that we shall see his
Affection to the Universities, in a season when They needed no Enemies, viz. in
the short Reign of the Medley-Iunto, that consisted of those whom M. Stubb
would have had our perpetual Senators, Independents, Anabaptists,
Fifth-Monarchy-Men and Quakers, [ ut supra.]

His 32d. Query in that Book is, Whether the Primitive Christians had any
Universities, or other Schools of Learning, than such as Origin did catechize
in at Alexandria? And he concludes his Citations thus, Nor indeed have I ever
heard of an University of the Albigenses, or Waldenses, and Bohemians, p. 139.
Again,

Qu. 33. Whether Ancient Times, (and those not very ancient neither) record any
more than that of Bologna, Paris, and Salamanca? and whether Christianity at
that time were not of farther Extent, than the Kingdoms those stood in? p. 140.
And

Qu. 34. Whether it were not the Design of the Reformers in King Edward the
sixth's days to put down Universities? whether the Dean of Christ-church had
not a Design to reduce Oxford to one or very few Colleges? p. 140.

Well! If the Primitive Christians, and the Predecessors of the Protestants had
no Universities; Ancient Times, since them, had but four; And the first
Reformers among us designed to put them down; What must we think our Friend of
Universities would have his Patriots conclude? The Answer to this Question will
be clear enough in the following Queries.

Qu. 35. Whether the Rise of our present fashioned Universities and University
Habits was not from Dominicans; an Order instituted by the Pope to suppress the
Waldenses those Predecessors of the Protestants? whether this be the Spot and
Attire of God's Children? and whether they have not the Spirit, as well as Garb
of Persecutors, and man of Sin? [p. 142.] His Masters answer, No doubt; and so
down with this Limb of Antichrist.

Qu. 36. Whether the Institution of Doctoral Degrees be not novel and accounted
Antichristian by the Reformed Churches in Scotland, France, Holland,
Switzerland, and the Calvinists in High Germany? And whether they have any in
those Countries, or any constant peculiar Habits in their Universities? p. 143.

He answers, That Foreign Divines have told him, That the Reformed Churches
esteem them as Antichristian, ibid. and adds, That the Degree is as Popish as
the Divinity whereunto it referrs: A Divinity erected in 1220, and which is
acknowledged to have been the Subversion of Christianity. A Doctor that is no
Teacher, he is a dumb Dog, an insignificant Piece of Formality in the
University, reserved by the Reformers (as it were) upon such grounds as
Constantine in the demolishing of Statues, preserved some Heathen Idols, that
Posterity might know what Beasts their Fathers had worshipped. [p. 143, 144.] O
excellent Patron of Universities! How did his anointed ones, those precious
People of the Cause, hug him for this goodly Language?

Well! but if this be not enough, he is resolved he will have their Favor;
Therefore have at Antichrist again.

Qu. 37. Whether there are not in our, as well as other Antichristian
Universities beyond Sea, the same or rather more popish, idolatrous and
superstitious Habits, Ceremonies and Customs? Nay, whether they do not rather
exceed them in Pomp, as well as Number? His Answer to the Queries follows thus;

Here I am ready to cry out, Come and see! Come and see! Not John the Baptist
in the Wilderness, nor John the Divine in Pathmos; but our Theologues in their
Pontificals at Oxon, view their Habits, their Ceremonies, their Processions,
the Respect due to them by Statute, and you will find that PETITION from the
well-affected in Oxon, was not groundless, which desired the Abrogation of
them. [p. 145.] We must give the Lie to general Fame, [as he speaks, Non Plus
p. 20.] or believe that M. Stubb was the Author of that Petition: I remember
there is as rare stuff in it as any here, but I have not that Paper by me, nor
do I need it; I have more than enough, if I were to write a Volume of this
Proteus. But he goes on [ibid.] Come and see the Scarlet-Whore represented in a
Glass multiplying Doctors: Come and see the Difference between Presbytery and
Popery; since they apply that Expression to Democracy, so often, let me style
them in comparison of the Romish Antichrist, the more many-headed Beast; if the
other strive to make the Kings of the Earth drunk with the Cup of Fornication;
These catch at Crowns and half-Crowns. Make good Sense of this Piece of Wit,
who can: I cannot guess, except this be it. Presbytery is worse than Popery,
because Rome only makes the Kings drunk; Presbytery makes Them pay their
Forfeit, which it unconscionably raises from Groats to Crowns and half-Crowns.
But let that go, he proceeds, As for the lost Sheep of Israel, the poor and the
weak whom God has chosen, unless the Salary be good, they seem to be under as
great a Prohibition from Preaching to them, as the Apostles from going to
Bithynia, [p. 145, 146.] But he has not yet done with the Popery and
Antichristianism of our Universities, and their Fashions; Therefore it follows.

Qu. 38. Whether the University Hood be not the Product of the old Monkish
Melote spoken of by Cassian de Institutione Monachorum, and grounded upon the
superstitious Exposition of that place in Heb. 11. They wandered about (...), in
Sheepskins? whether it were not a Religious Habit, it being a Badg of Monkery
according to Cassian and Hierome, ibid.

Qu. 39. Whether it be not a superstitious and detestable Exposition of that
Scripture, Stand fast having your Loins girt, etc. To accommodate it to the
Episcoparian Girdles, with which they tie in their Canonical Coats? ibid.

Qu. 40. Whether it be not a pretty Foundation for the Oxford Doctors to stand
booted and spurred in the Act; because there is mention made in Scripture of
being sh^d with the Preparation of the Gospel? p. 146.

Q. 41. Whether the University of Oxford do well to give for their Arms the
Book with seven Seals? Is not that a gross Abuse of what is laid down in the
Revelations: as if the seven liberal Arts (two whereof are Grammar and Fidling)
were typified by those Seals, which none were worthy to open, but the Lamb? [p.
146, 147.]

Q. 46. Whether any of the Ceremonies and Habits now used in the Universities
had a very good Original, or have been employed to a good Use since? p. 149.

Q. 47. Whether those things which had a good Original and Use (if they be not
still necessary or commanded by God) when once they have been used to Idolatry,
and Superstition, are not quite to be abolished? ibid.

Here is the Upshot and Conclusion of the Matter: YOU know and own this
glorious Truth, O ye our Deliverers from EGYPT, and from BABYLON, from all
Soul-Oppression and Conscience-distressing Persecution. [Vind. of Sir H. V. p.
57.] And you know that Universities are some of the Hay and Stubble of Humane
Invention, and not commanded by God; Nor are they necessary, The Primitive
Christians and first Protestants had them not; Soul-saving Truths are not
taught by the Words of Man's Wisdom; Christ chose illiterate men for Disciples;
The Gospel of St. John is as bad Greek as the Quakers English; [Light out of
Darkness, p. 87.] God has chosen the Foolishness of this World to confound the
Wise. [ibid.] You see, O ye PATRIOTS those Schools of Humane Learning are not
necessary, Yea, they were erected by Popery, and are Antichristian, Popish,
Superstitious; Down with them therefore, down with them to the Ground; Destroy
Babylon, and the Garments of the Whore, away with the Idols, dumb Dogs, and
Beasts, that our Fathers have worshipped

This is the Sense of the whole, and a grand Expression of M. Stubb's
Friendship to the Universities.

BUT he is a Zealot, no doubt, for the Learning that is taught there, so he
pretends by his eager Oppositions of what he calls the mechanical Education,
[Non Plus, p. 13.] now contradistinguish'd, as he tells us, from the
Vniversity-Learning, this he here recommends and celebrates; and would fain
persuade his Reader, That the Royal Society have a desire to triumph over the
ancient Education of the Kingdom. [Pref. p. 6.] All which are mere Chym^ra's
and malicious or proud Devices, to effect his purpose of rendering the Virtuosi
odious, as he declares it, [Pref. p. 4.] or the other Design of dignifying
Himself as the great Patron of ancient Learning. For the Royal Society does no
way disturb or meddle with Vniversity-Learning and Education: The Art of
Reasoning, the Validity of Consequences, The unfolding of Critical Syllogisms
and Fallacies, the general Doctrine of Topics, the Moral Philosophy and
Foundations of civil Prudence, Civil and Ecclesiastical History and Languages,
which M. Stubb himself reckons up as the Learning of the Universities, [p. 17.]
will proceed all in the same way, notwithstanding the Study of Experimental
Philosophy; which though it may use some of them, as they are already taught,
yet it contradicts none. And by the same Reason, that M. Stubb suggests the
Mechanical way to be prejudicial and contrary to the Vniversity-Learning, he
might say, that All Practical Arts, as Surgery, Architecture, Limning, and
the rest, have an Antipathy to those Academical Studies also: such a Logician
is M. Stubb as not to distinguish between contrary and diverse: What an
impertinent thing is proud Malice?

But let us see how much M. Stubb has declared himself a Friend to
Vniversity-Learning, and all sorts of Literature, in the time when they were
despised, and their utter Extirpation zealously attempted. Concerning the first
Sort, Languages, he Queries thus,

Q. 13. L. D. Whether the Knowledge of Tongues leads us to one Sense of
Scripture or many? Whether all such dealings lead us not to put our Trust in
Man? Can any matter of Faith be built upon the Strength of a Criticism? [p.
97.] and Critical Learning is called a Gallimaufrey, [Pref. against Dr. Wallis.]

Q. 18. Whether the first Christians were not against Humane Learning, and
Heathenish Authors? And whether it was more an Effect of Julian the Apostate' s
Malice, or Christian Prudence, that went about to keep the People of God from
Reading Heathen Writers? [p. 101.] For the Affirmative of the Query he
alleges diverse Testimonies; and concludes, The Greek Church is owned for a
true Christian Church, and highly magnified by Protestants in Opposition to the
Pope, yet neither They nor the Picards, or Waldenses in Bohemia did value
Learning, so far were they from esteeming of it, as a Prop of true Religion, p.
105.

This was the way to recommend Learning to the Religieuse of those times, whose
Favor our Anti-Virtuoso then courted. And even in this last Book, he has
given proof of his Kindness to one sort of Vniversity-Learning, Mathematics;
They are less necessary and inutile, [p. 17.] and a little before Geometricians
seldom, if ever, prove Metaphysicians, Religieuse, or othe^wise of tolerable
Ratiocination; but are said ignorantly to run into Whimsies, and Fantastical
Ways of Arguing. This is the great Friend and Patron of Learning.

BUT what does he think of Aristotle, who M. Cross tells us in his Book, was
Artium Partiumque Uir, Fundator Artium, Maximus Hominum? His Credit our Author
kindly undertakes in part to readvance. [Title p. to Non Plus.] And he did it,
when he Q^eried in his Light out of Darkness, p. 105.

Q. 19. Whose Sepulchers do our Vniversity-men build up, whilst they uphold
ARISTOTLE's PHILOSOPHY, which has been so generally condemned of late, and
heretofore by Popish Assemblies, and particular men of that way; as also by the
FIRST CHRISTIANS, AND HONEST MEN OF ALL AGES? In his Discourse upon this Query
He tells us, That whatever it be now adays to urge Philosophy among them, viz.
the Primitive Christians, was either to be an Heretic or Gentile. He goes on,
But I refer my Reader to La^noy's Discourse, -- there he will find Aristotle
not only condemned by the Fathers, but burnt by after-Ages, -- And in the
following words he extends the Apostle's Prohibition to the condemning of all
Philosophy whatsoever; If any shall say, That the Apostle by prohibiting
Philosophy and vain Deceit, does rather establish than prejudice what is true,
I shall not only desire that Person to ascertain me of what is true in
Philosophy; but further demand, whether this dealing in making that
distinctive, which is exaggerative, be not like to what Gregory de Valentia
alleges in the behalf of that Worship that is paid to the Host in the Mass,
That the Apostle in condemning of abominable Idolatries, does not prejudice
Idolatries which are not abominable, ibid. p. 106. And so farewell this Sort of
Vniversity-Learning with the rest.

FOR this Query and its Appurtenances M. Stubb falls under the Corrections of
his Friend M. Cross. His Book I told you, could not be Licensed, and therefore
I should not have published any passages of those Papers, but that he has
endeavored to do it himself in all Places, and will, no doubt, take it very
kindly to be quoted, especially on an occasion, in which his Zeal for Aristotle
may appear: I shall therefore gratify him, and show how M. Stubb's Insolence
against the Vir Artium and Partium may be chastis'd with M. Crosses Rod, with
which he ^irks me and the rest of the Hogs of Epicurus' s Stie (as he calls the
Dissenters from Aristotle.)

Quantum sudatum e quot Uini Amphorae epotae nocturnis Comessationibus ab hoc
Spermologo [me scilicet] (ne dicam reliquis ab Epicuri Hara Porcellis) in
Aristotele exterminando, exsufflando, epotando, exsibilando? -- And again a
little after Quantum sudatum, epotatum, eructatum, ut Vir hic, Semo potius and
Heroes, Philosophiae, temporibus long doctioribus, facile Princeps; Stipes,
Stultus, nihil audiat? you may perceive how much this man knows me, or how
little he cares what he says, by his telling me so much of Fudling; If I had
been any ways guilty of this Fault, M. Cross, of all men, should have taken
care how he had accused me.

But he goes on, and enquires by whom it is that Aristotle is so hissed at,
drunk down and exploded; Nam and hoc Solatium est and Augurium, a Fungis
Combibonibus, severae Eruditionis Osoribus acerrimis summis; Such are all the
Deserters of Aristotle: and hence the good man prophesies a happy issue to that
Philosopher: Ergo Senex hic, aevi sui Decor, sequentium Stupor, reviviscet, nam
revixit multoties: Erit tandem rumpente se Epicuro, Democrito, Gassendo,
Cartesio, erit quod fuit, summorum and eruditissimorum Virorum Iudicio,
Philosophiae rursus facile Princeps: Artium Partiumque Vir, Artium quotquot
ingenuarum Liberarium Fundator, de Natura and Philosophia optime meritus, and
quo minor est quisquis maximus est Hominum, -- Hey for Aristotle! Here it is
like M. Stubb would have asked, how all this was to be proved; But that is no
sit Question to be put to M. Cross, he never uses to give himself that
trouble. M. Stubb charged M. Baxter with Ignorance, and tells us, he would
leave it to others to prove it; and M. Cross makes Aristotle a Demi-god, and
the Anti-Aristotelians more than Demi-brutes, let him prove either that can;
Proof is a thing out of this Disputers way, he has a Maxim ready to stop you,
if you expect it, Contra Negantem Principia -- But let us hear him talk on in
his Dream.

An tamen unquam disputabitur, ut me Iuvene a^xie disputatum est Oxonii, nempe,
An Aristoteles plus debuerit Naturae, an Natura Aristoteli? Did ever any man
else hear of such a nonsensical and impious Question, than which nothing can be
phansied more ridiculous, except it be the second, which follows, Vt and An
quispiam sit scripturus Librum de Salute aeterna Aristotelis, ut olim
Colonienses? Are not these worshipful Enquiries, and much beyond those of the
Virtuosi? What would a man give to be informed, Whether Aristotle owes more to
Nature, or Nature (which indeed is God) to him? or whether any one will write a
Book to prove his eternal Salvation? The Questions are deep, and the modest man
will not undertake to determine them, but adds, in Catalogo Rerum Curiosarum
repono. I wish we could see a Catalogue of the rest of the things, which he
thinks most worthy our Enquiries; Hitherto the World have troubled themselves
about Trifles, it is great pity but M. Cross should be the general Proposer of
Matters fit for Philosophical Disquisition.

But he proceeds in his Zeal, and says of me, That I arrived to that degree of
Madness, as to write contra Aristotelem, quem nemo unquam vituperavit, nisi cui
pro Cord Pepo est, nemo contra scripsit sobrius, nisi forte insanus; Very
good! no sober man, except he were mad; such sober madmen were several of the
first Fathers, and diverse great Moderns; His Friend will tell him honest men in
all Ages condemned that Philosopher, and some burnt his Writings; How bedlam
m^d were that sort of sober men? But he has not done vindicating Aristotle in
his way, viz. calling all those Names that dissent from him, he sputters on
against me.

Hic est ille, qui scripsit prius contra Aristotelem; quid Impudentiae and
Stultitiae ausurus non est, qui jamdudum perfricuit frontem, and scripsit
contra Aristotelem? What a rare Defender of Aristotle is this? O brave
Aristotle! Aristotle a Demi-god, a Hero, Prince of Philosophy, a Man of Arts
and Parts, Founder of Arts, Greatest of Men! O the Hogs, Drunkards, Vain
Eablers, Dolts, Pot-Companions, Haters of Learning that explode and throw off
Aristotle! O the Madness of one that writ against Aristotle, against whom no
sober Person ever writ, except he were a madman! Here is one that writ against
Aristotle, what Impudence and Folly will he stick at that writ against
Aristotle? Are not these, Sir, strong Arguments, and is not Aristotle well
defended? This I assure you is the Sum of what M. Cross says for him, and the
Reasonings of his Book throughout are of the same sort. I have not picked these
Passages, as an Instance of ridiculousness to expose him, but took them up in
my way, for a little Mirth sake, and to give you a taste of this Authors way of
arguing, which is every where the same. And I have done it the rather, because
the Learned Dr. Casaubon in his Letter to Dr. du Moulin about my PLUS VLTRA,
accuses me [p. 7.] of reproaching my Adversary for his Love to, and Esteem of
Aristotle; By this I would let that Reverend man see, that it is not my
Adversaries Love and Respect to Aristotle I deride; but the ridiculous
Expressions of his fond Admiration, which he sufficiently discovered in that
Conference, that was the Occasion of my Book.

But enough of M. Stubb and M. Cross as to this particular; It Is evident enough
that the former has not that Kindness for Aristotle he pretends, to serve his
Designs against the modern Philosophers; and the other can say nothing on his
behalf, more than what Freshmen use to talk of that new great Name they are
taught to admire; whatever Love he has for Him.

And now as to what concerns the modern EXPERIMENTAL PHILOSOPHERS, I dare say
they are slandered much by those their Adversaries, that represent them as such
Enemies to Aristotle; For I know They have a due Esteem of him, and allow Him
an eminent place among the wise Men of Ancient times; They acknowledge the
helps he has afforded us, and pay Respects to his Writings, as they do to
those of other venerable Authors; They refuse not, nor discourage the reading
of his Books, nor do they reject any of his Discoveries, that may aid us in the
Uses of Knowledge or Life; yea, they embrace them cheerfully, and are glad when
any useful Truth has such an Authority to recommend it. Thus much I dare
undertake for all the Philosophers of the Practical way, of whom I have any
Knowledge. But to make Aristotle a Dictator in Philosophy, and to give him an
absolute Empire over our minds; to admire him, as if in him were hid all the
Treasures of Natural Wisdom and Knowledge, and to be scrupulous in
acknowledging that he was ignorant of any thing in Nature, as Dr. Casaubon
says Fabricius was, [in his Reflections on my Plus Vltra.] such Fondnesses as
these, those Philosophers by no means approve, but look on them as extremely
prejudicial to the Advance of Knowledge, and the Respect that is due to other
excellent Authors both of elder and later times.

And I think by their modest Judgment of that Philosopher, they rather secure
the just Praise and Regard to Aristotle's Authority that is his due, than any
way diminish it. For those that raise the Commendations of any man much beyond
the Proportion of his Merit, and lay more Stress upon his Authority, than it
will bear, do indeed give an occasion to the Contempt of such an over-valued
Person, and the degrading him below that Respect, which his worth might claim:
So that in earnest those doting men that talk such childish, incredible things
of Aristotle, as I lately quoted from M. Cross, are his real Enemies, and
expose him to Scorn and Opposition; whereas the modern Philosophers, who give
him just, but less excessive and flaunting Applauses, do more really serve the
Interest of his Name; And what I particularly, have writ against Him, has been
designed chiefly, to lessen the Hyperbolical Admirations of the little enslaved
Sectators; not to discourage any from the Study of Aristotle, or a modest value
of his Authority. And that my Sense of Him and his Writings was the same then,
that I declared but now, to be the experimental Philosophers Inclination in
reference to that Philosopher, may be largely seen in my Defense of the Vanity
of Dogmatizing against that famous Adversary the Learned Albius, especially, p.
7. I have spoken there to the same purpose; but it is too much for my Laziness
to transcribe.

AND now, Sir, methinks, upon the Review of the whole it seems to me very
pretty, that one, who labored so industriously, and inveighed so bitterly
against Monarchy, Ministry, Churches, Universities, Aristotle, and all Humane
Learning, when some of these were actually overthrown; and All in imminent
Danger of Ruin; that put on the Fanatical Usurpers (that needed no Spur) by
gross, canting Flatteries of Them; and deadly, malicious Reproaches and
Oppositions of those great concerns of the Kingdom, to complete the Destruction
They had begun; That this man, I say, should talk, as if he were the only
zealous Person for the Interest of Monarchy, Religion, Universities, and old
Learning, and the only Patriot that could defend them, is a Confidence more
than usual; and such, as very well becomes M. Stubb. And on the other hand,
It Is as pleasant to hear this Writer representing a Society, that is a Royal
Institution, and consists of a great Number of the most loyal Nobility and
Gentry; and several of the most venerable Fathers of the Church, Archbishops,
Bishops, and diverse other Ecclesiastical Governors, and men of Eminence among
the Clergy; I say, it is very fine, to hear M. Stubb setting out such an
Assembly as an Enemy to Monarchy, Religion, Universities, and Learning: And we
must believe upon the word of the Anti-Virtuoso, That a great part of that Body
are driving on Designs destructive to the Interests of Religion and the
Kingdom; and that the Loyal and Religious men of the ROYAL SOCIETY are so dull
as not to perceive it, while the more sagacious Doctor of Warwick sees those
dreadful Projects clearly, and therefore cannot be silent, but must warn the
Nation of the Danger.

Upon the Consideration of the whole Procedure, one would think that M. Stubb
had so great an Ambition to gain the Applauses of the envious and ignorant (who
are glad to see any thing that is worthy railed at and opposed) that for their
sake, he is resolved (yet further) to expose himself to the Scorns of the sober
and judicious. And really he writes at that rate, as if he were to defy the
intelligent part of Mankind; and designed only to be read by those that would
believe any thing he said at a venture, because he writes against the Virtuosi.
The Truth of this Censure will appear, when I come to my particular Remarques
upon his Book; which I shall presently do, when I have taken a little notice of
His other Designs, which are yet behind, viz.

TO represent the Uirtuosi as ridiculous and odious to the Kingdom; and to
sacrifice me to public Obloquy.

To effect the former, He clapped his own Cap on the Virtuosi, and calls them
Prattle-boxes, and then without any more ado, They are ridiculous: He describes
them by the other part of his own Character, as Persons of irreligious and
dangerous Inclination, and then they must be odious. And when the
Virtuoso-Mastix has proved that these are not Complements, but that his
Comical Wits are so really like Himself; all men, no doubt, will say, that They
are as he designed to represent them.

But if M. Stubb be no better at making Characters, than he is at giving Names,
the Virtuosi, I doubt, will leave him without their Company, to enjoy the
Honors he projects for them: For why of all things, must they be called the
Comical Wits, I trow? How came this to ramble into the man's head? Of all the
Names that courtly M. Cross bestowed on me, there is scarce any that suits
less; And yet now I remember, it is not improbable but that M. Stubb might
borrow this from that great Repository of Titles; For that Master of Ceremonies
calls me, and all things I do, at every turn, Romantic; And when he had
studied a long time to know what I was good for, at last he finds this; that I
might be capable of serving a Stage; Hence it is like his Friend took the hint,
and the Virtuosi are presently dubbed the Comical Wits; and the Tres-haute and
tres-agreeable Comediants.

But it may be too this was intended for a Figure, Lucus a non lucendo: For
there are no men more averse to the professed Drolls; none that value their Wit
less, than those that are most concerned for the Institution and Designs of the
Royal Society; nor has any sort of Enemies been more injurious to those
generous undertakings of the experimental Philosophers, than the Buffoons and
Comical Wits that have still endeavored by their malicious Flouts to render
them contemptible in Coffee-Houses and Taverns; and have filled the Land with
ridiculous Stories of their Designs and Performances.

Yea, These are the men, that M. Stubb gratifies by his Book, which (to give
him his own Language) will please none, but shallow-brain'd and Comical Wits.
[p. 115.] How shallow-brain'd, I think those of the common Drolling sort, and
how prejudicial to Religion, Government, and Knowledge, I have sufficiently
declared in a short Discourse at the end of my CONSIDERATIONS about
WITCHCRAFT, called A WHIP FOR THE DROLL, FIDDLER TO THE ATHEIST. If M. Stubb
think fit to look into that Appendix, he will see reason there to take me out
of the Number of the Comical People; And if I sometimes make a little merry
with him in these Papers, it is because I would try, whether I have any of the
Comical Faculty in me or no; If I have, it is fit that he who first let me know
it, should have it first employed in his Service. And indeed M. Stubb is such a
pleasant Object, as would make a man Comical, though his Genius be never so
little disposed to that Iollity of Humor. The sick man that was dying of an
Impostume, broke into a loud Laughter, when he saw the Ape set the grave,
gold-laced Nightcap upon his Head; And it is very hard for one to contain, that
sees M. Stubb puts on a Pretense for Monarchy and Religion. If he thinks there
is any thing of Rudeness in the Application of that ridiculous Passage, let him
thank his Friend M. Cross who gave occasion to the Comparison; That renowned
Author spends a great deal of serious pains to prove that I was an Ape, or very
like one, and made such Philosophical Observations upon the Nature of that
Animal, that I could not choose, when I lately read it, but think of a certain
Anti-Virtuoso; and that Thought run into my Pen before I was aware.

But I have done with this Design of our Projector also, to make the Comical
Wits ridiculous and odious: How far he has effected it, he will see when Time
and Experience have acquainted him, what he has made himself.

THE last of his great Intendments that I took notice of was, To sacrifice me
to public Obloquy to settle the general Repose and Tranquillity. Pref. p. 3.

I think I have generosity enough, or at least I desire so much, as to be
content to be so sacrificed upon such an Occasion: But will that do it? will
the Sacrificing me, is he sure, establish the general Repose? I fear there are
other Comical Wits will be left, when I am gone, to disquiet such peaceable
men, as this: and except M. Stubb will assure me, that all the World will be
quiet when I am fallen, I will not be sacrificed by him; Yea, though he should
Nonplus me in ten Title-pages more, yet, I doubt, I shall disturb him, if he
goes on to settle our Tranquillity in the way he has begun. Well! but public
Obloquy is hungry, and must have a Sacrifice to feed it: M. Stubb takes hold of
me, and resolves I shall be the Offering, He spits at me, and scratches me with
his Nails, and I fall a Victim without any more ado; But let him look to it,
and make sure of that, or else public Obloquy will catch him by the back, and
make this her Priest, himself the Sacrifice.

But without Allegory, M. Stubb designs to expose me to public Reproach, and
to make the Virtuosi odious and ridiculous, and so one would think that reads
his Book. How he has demeaned himself in it for the effecting of these, and
his other mighty purposes, I come to consider next, and it was the Third
general Head of which I proposed to treat. I cannot now fall upon the
particular Examination of all things in his Work, but shall only give you those
sudden Observations I made upon a cursory Reading, the more large and punctual
Confutation shall follow.

(III.) THEN as to the MANAGEMENT of his DESIGNS, I take notice,

I. That the pretended Reason of his falling on my Book, is very idle and
impertinent. Forsooth, a Gentleman at a Person of Honor's Table avowed, that
all the Ancient Methods of Science were vain and useless to a Physician, and
did not as much as contribute to the Cure of a cut Finger, [Pref. p. 1.] This
the Gentleman avowed to be the positive and dogmatical Averment even to a
Syllable of M. Glanvill and other Virtuosi, p. 1, 2.

M. Stubb's Beginning brings to my mind what I heard last Year at Oxford; Being
there with a learned and ingenious Knight at the House of a Doctor of Divinity
of great note, upon the occasion of some Discourse concerning our Author, The
Doctor, who knew him very well, spoke to me to this purpose, M. Stubb, said he,
is so great a -- That if he tell you he was at such a Gentleman's Table where
this or that Discourse happened; you are not to believe as much as that he knows
that Gentleman, or ever saw him. I should not have mentioned this Passage, but
that it fell so pat in my way; whether we have the more reason to believe the
Doctor concerning M. Stubb, or M. Stubb concerning the Gentleman's Discourse at
the Person of Honors Table, I shall not here dispute: But for Peace sake I
shall be so courteous at present, as to suppose that there was such a
Rencounter, and that M. Stubb ought to take as an instance of Candor, and a
very large Charity. Be it so then for once, There was an Admirer of the
Institution of the Royal Society that talked so in the Anti-Virtuoso's Company:
but he paid him for his Insolence, and showed as he tells us, That the Ancient
Philosophy had not been so sterile in reference to Physic, but that it had
been the Foundation of the Healing of cut Fingers, and green Wounds. [Pref. p.
2.] And thus he sacrificed that Virtuoso to the Obloquy of the Table: But yet
his Wrath was not appeased so, he goes on;

I still retained a Sense of the Injury I supposed done to me, and all rational
Physicians by this barbarous Opiniatour; I determined to avenge my Faculty on
M. Glanvill for this, [p. 3.] and so I am to be made a Sacrifice as well as the
Chymaerical Gentleman. Here was the Provocation I gave M. Stubb, and this Book
his Revenge.

One of the First things h^ falls upon in it, is to make it appear by
demonstrative Proof that the Ancients could cure cut Fingers, [Book p. 3.] for
here he received the Injury, for which he determined to avenge his Faculty. He
proves this mighty Truth by many Testimonies and great Instances, Podalirius
and Machaon in Homer could do it; Hippocrates writ about Wounds and Ulcers, and
therefore, no doubt, he could cure cut Fingers; Yea, Aristotle was descended of
the Line of Aesculapius, and it is not to be questioned, but he could prescribe
a Plaster for such an occasion. And how little the Ancients stood in need of
Modern Discoveries and Aids to cure cut Fingers, any man may judge that knows,
what Scribonius and Galen have written, and how this last Author compounds
several Medicaments to that purpose, [ibid.] Those Galenical Medicaments for
cut Fingers he there also names. And he assures us farther [p. 159.] That he
that shall proceed according to the Notions of Elements, etc. in Compliance
with the Ancients, shall not stand in need of any novel Method from the
Virtuosi to salve a cut Finger. Forsooth!

This, Sir, is one of the first Blows he gives the Victim, which must needs
fall under such fatal Strokes. But what a serious impertinent is this?

The man, no doubt, can prove by force Of Argument, a Man's no Horse. Hudib.

He puts me in mind of a certain Preacher, that I once saw, who, at a Funeral,
very largely undertook to prove, That All men must die, This he did in M.
Stubb's Method, by Instances and Authorities: Adam died and Eve too, as did
Abraham and Sarah, Isaac and Rebekah, Jacob and Rachel, the good men and the
good Women; so it befell Moses and Aaron, David and Solomon, Cyrus and
Nebuchadnezzar; and so he went on to reckon up who had died, till his Glass
hastened him to his Authorities; where he showed his Learning, and proved his
Proposition by the Testimony of Poets, Philosophers, and Fathers; and by that
time he had done with Virgil and Ovid, Aristotle and Plato, St. Bernard and St.
Ambrose, 'twas time to make an end. M. Stubb writes at the rate that the
Reverend Man preached. For can he think in earnest that either I, or any body
else ever believed or said, That None of the Ancients could cure a cut Finger?
or, if I had, was such an Assertion fit to be learnedly disproved? If one
should affirm, that the moon is a green Cheese, or that M. Stubb is sound in
his Head; would a wise man argue seriously against such an absurd Asserter.

It Is true indeed these words are mine, The Vnfruitfulness of those Methods of
Science, which in so many Centuries never brought the World so much practical
beneficial Knowledge, as would help toward the Cure of a cut Finger, is a
palpable Argument that they were fundamental Mistakes, and that the Way was not
right, [Plus Ultra, p. 7, 8.] But what? Do I speak of the Methods of Physic,
Surgery, or any practical Art? If I had done so, M. Stubb had had reason:
But it was nothing thus, I had not to do with any thing of that Nature, but was
discoursing of the Infertility of the Way of Notion and Dispute, concerning
which, I affirmed, that it produced no practical useful Knowledge, viz. by its
own proper native Virtue; and my Sense was the same here, as it was in that
Expression of my Vanity of Dogmatizing, [p. 132. of Edit^ second.] 'Twould
puzzle the Schools to point at any considerable Discovery made by the direct
sole Manuduction of Peripatetick Principles. So that I never dreamt of denying,
That those Philosophers of elder times, that went that way, had practical
beneficial Knowledge; Yea, or that they were Discoverers of many excellent and
useful things; But that they learnt that Knowledge from the disputing Methods
of Physiology, or made their Discoveries by them; These were the things I
denied; and I have the excellent Lord Bacon with me in my Negative, as I may
have another occasion to show. I grant therefore to M. Stubb (since he is so
zealous to secure this Honor to them) That Machaon and Podalirius in Homer
could cure cut Fingers, and that Galen might make Diapalma and other
Medicaments for that purpose; but unless he can prove they did it by the direct
Help and Conduct of the Notional disputing Physiology, he will not sacrifice me
to public Obloquy here, nor say any thing in which I am at all concerned.

You see, Sir, we are like to have great matters from an Undertaker that begins
with a ridiculous Cavil; and the general Repose and Tranquillity, you may
think, will be well established by one, that maliciously perverts an innocent
Sentence, to make it an occasion of a Quarrel.

Thus he enters hopefully; and if I might pass a general Censure on his Work,
as he does upon my Letter concerning Aristotle, [p. 11.] It should be this,
That it is an elaborate, spightful Impertinence: This I now say, and if I do not
prove it, let me be in your Esteem, the same that my Adversary is in the
Opinion of all sober men. It will I suppose sufficiently appear to you in the
following Observations, and particularly in this next, viz.

II. HE does not at all by any thing he has said, prejudice the main Design of
my Book, which was, to show, That Knowledge has been highly advanced in these
later Ages, beyond its Pitch in more Ancient Times, and consequently, that
there is no reason we should acquiesce and sit down in the Dictates of
Aristotle, or any other of the ^lder Philosophers; but being encouraged by many
excellent Helps and Advancements, we should endeavor its further improvement.
I gave instances of the Increase of Knowledge in Chemistry, Anatomy,
Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy, Optics, Geography, and Natural History; and
showed what Advantages we have from modern Philosophic Instruments, and from
the Institution of the Royal Society; of all these I discoursed as far as I
thought necessary to my purpose, without arrogating to my self great ma^^ers in
any of those sorts of Knowledge, or designing Ostentation of Learning, as M.
Stubb accuses me, [p. 2.] But my aim only was to prove, and to illustrate my
Subject by such of the main Instances of modern Improvements as I could
collect; and of these I gave an Account in the way of an Historian from Authors
of note, though I seldom name them, but shall hereafter in my Answer in those
particulars, where M. Stubb attaques me; and I hope, give you to see, that I
affirm nothing from mine own head in reciting matters of Fact, in which Fiction
would be impudent and ridiculous.

Thus I have told you the Design of my Book, and the chief things treated of in
it. And now one would think, that nothing less should be worthy the Courage of
such a valiant Wight as M. Stubb, than the main Subject. You will expect, no
doubt, he should attempt to prove, that the Ancients had greater Advantages for
Knowledge, than latter times; that the things I mention as Modern Improvements
were known to remote Antiquity; or that they are not Helps for the Increase of
Knowledge. This should have been the Work of one that promises such mighty
things; that was resolved to readvance the Aristotelians, and to make the
Virtuosi odious. But he has not thought fit to attaque the Comical Wits this
way; He designed to make them ridiculous, and for that he thought something
less would serve, than confuting them.

He falls upon the Errata of the Press, and then crows over the Author of Plus
Vltra; He carps at some little things about the Philosophical Instruments,
Chemistry, and Anatomy, and in his Fancy breaks them to pieces, and then
forsooth, all the other parts of my Book, which he has not touched, like
Glass-Bubbles fall to Dust: He cavils at some by-passages that relate not to
the main Business, and instantly Plus Vltra is reduced to a Nonplus: He
confutes his own Imaginations, and then wonders at my Ignorance: He takes the
Credit of the Inventions I mention from the Authors to whom I ascribe them, and
gives it to others of the same Age, or not far from it; and so the Ancients are
readvanced, and the Virtuosi undone.

This is the man of great Deeds, that will set up, and pluck down what, and
whom he pleases; that will erect the Credit of those Authors, who are so happy
as to have his Favor, and lay the Royal Society (as he elegantly and modestly
uses to express himself) as flat as a Pancake. But that those mentioned are
all the Exploits he has done, notwithstanding his Boasts, I shall show under
the next head, to which I shall pass presently, after I have taken notice,

That the other Anti-Virtuoso M. Cross, durst not attempt as much as this. No,
He found an easier way, he betook him to his Dunghill, and charged me stoutly
from thence, he picked little critical Quarrels with the Latin of a single
sheet of mine, written for a private purpose, and containing nothing of the
main Controversy; He endeavors to show largely that I am like an Ape; and
that I have not the knack of writing solemn Epistles; For my Plus Vltra, he
saves himself from the Trouble of answering it, by telling his Reader in short,
that the modern Improvements I mention in Chemistry, Anatomy, Arithmetic,
Geometry, Algebra, Geography, Astronomy, Optics, and Natural History, are no
more, than what every Bookseller knows, and so it is not fit for a man of his
Learning, to spend his time so impertinently, as to say any thing about them.
This, Sir, is the most pleasant Antagonist that ever any man had: But we shall
have an occasion of saying somewhat more of him anon, therefore I now pass
forward with M. Stubb, and come to prove concerning his Animadversions, That

III. THey are mere Cavils, and that he affirms groundlesly and falsely, and
talks impertinently, and reasons weakly: These I shall prove by Instances, and
there is scarce any thing in his Book, but falls under one or other of those
Censures.

But first I crave your leave to mark how my Adversaries are disagreed among
themselves, about my Account of modern Improvements; Dr. Meric Casaubon in his
Reflections on my Book, [p. 35.] says, That it is an exact Account of late
Discoveries: M. Cross makes them such known things that every Bookseller is
acquainted with them, whereas M. Stubb reckons them false and fictitious.

For the Censure of the sober, learned man, I can with no Modesty own it; I
intended no exact Account; nor am I able to give such a one, as can pretend to
be accurate; I only collected such Instances, as I thought sufficient for my
Design to encourage Philosophical Hope and Endeavors. For M. Crosses Judgment
of them; Either every Bookseller knows them to be true or false; If this
latter, why had he not got some Bookseller to have informed him, that he might
have proved it, and confuted me? But if every Bookseller knew them to be true,
what becomes of his Friend M. Stubb? and how will he answer my Inference of the
great Advantage the later times have from those Improvements, above the Helps
that were enjoyed by Aristotle and high Antiquity? But I must leave M. Cross to
reconcile himself to his Champion, and the Interest of his own Assertion, as
well as he can, and descend to the Proof of what I have affirmed concerning M.
Stubb's Performance.

This, it is true, makes a formidable show of invincible Strength, and he
marches in the Van of an Host of Authors, but with them he fights Chimaera's,
and takes Castles in the Air, that his Imagination built. He directs his force
against things that I never said or meant, and most of his Authors shoot
besides me; So that with mighty Strokes he cuts the Air; and hurts his own Arm
by his Strength, but does prejudice to no other Adversary with his mightiness.
This will appear by the particulars, which I come now to represent, and I
observe,

(1.) That in the Entrance of his Reflections, he affirms confidently a thing
which he does not know, whether it be so or not; and which would be impertinent
to his purpose, though it should be granted. It is in these words, [p. 2.] The
Authors he mentions he never saw. Roundly affirmed! Certainly, he has dealt
with some Spirit; or with his Familiar M. Cross, for this; How else should he
know what Authors I have seen? who can tell this but my Attendant Genius? or
the Seer of Chue, who knows all things belonging to me by Dreams, and an occult
Quality. This divining man indeed affirms in his Libel, That I have no Books in
my Study, but Plays and Romances; whenas he never saw my Study, nor any man
else of his Acquaintance, that could inform him; and as luck would have it, I
have not one (in English) of either sort; This it is like was M. Stubb's
Intelligencer, for M. Cross writes of me with as much Confidence, as if he had
been at my Christning, and stood by me ever since; and with as much Truth, as
if he had never seen me or known more concerning me, than he does of the Man in
the Moon.

Well! but if it be so, That I never saw the Authors I mention, what is that to
M. Stubb's purpose? I was giving an Historical Account of the Improvers of
several sorts of Knowledge; And might I not from other good and approved
Writers name the Inventers or Advancers of this or that Discovery, except I had
seen it in the original Author? Is there no Credit to be given to the Testimony
of learned men? May not one write an History of Things and Actions that he
never saw? and have not most of the Historians that ever were, done thus? May
not I say that Columbus discovered the new western World; or that Fust or
Gothenberg found out the Mystery of Printing, or Flavius Goia the Compass,
except they had told me so themselves? And if it be usual among the most
unexceptionable Relaters to collect their Accounts from other Testifiers, what
can M. Stubb make of it, if he could prove that I never saw most of the Authors
I mention? How much he himself is acquainted with the Books he quotes, we shall
anon find some things whereby to pass a Judgment.

Thus M. Stubb begins with a peremptory Assertion of a thing which is false in
the Latitude of his Affirmation; and which he could not possibly know, whether
in any more restrained sense it were true or not.

And his immediate next words contain another most gross and confident
Falsehood, [ And all his Discourse about the Mathematics and Mathematicians
procured him no other Acknowledgments from a Learned and Reverend Prelate (to
whom he sent one of his Books) than a Reprimand for intermedling with what he
understood not. ibid.] I have heard from credible Persons, that M. Ieanes the
Polemick Writer (who was well acquainted with M. Cross) was wont to call any
lusty -- by a name, which for the sake of some worthy Persons, I shall not
mention on this occasion. M. Stubb's Friend of Chue knows what I mean. He may
do well to advise him to take care of such broad, unconscionable Falsehoods;
though I confess a man of his Practices is the most improper Person in the
World for such a Service. The Period I last quoted from M. Stubb is a gross
Untruth; I sent my Plus Vltra but to one Bishop, besides that Reverend Father
to whom it was dedicated; and that learned and excellent Person was so far from
sending me a Reprimand, (to use M. Stubb's word) that he was pleased to write
me a most obliging Letter of Thanks; And my own venerable Diocesan accepted of
that Book, and the Direction of it to him, with a great deal of Candor and
Kindness, and never signified the least Dislike to me of it. So that I should
have wondered much at this Clause, and diverse others of like kind, If I had not
heard a Character of M. Stubb at Oxford, and did not know Him, and his
Familiarity with M. Cross; but now I shall not be surprised though every
Sentence were a Legend.

But (2.) he offers something for proof of his first Saying, viz. that I never
saw the Authors I mention, as it follows, [ib. p. 2.] who ever heard of such
men as Maximus Palanudes, Achazen, and Orentius? And who ever heard of such
things as Errata of the Press? If I had a mind to play at this little Sport,
and would retort, I might ask him, who ever heard of such People as the
Abbigenses spoken of in his Vind. of Sir H. V. [p. 13.] or of such a man as
I^lice, mentioned p. 113. of this Book; No doubt he will lay the fault at the
Printers doors; And why did he not see that the Names he quotes from me are
like Errors? Does he not know there were such Persons as Maximus Planudes,
Alhazen, and Orontius? and there is not one of these that differs more, then a
Letter from the Names, over which he so much insults. The latter he charitably
supposes to be a Mistake, because he thought he could make the man ridiculous,
and disable him from signifying to my purpose; but of that by and by: If he
could have found that the other two had been pitiful Fellows also (as he
pretends this was) then Palanudes should have been corrected by Planudes, and
Achazen by Alhazen. And it is very strange that M. Stubb could not see that
Achazen was a Mistake of the Press, when as Alhazen stands within five Lines of
him in my Book; whar a blind thing is Malice, when it has no mind to see?
Well, There were such men as Planudes, Orontius, and Alhazen; and Vossius says
enough of the least considerable of them to justify my transient mention of
their Names. Anno 870. eluxit Maximus Planudes, qui Diaphanti Arithmeticen
Commentariis illustravit. Voss. de Scient. Mathem. p. 311. And even of Orontius
he speaks thus, celebre Nomen fuit Orontii Finei Delphatis, qui Arithmeticae
practicae publicavit Libros quatuor. p. 316. But M. Stubb says of him in
Scorn, He was so famous a Geometrician, that when Sir H. Savil ( as I remember)
was to seek of an Instance of a pitiful Fellow, this was the man he fixed on.
[ib. p. 2.] Would not any one from these Words, and their Relation to those
that go before, conclude that I had reckoned Orontius among the Improvers of
Geometry? To what purpose else does the Animadverter speak of him as a
contemptible Geometrician? But if he will look again into my Book, he will see,
that I mention not Orontius under that head, but name him (and only so) among
the Authors in Arithmetic: And have not I as much reason to say, That M. Stubb
never reads the Books he writes against; as He to affirm, that I never saw the
Authors I mention? But M. Stubb could not give his Studies so much Diversion as
to consider what he said. Well, I name Orontius among the Arithmetical Writers,
and it is an evident Argument I never saw him, because he is a pitiful Fellow at
Geometry; Is this Logic old or new? It Is a sort M. Stubb uses often, but I
believe he can show us nothing more pitiful in Orontius. But if Vossius may be
believed, Orontius did not need so much of M. Stubb's Pity, even in Geometry.
He tells us, Anno 1525. ac 30 proximis claruit Orontius Fineus qui de Geometria
scripsit Libros duos, item Demonstrationes in sex Libros priores Euclidis. Ad
haec de Quadratura Circuli inventa and demonstrata; de Circuli Mensura, and
ratione Circumferentiae ad Diametrum, de multangularum omnium, and regularium
Figurarum Descriptione, aliaque de Sc. Math. p. 65. And that his Performances
in these, were not altogether so contemptible as the Anti-Virtuoso would
insinuate, we may see a Reason to think, from the Place he held among the
Mathematicians of his time, according to the same Author, Primus hic Matheseos
regius in Galliis Professor fuit. [ibid.] But let Orontius be what he will in
Geometry, M. Stubb is impertinent in what he says about him, and I am not
concerned. For the other Author ( Achazen in one Line, but Alhazen within five
Lines before) Confidence it self has not the face to deny that there was such
a man, or that he was a great Author in Optics, for which I mention his Name
there, where M. Stubb found Achazen to make a Wonder of.

You see, Sir, what an Adversary I have, that will not suffer the misprinting
of a Letter to escape him; excellent Corrector of the Press! What pity it is
that M. Cross had not found out these three Errata, that he might have had
something to say!

Thus I am to be sacrificed to public Obloquy. The pertinent Discourse about
curing cut Fingers follows, but of that I have given an Account before.

I proceed to remark (3.) upon that Note of his, [p. 3, 4.] But as for the
Telescope, he confesses that to have been invented by Metius, and Galilaeo,
which Confession of his though it take from the Society all Pretenses to the
Invention thereof, yet it is unbecoming an inquisitive Person, who might have
had better Intelligence from Borellus. Here the Anti-Virtuoso carps again at a
mere accidental Passage; and though we should grant him what he says about the
Inventers of Telescopes, it would be nothing contrary to my Design, since the
Persons he mentions were late men. My Words were, [ So that these Glasses are
exceedingly bettered since their Invention by Metius, and Application to the
Heavens by Galilaeo, Plus Vltra, p. 55.] Whatsoever M. Stubb finds in his
Borellus, I am sure I have Authority enough to justify me in this passing
Glance at the Inventer of Telescopes. The excellent Renatus Descartes ascribes
the Invention to Metius in the first Page of his Dioptricks, and is particular
in the Account of the occasion of his finding it. Hujus summa Voluptas erat
Specula and Vitra ustoria formare; nonnulla etiam Hyeme componens ex Glacie; --
quum igitur hac occasion multa, ^aque variae formae Vitra ad manum haberet,
prospero quodam fato duo ^imul Ocul^ objecit; quorum alterum medium paulo
crassius habebat quam extremitates, alterum vice versa extremitates quam medium
multo tumidiores; and adeo feliciter illa duabus Tubi extremitatibus applicuit,
ut primum de quo loquitur Telescopium inde extiterit. Descartes Dioptr. p. 1.
And the learned Gerard Vossius ascribes this Invention to the same Metius, [
Adriani hujus Frater Iacobus Metius fuit, qui Tubum opticum, sive Telescopium
invenit. Hujus open in Siderum Doctrina plus scitur hodie quam omnis novit
Antiquitas. De Scient. Math. p. 201.] The same Author justifies my other hint
of their Application to the Heavens by Galilaeo: For thus, [p. 112.] Ac
postremo de Tubi^, sive Telescopiis inventis ab Hollandis, ad ^idera vero
applicatis a Galilaeo de Galilaeis. But this even M. Stubb confesses to be
generally written; and if so, pray why might not I mention it so lightly
without any further Enquiry, it being a thing that was incidental, and of no
importance to my Design? Yea, if it had, I was upon sure ground, for I say no
more then what M. Stubb and all men will grant, viz. That Telescopes were
applied to the Heavens by Galilaeo; I did not say first, and so his Pretense
from Borellus is impertinent, and opposes only the Shadow of his own
Imagination: Galilaeo's Application of Telescopes to the Heavens was first
famously taken notice of, and those Tubes upon that account have been called
his Glasses; and therefore I might well enough express my self in such a
passage as that, saying, That those Glasses were bettered since their
Application to the Heavens by Galilaeo, though M. Stubb's Author must be
believed before Descartes, Vossius, and most others that have written about
this matter; If any one besides the Animadverter be of that mind, I shall not
trouble his Opinion; For M. Stubb, I must see a reason ere I can believe him
before any man, but M. Cross; and for Borellus, when I know what he says, I
may perhaps tell this Antagonist what I think.

Thus, Sir, you see something of this man's notorious Cavilling and
Impertinence; and I might have taken notice further, that he misquotes me too
in the recited Period, For I say not that the Telescope was invented by
Galilaeo: But M. Stubb makes me say what he thinks fit, and when he has
confuted his own Mistake, he phansieth he has reduced me to a Nonplus.

The Passage likewise that follows may be justly censured, viz. That my
Confession takes from the Society all Pretensions to the Invention of the
Telescope.] This supposes that the Society assumes this Credit, or at least
that it is like to do so; which Supposition is a mere Chimara, or be it what it
will, his Refutation of it is an Impertinence. For if it were so, that the
Royal Society did or were like to challenge this Invention as theirs, one might
ask the logical man, how my Confession that it was found out by Metius and
Galilaeo, should take from the Society all Pretenses to it? What an Author does
he make me, or what a Reasoner does he make himself? either my Authority must
be infallible, or his Reason will be contemptible. If I say Metius or Galilaeo
is the Inventer of Telescopes, your Pretensions, O ye Virtuosi, are ruined,
such a careless Scribbler is our confident Bravo.

(4.) He next cavils at some passages of mine concerning the Barometer, I
introduce my Discourse about that Philosophical Instrument thus, [ That there
is Gravity even in the Air it self; and that that Element is only comparatively
light, is now made evident and palpable by experience, though Aristotle and his
Schools held a different Theory: And by the help of Quicksilver in a Tube -- ]
In opposition to this he says, That there is Gravity even in the Air it self;
and that that Element is only comparatively light, was of old made evident by
the man of Stagyra. [p. 7.] But how did Aristotle make that evident? It was by
the Experiment of a blown Bladder; as [p. 4.] Let us remember this, and observe
how he goes on: M. Glanvill neither understands what he opposes, nor what he
asserts; But why so I pray? enter the Reason: For in the Beginning he speaks of
the Gravitation of the Element of Air, whereas the Instrument called the
Barometer proposes only a Way to measure the Degrees of Compression in the
Atmosphere, in which Region I believe no man ever denied, but that the aqueous
and terrestrial Corpuscles interspersed had their Weight and Pressure, [p. 7.]
Now I look back, and return the Complement; M. Stubb neither understands what
he opposes, nor what he asserts, This I prove by his own Argument; For he
says Aristotle proved the Gravitation of the Element of Air, and that by the
Experiment of a blown Bladder, in which I believe no man ever denied, but that
the aqueous and terrestrial particles intersperst had their Weight and
Pressure. In short, I propose this Dilemma to M. Stubb to be considered; when
he affirms, in my words, concerning Aristotle, That he proved the Element of
Air to be only comparatively light, He meant either the supposed, pure, or the
mixed Air; If the former, let him show how the man of Stagyra proved that to
ponderate by the Bladder; If the latter, why might not I mean the same? There
is no reason but this, M. Stubb would be interpreted as he means; and I shall
be understood, as is fit for his Design. Yea, The Caviller might easily have
known, (and no doubt he did so) that by Element of Air I meant that of the
Atmosphere, since he cannot suppose, that one of his Virtuosi should hold a
pure peripatetical Element of Air, except he will call the Ether by that Name:
So that here the Animadverter wilfully mistakes me, to make an occasion to vent
his impotent spite. It Is M. Hooks Opinion of the Air, That it is a kind of
Tincture and Solution of terrestrial and aqueous Particles dissolved in the
Ether, and agitated by it; Micr. p. 13. I am of the same mind, and never
dreamed of such a thing in what I said, as an unmixed, peripatetical Element.
And thus his Malice here also is nonsensical and impertinent, For he says, I
begun with the Gravity of the Element of Air, whereas the Barometer is an
Instrument to weigh the Degrees of Compression in the Atmosphere; and hence he
would have it clear, that I know neither what I oppose, or what I assert: And
it is evident on the other hand, that the Caviller either knows not what he
says, or says what he knows to be idle and inconsequent.

Yea, in the words that follow a little after he represents Aristotle alike
impertinent as himself, for he proves the Air to ponderate, p. 4. and this is a
body which no man in his Wits ever denied to be ponderous, p. 8. And yet p. 5.
in the Margin he tells us, that many Peripateticks (naming only one,
Claramontius) held that the impure Air of our Atmosphere does gravitate, it
seems others of them did not hold s^. But I ask again, what Air, good M. Stubb
did Aristotle weigh? The impure Air of the Atmosphere, no doubt, for sure he
did not catch the pure Element in a Bladder; That Air no man in his wits ever
denied to be ponderous; And was not Aristotle as well employed as M. Stubb,
when he proved, that the Ancients could cure cut fingers? But what must become
of all the Peripateticks that held not the Air to be ponderous? Claramontius,
p. 5. and Averroi^, p. 7. are excepted, and many other Peripateticks, he says,
held the impure Air to gravitate; but who those many were he tells us not, nor
how much the rest were in their wits that belonged not to that Number. What
Feats would this man do against the Virtuosi, if he had any real Advantage,
when he ventures every where to make himself ridiculous and absurd, rather then
he will let the least passage go against which he can form the appearance of an
Objection?

(5.) I take notice next, that he falls upon me [p. 10.] for the Epithete of
Heathen given to some of Aristotle's Notions: my words are these, [ And the Zeal
I have for the Glory of the Almighty discovered in his Creatures, has inspired
me with some Smartness and Severity against those heathen Notions, which have
so unhappily diverted learned men from the Study of Gods great Book, Universal
Nature. -- [Pref. to Plus Vlt.]

If I had chanced to have left out that Epithete, or to have put another in its
place (either of which might have been done, and my Discourse, yea that very
Period had not been concerned) The Caviller had lost an opportunity of very
learned Animadversions; and a minute verbal Alteration of about a dozen other
Sentences in my Book, would make all he has said against me useless and
insigni^icant; so little has he touched the main Parts and Design of my
Discourse. But I must let that pass, the general Impertinence is notorious
every where, and this is one of the least of M. Stubb's Imperfections; I note a
worse Fault here, His Stricture is a Falsehood, the words are [ He inveighs
bitterly against Aristotle for his Heathen Notions, p. 10.] I recited my
Period, from whence the Caviller takes this occasion, before, let any man judge
whether I inveigh against Aristotle for his Heathen Notions, or whether the
word Heathen bears any great stress in that Sentence. But M. Stubb makes what
he confutes. He implies p. 11. that this was the Motive that swayed me to
Anti-Aristotelism, viz. the Heathenism of his Notions, which is a mere
Invention of his own Brain, and such a one as he knows to be a gross Untruth,
for he pretends to have confuted my Letter concerning Aristotle, which contains
several of my Motives, but makes this none; and my Scepsis S^ientifica, and
even this last Book gives an other account of my withdrawing from the
Peripatetick Doctrines.

But he has not done persecuting the poor Epithete; [ Alas! He is troubled at
his Heathen Notions! Oh! rare Puritanism! and afterward it follows, Nothing
has more of the Presbyterian and Fanatic than this Topic, ib. p. 11.] Say
you so M. Harry! Suppose one should call Universities, Churches, Churchyards,
Bells, -- Antichristian, Idolatrous, Popish, Superstitious, as one M. Stubb did
in his Light out of Darkness; would there not be more of the Fanatic in that?
Or should he speak against all Humane Learning and Heathenish Writers, as the
same Author, would there not be as much of Fanaticism in such talk? It Is
Puritanical and Presbyterian, it seems to inveigh against Heathen Notions, but
not so to decry Heathenish Authors and Heathen Writers. L. D. [p. 101.] But
however it is, I am not at all concerned, For I no where inveigh against
Heathen Notions, but in M. Stubb's Book, (not I mean because they are Heathen)
though I speak against those of them, which I judge either false, uncertain, or
useless. So that the Questions that follow about Atoms, Corpuscles,
Mathematical Terms, Languages, etc. are impertinent, and the man only disputes
with himself in his Dream.

(6.) In the same Paragraph my Letter about Aristotle is confuted in short, For
those Exceptions against him are nothing but Lies, [ibid. p. 11.] what ill luck
has M. Stubb to have controversy with none but Liers? Dr. Wallis was a
notorious Falsifier; M. Baxter a great Calumniator and Lier; the Royal Society
have yet invented nothing but a LIE; [ubi sup.] Dr. Sprat is a Legendary
Historian, and my Animadversions on Aristotle are all Lies. It seems as soon as
M. Stubb makes any man his Adversary, he commenceth Lier, ipso facto; And this
I think, that (as he said to Dr. Wallis) one of us two is grossly ignorant, he
may to every other Antagonist, one of us two is a gross teller of Lies; this I
have proved in part already, and it will appear further in some of the
following Notes. But as to my Reflections on Aristotle, if they are Lies, they
are none of mine, the matters of Fact are reported from Patricius, Picus,
Gassendus, Lord Bacon, Laertius, Suidas, Aelian, Arrian, Plutarch, Eusebius,
and such like Authors; If these are all Liers too, there are no Tell-troths but
M. Stubb.

But it is a rare Protestation that follows; I protest in the Presence of
Almighty God, that if there be not great Care taken, we may be in a little time
reduced to that pass as to believe the Story of Tom Thumb, -- p. 11.] Does M.
Stubb seriously think this, or does he not? If so, he is more ridiculous than
one that believes Tom Thumb already; If he be not serious in what he says, he
is impious in it; And if it were an other man, one might ask him, how he durst
in that manner use the Name of God and protest a known and ridiculous Falsehood
in his Presence. But who can tell what M. Stubb thinks of God? He says enough
sometimes to give occasion to conjecture; who knows but that all Religion is
with a certain Anti-Virtuoso like the Story of Tom Thumb? And he might do well
to inform us how far he extends his Expression of the Legends and
Falsifications of History. I shall not here to tell you what I have heard him
say.

But he goes on [ This Philosophy fairly disposes us thereunto.] viz. to
believe Tom Thumb and the Legends. If so, I hope he will excuse it from the so
often objected Guilt of Skepticism? But these Philosophers one while dispose
men to believe every thing; and at the next turn to believe nothing. And yet
one would wonder, how the Philosophy of the Virtuosi should incline men either
to the one or the other. It deals in the plain Objects of Sense, in which, if
any where, there is Certainty; and teaches suspen^ion of Assent till what is
proposed, is well proved; and so is equally an Adversary to Skepticism and
Credulity. But M. Stubb tells us, [ibid.] that it makes men so credulous by
taking them off from the Pedantism of Philology and ancient reading, -- It
takes men off indeed, as Philology takes them off from Philosophy, and one sort
of Studies takes men off from an other, which they are not able to pursue at
the same time with it: But this is no more discredit to the Modern Philosophy,
then it is to all other sorts of Learning, and indeed none to any. If M. Stubb
means more than this, and would insinuate that experimental Disquisitions into
Nature, have any direct Antipathy to Philology or ancient Reading, he speaks
what is false and groundless; and is not able to say any thing to purpose, to
make such a Censure good. He tells us indeed he is resolved to charge the Enemy
home, and he does it by confident Falsehoods and bold Affirmations without
proof: His whole Force is in Noise and Clamor; and did he not keep a great
Stir, and raise the Dust about him, he would scarce engage any to look toward
him, or to take notice what he does or says.

(7.) He proceeds to animadvert upon me thus, [ He tells us that the
Aristotelian Philosophy aims at no more than the instructing men in Notion and
Dispute, that its Design was mean, -- p. 12.] He quotes not the place whence
this is taken, and it is well he does not, for he mis-reports my Words, and
affirms that which is false, for I was not speaking there of the Aristotelian
Philosophy, but of the Modern Peripatetick Way, which I affirm in that very
Page to be now quite another thing from the Philosophy which Aristotle's Books
contain, and have frequently spoke to the same purpose elsewhere: Now let any
one look into the voluminous Physics of Ariaga, Hurtado, Pontius, Oviedo,
Carlton, and the rest of the late Peripatetick Writers, and let him then tell
me what they aim at more, than the instructing men in Notion and Dispute. To
talk here as the Caviller does, of Aristotle's Books of Animals, and
Theophrastus about Plants, and such like things, is toyish, impertinent, and
like M. Stubb; And all the rest of the chat that comes in upon this occasion
turns to wind and insignificant Prattle. This is the man that would charge the
Enemy home; we are like to have good doings in his Quotations of other Authors,
when he perverts even the words of his Antagonist.

He is at the same sport again, [p. 14.] If Notions might be rejected for being
first proposed, and used by Heathens, then is not Aristotle in a worse
Condition than Epicurus, Democritus, Plato, or Pythagoras, -- p. 15. He desires
me to acquit Paracelsus from being impious in his Life. At this rate, there
will be no end of Animadversions, and 'twill be impossible to escape the
Anti-Virtuoso; Who said that Notions might be rejected for being first
proposed, and used by Heathens? or what has M. Glanvill to do with Paracelsus?

But further [ibid. p. 15. He says, Aristotle was of no such superlative
Esteem in the wisest Times; But he tells us not what those most wise Times
were, when he was in Disesteem] What need I? I said not that he was in
Disesteem in the most wise Times; but of no such superlative Account, as he
himself quotes my words in one Line, and makes quite another thing of them in
the next. For is there no Difference, does he think, between not being of
superlative Account, and being in Disesteem? Such gross Slips as these in a
Virtuoso would have afforded matter for endless Insultings, and Charges of
Ignorance. He proceeds to prove that Aristotle was in Esteem in wise Times; and
what then? It follows clearly, that M. Stubb can demonstrate, what no body
denies. But was he in the most superlative account then? He does not say so,
for that had been to his purpose: or were those times when his Esteem was
superlative, the wisest? He shifts from this too; he had not read of more wise
People, than Greece, Rome, and the Mahometans, -- and all these admired him at
several times; but was their Admiration superlative, when the times were
wisest? otherwise what he says is not to purpose. He confesses [ ibid.] that
he was much opposed and slighted by the first Fathers; and in his Light out of
Darkness, p. 105. he says, That Aristotle was condemned by the first
Christians, and Honest men of all Ages. And I think the times of the first
Fathers during the Glory of the Roman Empire, were some of the wisest times;
and I mention in my Letter concerning Aristotle, the Observation of Gassendus,
that in the flourishing times of Rome, and Athens, the Academicks and Stoics
were more in Esteem, than the Sectators of Aristotle; and instance in Cicero,
Pliny, and Quintilian, who though they had a great Esteem of Aristotle, did yet
prefer Plato before him. So that in those most wise Times, and among those wise
men, Aristotle's Account was not superlative, if Gassendus, or M. Stubb himself
be to be believed.

And methinks it proves much, that the wisest men and times had the most
superlative Account of Aristotle; because They divided into Platonists and
Aristotelians, as they did into Catholics and Arrians, and the Arrians were
Aristotelians, ibid. Aristotle was of best Account, because the Catholics
followed Plato, and the Arrians were Aristotle's Followers. Does not this tend
to the re-advancing the Credit of Aristotle? If this will not do it, Aristotle
shall be re-advanc'd by and by; it follows, [p. 15, 16.] Mahomet's Successors
the Caliphs did wholly employ themselves to improve the Doctrines of Aristotle,
and the Peripateticks: So that Aristotelism, Arrianism, and Mahometanism issued
out of the same Parts of the World, viz. Alexandria, and the adjacent
Countries. -- This the Virtuoso could not see, because so much History was
above his reach, p. 16. and the Reasoning is as much above it as the History.

He next quotes another passage of mine, relating to the same business, viz.
That since the minds of Christians are enlightened with the Rays of the
glorious Gospel, they have less reason to bow down to the Dictates of an
Idolater and an Heathen.] Hence M. Impertinent concludes, that we must bid
farewell to the Rhetoric, and other Works of Aristotle, which I had before
recommended; and he adds that we must shake hands with Seneca, Epictetus, and
Plato, p. 16. This follows like the rest, because we may not bow down, and give
an implicit Veneration to an Heathen Authority; Therefore we must bid farewell
to all the Works of those Authors; As if there were no Difference between using
their Works, and servilely adoring them.

(8.) He perstringeth a passage cited out of Plato, (...); and what I add, viz.
That [The Universe must be known by the Art, by which it was made.] Here I am
sent to answer Dr. More's Dialogues, where he explodes the Mechanism of Nature.
ibid. p. 16.]

Before I descend to the particular Answer to this, I take notice, that M.
Stubb runs up and down, and flirts from some things to others, which have no
Coherence among themselves, or in my Book. He falls upon my Discourse about
Philosophical Instruments; and then, without any occasion given, suddenly steps
back against a passage in my Preface, that has no relation in the world to his
Discourse, as p. 10. In the same Paragraph he leaps forward again to the 124.
page of my Plus Vltra, and largely confu^es a Sentence or two there. The next
Motion is back to a passage, p. 25. that had nothing to do with what he was
saying; and so every where he writes, as he dreams. But to omit other Instances
of this here, I come to show the Impertinence of this last Cavil.

By Plato's Saying, I understood no no more, than that God made all things in
Number, Weight, and Measure; and I suppose that Mechanism may be used, as far
as it will go. Now Geometry assists men in mechanical Disquisitions, which are
helps for the Knowledge of Nature and Causes: This was all I intended, for I do
not believe that all the Phenomenon are merely Mechanical: So that Dr. More's
Dialogues do no way oppose my Sense; He explodes not the Mechanism of Nature,
(as M. Stubb tells us) but such a Mechanism, as is supposed to suffice for all
the Effects of Nature, without help from any immaterial Agent. This may be seen
easily by those, that read the Book, and endeavor to understand it; But M.
Stubb reads by Indexes and Catches, which is enough for the purposes of a
Caviller.

Having thus explained my meaning, I need not be concerned in what he adds in
his Review, p. 170. etc. For all his Arguments are impertinent in reference to
my sense, and I may take occasion, ex abundanti, hereafter to prove that they
are trivial and childish in reference to any other. For they can do no
execution even upon the mere Mechanical Hypothesis.

But (9.) to let that alone now, I cannot forbear noting here the intolerable
Impudence and Lying of this man, p. 173. where he goes on with the Impertinence
he begun, p. 16. He tells us there, That his Opinion had been amply maintained
of late by Dr. Hen. More in opposition to what the Royal Society lays down in
their History, viz. That Generation, Corruption, Alteration, and all the
Vicissitudes of Nature are nothing else, but the Effects arising from the
meeting of little Bodies of differing Figures, Magnitudes, and Velocities. Than
which Opinions, says he, there can be nothing more pestilent and pernicious;
and Dr. More albeit a Member of this Society heretofore, (for be allows nothing
to it now) yet a pious one, professes that this Mechanical Philosophy inclines
to Atheism: neither would he approve of those Deductions as necessary but
ridiculous, when I upbraided him lately with that nonsensical and illiterate
History.

Upon my reading of this Paragraph I resolved to write to Dr. More, to know
whether he had deserted the Society, or whether those other passages were true;
I writ accordingly, and that learned Doctor was pleased to return me the
following Answer, in which you may see the insufferable Impudence of this
Prodigious Romancer.

A Letter from Dr. More to I. G. giving an Account how M. Stubb belies him. p.
173.
SIR,
I Thank you for yours, which I received by the hand of your Friend and
Neighbor M. C. Before I received your Letter I had not read half a Page in
your Antagonists Book, for I had only seen it once by chance in one of our
Fellows Chambers, but had no leisure as yet to read it, my time being taken up
with other matters; And therefore I was wholly ignorant of those passages, p.
173. till your Letter gave me an occasion to enquire after the Book, and to
read all there that concerns my self: At which I must confess I was much
surprised; especially at that particular passage, which was pointed me to by
another Letter from a Friend, the day after yours; that passage I mean, wherein
he makes as if I were not still a Member of the Royal Society, but had left it;
grounding his Assertion upon this Reason, [ For he allows nothing to it now] It
was a great marvel to me, that he should pretend to know better than my self,
whether I be still of the Royal Society, or no. For I take my self still to be
of it, and I am sure I have not left it. And as for the Reason he would build
his Conclusion upon, in that sense as it will seem to sound to all men at the
first reading, namely, That I allow them no Respect, nor have any Esteem for
them now, it is grossly false. For the great Opinion I have of their
experimental Philosophy, I have at least two months ago amply testified in my
Preface to my Enchiridion Metaphysicum, when I did not at all dream of any such
passage of your Antagonist concerning me in his Book. And do particularly note
how serviceable their Natural Experiments in matter are to the clear Knowledge
and Demonstration of the Existence of immaterial Beings: So far are they from
tending to Atheism.

And it is invidiously done of your Adversary to commend me for Piety, with an
unworthy and odious Reflection on the Society, as if men were less pious for
being thereof: whenas I dare say there are as pious Persons of that Society, as
there are out of it; and it is a gross mistake in him, that he looks upon that
Mechanic Philosophy which I oppose, to be the Philosophy the Royal Society
does profess, or would support. But the Philosophy which they aim at, is a more
perfect Philosophy, as yet to be raised out of faithful and skilful Experiments
in Nature, which is so far from tending to Atheism, that I am confident, it
will utterly rout it and the Mechanical Philosophy at once, in that sense which
I oppose, namely, as it signifies a Philosophy that professes, That Matter
having such a Quantity of Motion as it has, would contrive it self into all
those Ph^nomena we see in Nature. But this Profession cannot rightly be called
the Mechanical Philosophy, but the Mechanical Belief of Credulity. For it has
no ground of Reason in the earth to support it. But there are many and most
palpable Demonstrations against it, as all the World shall see in my
Enchiridion Metaphysicum. Wherefore it is a very high Injury of your
Antagonist, to father so absurd a Profession upon a Society of such Learning
and Judgment as the Royal Society is.

I believe indeed most of us, I am sure my self does conceive, that Generation,
Corruption, Alteration, and all the Vicissitudes of corporeal Nature are
nothing else but Unions and Dissolutions (I will add also the Formations and
Deformations) of little Bodies or Particles of differing Figures, Magnitudes,
and Velocities. But this thus bounded is not the Mechanical Philosophy, but
part of the old Pythagorick or Mosaic Philosophy, so far as I can see by any
History. So that it is very unskilfully done of your Antagonist to bring me in
as opposing, or clashing with the Royal Society in a thing of this great
Consequence, and so to make them Patrons of that, which neither any sound
Philosophy, nor true Religion can allow.

Nor can I have so low a conceit of your Parts, Judgment, and Virtue, as to
think, when you magnify D^s-Cartes his Philosophy so highly as you do, that it
is for that hasty Presumption of his, that upon the Supposal that Matter was
possessed of so much Motion as there is in the World, it would necessarily at
length contrive it self into all such Phenomenon, as we see in the Universe;
but because several of his Conceptions concerning the Figures of the Particles
of such and such Bodies are exceeding plansible, and probable: amongst which
that of the Globuli seems to me so far to surpass all other Hypotheses about
Light, that I stand to him close against his most able Opposers in that point
in my Enchiridion Metaphysicum, so far forth as concerns the Mechanical part of
Light and Colors. But mere Mechanism does not exhaust all in those Phenomenon
neither, as I there prove in a long Chapter on that Subject. By this time I
think it is plain, what Mechanical Philosophy that is, that may incline men to
Atheism, and that it is not the experimental Philosophy, which the Royal
Society professes, that is, that Philosophy which inclines men to Atheism, but
quite contrary, as I shall manifestly demonstrate in my Exhiridion Metaphysicum.

I think there is nothing now that concerns me in the Page you point me to in
your Letter, but my Judgment touching that large passage of the Learned and
Eloquent Dr. Sprat, and the Deductions therein contained, which Deductions,
says your Antagonist, I would not approve of as Necessary, but Ridiculous;
Truly if I had said so, I should have made my self ridiculous; For how could I
approve of Deductions, especially in so serious a point, as, or Quatenus
Ridiculous; For there is no man, let him be never so pious, unless he be a
Fool, that can approve of Deductions for their being ridiculous in so serious a
Cause. But it seems he having a mind to monopolize all the Wit in the World to
himself, is content to repute me for Pious, so he may remonstrate me withal to
the World to be a Fool, and such as he may play the Fool withal, as he has in
all this Page you have pointed me to. I might indeed approve of those
Deductions as smooth and plausible, though not as necessary, but something of a
lubricous and doubtful Aspect; but I know very well I could not approve of them
as ridiculous. But I add further, that there are such Experiments made by us of
the Royal Society, that do not only plausibly invite us to, but afford us most
forcible and evident Demonstrations for the Belief of the Existence of
immaterial Beings, and such as your Antagonist can never be able to elude the
force of^ by pretending that we do (...) as will appear in my Enchiridion
Metaphysicum.

Sir, by this I suppose you see how much I am concerned in this Page you point
me to in your Letter; I have nothing more to add but that I am

Your affectionate Friend and Servant Hen. More.


This Letter I publish, because my Reverend and Learned Friend has given me
leave to print it, and he writes that he is much offended, that M. Stubb should
pick him up as a senseless Clod in the Highway, to pelt so honorable a Society
with, of which he is a Member.

You may judge by this, Sir, how far we are to believe M. Stubb, when he tells
us how many have deserted the Royal Society, when the very first Person that he
names, disproves the impudent Falsehood. What a man is this that dares belly so
Reverend a Person in the face of the World? and what am I to expect from him;
if one, of whom he pretends to speak well, be thus used? By this you may see
what Mechanism of Nature it is, that Dr. More explodes, and how impertinently
and maliciously the Animadverter urges this learned man against the Mechanic
Philosophy of the Royal Society, and that which I have recommended. And there
is no doubt but were the other Authors, which he quotes, alive, and able to do
themselves right, they would most of them disclaim the senses, which this
Perverter of their meaning puts upon them, to serve himself in his Cavilling.

(10.) But I am charged with this very fault, [p. 19.] and M. Stubb will have
it, that I have mis-reported the first Discourse between M. Cross and my self;
He prefaceth to what he says in the behalf of the Disputer thus, Nor will I
engage particularly in the Dispute between him and M. Cross; and as soon as he
had told us he would not do it, he begins in the immediate next words, and
proceeds to do it, in several of the following Pages.

I am informed, says he, that the Relation is very false; and it is like he was
so informed; His Friend M. Cross told him so. But I would have both these
Adversaries know, that I scorn to report any matter of Fact publicly, which I
cannot sufficiently, and substantially prove. I have two good Witnesses to
attest the Truth of the Relation I made in my Plus Vltra, of the Discourse
between M. Cross and me: They are both Masters of Art, and both of the same
College to which the grave man formerly belonged; and that They may see I am
not such a Legendary Reporter of things, as I have in part already, and shall
yet further prove Them, I here produce the Attestation.

We whose Names are underwritten were present at the Conference between M.
Cross, and M. Glanvill at Bath, and do attest, that the Discourse was exactly,
and sincerely such as it is reported by M. Glanvill in his Book PLUS VLTRA.

Io. a Court. Will. Allen.



These same Witnesses have attested the Falsehood of M. Crosses Relation of the
Discourse, in all the material, yea, even in most of the minute particulars
also; And have proved him guilty of sixteen gross Untruths in that account he
gives in his Book which was rejected the Press. But their Attestation here, is
too large to insert; I have it in a Latin Answer to M. C. which lies by me, and
any man that has a mind shall see it.

Thus I have proved my Relation for M. Stubb's Satisfaction; and there is no
other matter I have related concerning either of them, but I shall make it
good, whenever I am called upon to do it; yea, if they please, I am ready to
lay the issue of all here; If I cannot prove every matter of fact, that I have
printed about them; I shall humbly lay my neck at their feet: And if on the
other hand, either of these Adversaries can prove one of those reproachful
things they have alleged against me, I Will be their Uassal and their Uictim.
Before I have done, you will see, that this is no dangerous Offer. But I must
pass these things over briefly.

He is so kind to M. Cross, [p. 20.] that he is willing to venture the being
found in an error with him; For he says, I profess my self in an Error, as
well as M. Cross, if it be not true that Aristotle had sundry Advantages to pen
his History of Animals, which our Virtuosi want. But the mischief is, this
Kindness will not signify to his Friend; for he does not say, that Aristotle
had more Advantages to pen his History of Animals than the Virtuosi only; but
more Advantages for Knowledge, than the later Ages: If M. Stubb will undertake
his Cause here, he may do him a favor, otherwise, his Kindness is as
impertinent, as his Reasonings use to be. In the next words he attempts to
prove the Advantages Aristotle had for his History of Animals, and he does it
by the Authority of Pliny, which Author he makes a Lier to an Instance, [p.
161.] where he says of Sir Kenelm Digby, that he was the Pliny of our Age for
Lying: but any Authority shall be heard against the Virtuosi.

I am perstringed [p. 21.] for not knowing what Authors writ well upon the
several Subjects, in which I pretend the Moderns have outdone the Ancients:
This he proves, because I mention Sava^orol^ among the Improvers of the History
of Baths; and a man that knew Authors as well as M. Stubb, has named him among
those Natural Historians, the Person is Dr. Hackwel in his Apology, p. 283. But
the Animadverter discovers my Ignorance further, for he never heard any man
commend Blanchellus on that Subject, viz. concerning Baths, [p. 22.] But I can
tell him, that the just mentioned learned Doctor commends him on that Subject.
[ibid.] For he reckons Him and Savanorola among those, who had written parts of
Natural History more exactly: I speak of no more Improvers of this sort, than
those he mentions, because I was only to give some few Instances, and was not
obliged to an exact and full Account. I omit Dr. Jordan, because he pretends
not to improve the History of Baths, and the Animadverter is malicious in
urging this as a Defect, and Argument of my not knowing him; If I had named him
on this occasion, I had been besides my Subject; And if I had troubled my self
to collect and recite the Names of all Improvers, I must have been tedious and
impertinent; for I had not obliged my self to any such task, nor did my Design
require it.

But he mentions another great Omission of mine, with which, he says, he is
surprised, viz. Because I do not make the Moderns to surpass the Ancients in
Architecture, Sculpture, Picture, and several other Arts of ingenious Luxury.
[p. 24.] But why should he expect that? I proposed only to discourse such
things as were Helps and Advantages for the Advance of Useful Knowledge; as he
might have seen, [p. 9.] and in other places of my Plus Vltra. Nor was I bound
to mention every thing; I intended no perfect History, and the Instances I
alleged were enough to carry my Cause, and to encourage Philosophical
Endeavors, though a great many others that might have been very pertinent,
were omitted; and several that M. Stubb would have had there, designedly left
out, because they were not proper for my purpose: and I do not believe, that
the Moderns surpass the Ancients in Architecture, Sculpture, Picture, or the
Arts of ingenious Luxury; so that M. Stubb need not have been surprised at my
Omission.

(11.) But to show how unsupportable such kind of men, as the Virtuosi, are in
all judicious and intelligent Company, he sets down my Discourse with M. Cross
about Dioptrick Tubes. [ibid. p. 2.4, etc.] And the first Remark he makes upon
it [p. 27.] is, That I have little or no insight into Optics; This he remarks
roundly, but does not show us how he inferrs it from my Discourse, but adds
immediately, The Solution of M. Crosses Fallacy, if it were his, by that
Interrogatory, why cannot he write better with two Pens than with a single one?
is ridiculous, since there is no Uis unita there. -- But who told M. Stubb that
my instance of the two Pens, was a Solution of M. Crosses Fallacy about the two
Spectacles? Let him but look back upon the words that he had newly recited, and
he will see, that I allege this to show the Ridiculousness of M. Crosses
Argument; I do not say there is a Vis unita in the two Pens; But this I do,
that there is as much of it there, as in the two Spectacles, and consequently,
we may as well infer, That a man can write with two Pens better than with one
singly, because Uis unita fortior; as, that one can see better with two pair of
Spectacles, than with one, for that reason; which was M. Crosses Argument; that
is, there is no Consequence in either. So that I first show the Absurdity of my
Antagonists Reasoning by the instance of the Pens, and then solve his Fallacy
by denying there is any Vi^ unita in the two pair of Spectacles, as it follows
immediately in the words that M. Stubb cites from my Book, The Reason he [M.
C.] gave, why one would expect it should be so, viz. that a man should see
better with two pair, than one, is the Reason why it is not, namely, because
there is no Vis unita in the two, as I had intimated before, and do again in
the words immediately following. So that M. Stubb here either wanted
Spectacles, or saw what I said through the double ones of his Pride and Malice,
that misrepresented my Discourse to him.

But that which follows in the same Period is yet more mavelous, my Solution
of the Fallacy by the two Pens he had said is ridiculous, since there is no Vis
unita there, to which he adds in the immediate next words, And in one sort of
Tubes, though the Rays be united in the first unequal Glass, and brought to a
Convergency, yet must the sphaerical Cavity of the next dilate it again, and
dispose them fittingly to effect the expected vision in the Retina. How does
this prove that my solution of M. Crosses Fallacy by the two Pens is
ridiculous? What distant things ramble together into this man's wild Fancy?
But perhaps he had reference to something I had said before; I will charitably
suppose this, to try if I can make any sense of his arguing; I had said that we
see better through the two Glasses in Perspectives, than any single one,
because they are so fashioned and ordered that the visive Rays are better
gathered and united by them for the Advantage of Sight: If this be not the
thing he mutters against, I cannot imagine what he means; or if it be, I cannot
understand how it comes in here. But I need not wonder at the incoherence of M.
Stubb's Reasonings; This must be allowed him, or we shall never have done
remarking: Let it be so then, In a sort of Tubes the Rays are brought to a
Convergency in the first Glass, and again dilated in the second; Therefore the
two Glasses are not so ordered in Perspectives that the visive Rays are better
gathered and united for the Advantage of Sight. This is the Argument in it is
best Prospect, and let him make the most of it. I suppose, I need not tell the
intelligent Reader how absurd it is, and how impertinent; nor inform him, that
by the Union of the visive Rays I do not mean their Coincidency, but such an
Order among them as is fit for Vision. But I may further animadvert on these
things hereafter, if upon second Thoughts I think them worthy of a further
mention.

After he had thus remarked my Ignorance in Optics, and proved it irrefragably
by the two Arguments I have now recited, He attempts to bring off his Friend M.
Cross. He is a generous man, and told a Reverend Person from whom at second
hand I had it, That he would rescue the poor Fellow out of my hands; nobly and
charitably designed! But let us see how he succeeds in this Design of Rescue;
His first main Attempt follows here, [p. 28.] As to what M. Cross is said to
have argued against Telescopes, that the Addition of one Glass to another must
hinder, rather than improve Vision, because that the super adding of one pair
of Spectacles to another, rather weakens than amends the Sight. I must say,
that whosoever understands the Form of an Argument cannot except against the
Form of that, nor do the Propositions so ill cohere together, as that one
should be for Sense, the other for Convenience: All that Excursion of our
Virtuoso shows his Ignorance, not M. Crosses. Thus the Defense begins, and is
not M. Cross like to be rescued? The Form of the Argument is not to be excepted
against: And pray M. Impertinent, who talked of the Form of the Argument, or
excepted against it? Does M. Stubb intend this for a Defense, or does he not?
If not, what makes it here? If so, it is a rare knack, by which any thing may be
defended. For instance, M. Stubb calls the Members of the Royal Society, Poor
Devils, [ Campanella revived, p. 16.] And thus, suppose he forms his Arguments
to prove it; If the Disasters of the late Dutch War, the Plague, and Fire of
London were less Inconveniences than the Perpetuity of the Royal Society; Then
the Members thereof are Devils; But the Disasters of the late Dutch War, the
Plague, and Fire of London were (...) Inconveniences than the perpetuity of the
Royal Society, [Camp. rev. p. 21.] Ergo, There is no excepting against the Form
of the Argument; conclusum est contra -- Again, if They are pitiful
Mechanicians, an illiterate Company, Impostors, mean Spirits, etc. then they
are poor Devils; But they are pitiful Mechanicians, [Pref. against Plus Vlt.]
an illiterate Company, [Camp. rev. p. 21.] Impostors, [Camp. rev. Pref.] mean
Spirits, etc. [Pref. against Plus Vlt.] Ergo, No one that understands the Form
of an Argument can except against these; Nor do the Propositions so ill cohere,
as that one should be for Sense, the other for Convenience. Whoever excepts
against the Arguments shows his Ignorance, not M. Stubb's, as I showed mine, by
excepting against the Reason taken from the Spectacles, not M. Crosses. How
easily can M. Stubb prove a man guilty of Ignorance? Well! This is said in M.
Crosses Defense, and I believe he could have said as much as this, to defend
himself. If he be called in question for the matter of his Argument, M. Stubb
gives him up, and tells us, [ibid.] There is no Defense to be made for him, if
he urged this otherwise than to try the Intellectuals of M. Glanvill. Thus the
Cause is quitted, and M. Cross left defenseless, only this was a sort of
Knowledge that was not necessary for a Divine, and he has other, and better
Qualifications than carnal Reasoning. But since M. Cross cannot be brought off,
I must be charged; And that I as little understand the Subject of Knowledge I
pretend to, He says it is manifest from hence, That I might easily have denied
the Assertion of the Spectacles, that two pair did not impede, but amend the
Sight in some Eyes that are very weak: For there is an old Gentlewoman, and a
young Gentlewoman of his acquaintance that use two, [p. 29.] I shall here tell
M. Stubb that there are very few things which I pretend to know: But whatever
Ignorance I am guilty of, M. Stubb has never the luck to discover it, nor to
prove his charges against me of this kind. He remarked that I was ignorant of
Optics, because I intimate that the Axiom, Vis unita fortior, may be as well
used to prove a man can write better with two Pens, than with one; as that he
can see better with two Spectacles, than a single pair. I am charged with
Ignorance for excepting against M. Crosses nonsensical Argument, which at last
is given up as defenseless, and here it is manifest, that I understand not the
Subject of the Knowledge I pretend to, by as good reasons. Forsooth! I might
easily have denied the Assertion of the Spectacles, that two pair did not
impede, but amend the Sight in some Eyes that are weak. The Assertion was not
that two pair did not, but that they did impede; But we must pass by M. Stubb's
Improprieties and Nonsense; and this Period is not Sense, as it is worded. He
means, I might have denied that two pair of Spectacles hinder the Sight, they
amend it in Eyes that are weak; Because I did not this I am ignorant in
Optics. But if I had done so, I had been impertinent in answering; For it must
be granted, that two pair ordinarily hinder the Sight, though in M. Stubb's old
Gentlewoman and young, the Case is different, and if I had allowed the
Consequence, this had been enough to have carried M. Cross's Cause against the
two Glasses in Telescopes. Thus I must be ignorant, because I was not
impertinent. But does M. Stubb think that every one is unacquainted with
Optics, who does not know that double Spectacles mend the Sight in some whose
Eyes are weak, or disaffected? Must all be Ignoramus's that have not met with
the old Gentlewoman his Acquaintance, and the young Gentlewoman that he knows
with Cataracts in her Eyes, who use two pair of Spectacles? or must he needs be
ignorant that meeting two false Propositions in a Syllogism, contents himself
to deny one, and that the denial of which most evidently tends to the nulling
the Argument, and rendering it ridiculous? I propose not these Questions to
justify my own Knowledge, but to represent and shame M. Stubb's childish,
trifling, and malicious Impertinence.

12. As to the large Discourse that follows concerning Telescopes, I shall
treat fully on the Subject, and answer the Animadverter's Cavills, in the Book,
where I particularly examine his Authorities; and in that all other things
which are worth an Answer shall be considered. For the present I take notice,
that this whole Discourse is an elaborate Impertinence, for he proves not, that
Telescopes are no late Invention, nor yet, that they are not Helps for
Knowledge; He pretends indeed to show that their Reports are sometimes
uncertain, but yet will not be understood totally to discredit the use of
Telescopes in celestial Discoveries, as he cautions, [p. 47.] And so, what he
s^ys, is impertinent to the main Business, though it may seem to confute some
passages of mine concerning those Glasses. But let M. Stubb urge all he can for
the f^lliciousness of Telescopes, a Sceptick will produce as much to prove the
Deceitfulness of our Eyes, and I Will undertake my self to offer such Arguments
against the Certainty of Sense, as M. Stubb with all his Sagacity shall not be
able to answer.

But how comes M. Stubb to say in the Entrance of this Discourse, p. 29. That
he was sure M. Boil is in the same error with M. Cross? Let us see upon what
ground he built his Confidence in this first Instance by which he impugns
Telescopes: Why, M. Boil complains that when he went about to examine those
appearances in the Sun called Maculae and Faculae solares, he could not make
the least Discovery of them in many Months, which yet other Observators pretend
to see every day, yet does M. Boil profess that he neither wanted the
convenience of excellent Telescopes, nor omitted any circumstance requisite to
the Enquiry. Thus the Animadverter; and hence he is sure that M. B. is in the
same error with M. C. That Telescopes are fallacious. Let this be an Instance
how this Swaggerer quotes Authors, and let the Reader look into the place cited
from M. Boil, If he do so, he will see, That that Honorable Person says
nothing there, that tends to the proving the Deceitfulness of Telescopes, much
less, that he believes them fallacious. I have not the Latin Translation of
those Essays, but in the second Edition of the Original English, I find the
Discourse to which M. Stubb referrs, p. 103. where the excellent Author imputes
it not to the Glasses that he could not for several Months see the Macul^ and
Faculae solares, but seems a little to blame those Astronomers, who have so
written of the Spots and more shining parts, -- as to make their Readers to
presume that at least some of them are almost always to be seen there, which he
conjectures was occasioned by their so often meeting such Phenomenon in the
Sun, [ib.] But these for many months, our Learned Author could not discover by
his Telescopes, not because of their Fallaciousness, but for that during many
months they appeared so much seldomer than it seems they did before. These are
the words of that Honorable Gentleman, [ ubi sup.] And now how does it appear
hence that M. Boil is in the same error about the Deceitfulness of
Telescopes, with M. Cross? Is it sure that he thought those Glasses fallacious,
because he could not see the Maculae and Faculae in the Sun, when they were not
there? what are we to expect from this man in reference to the other Authors he
cites, when he so grossly and impudently mis-reports so known a one of our own,
who is yet alive, and sees how maliciously the Caviller perverts him? I shall
examine his carriage to other Writers in my next Book; and in that show that
most of the Arguments he brings to argue the Fallaciousness of Telescopes,
prove only the Diversity and Changes of the Mediums, and of the celestial
Phenomenon, not the Deceit of those Glasses.

But I am concluded to be altogether unacquainted with Telescopes, as well as
ignorant of Optics, [p. 46.] because I say, That [ They alter the Objects in
nothing but their Proportions.] by which I meant, that they make no Alterations
in the Figures of Bodies, but represent them, as they are, only in larger
proportions. And I am ignorant in Telescopes, for saying so, For (1.) Some
Telescopes invert all Objects, and (2.) the Dioptrick Tubes represent the Light
and Colors more dilute and remiss, (3.) Some represent some Objects greater,
(4.) Some no bigger, or rather less, (5.) Some Objects are magnified, but not
so much as others. These are Arguments of my Ignorance, or M. Stubb's
Impertinence: For my Ignorance, I have told M. Stubb, that I am ready to
confess a great deal more, than he can prove me guilty of; And whether he has
shown it here, as he pretends, let the Reader judge. If some Telescopes invert
all things, that is nothing to his purpose, for I spoke of the ordinary Tubes;
Nor is there any change of the Figure of Objects, when they are inverted.
Though in the largest Tubes the Light and Colors are more remiss; yet that
makes no alteration of the Object, and I said the Glasses altered the Objects
in nothing but their Proportions. Though some Objects in some Tubes are
represented no bigger, or rather less, than they otherwise seem; yet that is
nothing against what I say, For Telescopes ordinarily magnify, It Is their
remarkable property, and that for which they are used; and though some Objects
are not magnified as much as others, yet they are confessed to be magnified,
and that is sufficient; or though some are not, 'twere nothing, as I just now
observed. I note these obvious things as my eye runs over my Adversaries Book.
They are enough to justify what I said, and to show M. Stubb's Impertinence; I
shall discover it further, when I come to consider these things more deeply. I
represent the easiest matters now, that all Readers may see what a pitiful
Caviller this man is, that boasts such mighty matters, and counts all men
ignorants, and Fools, but himself.

(13.) And it is notoriously evident in this next Instance, I had said, [
Chemistry has a Pretense to the great Hermes for its Author, ( how truly I
will not dispute,) But M. Stubb will make me dispute whether I will or no. For
after he had recited these words he says, he can tell me what he is sure I am
ignorant of. The Egyptians did never attribute to Hermes the Invention of
Physic or any part of it, -- p. 50.] How does this Scribbler confute his own
Dreams? who said that the Egyptians attribute to Hermes the Invention of
Physic, or any part of it? How easy is it to pile up Authors against any
Writer, if a man may take this Liberty of making him say what he pleases? I
say, Chemistry has a Pretense to Hermes for its Author; And M. Stubb confutes
me by proving the Egyptians did never ascribe the Invention of Physic to Him.
And what then? the usual Conclusion follows, M. Stubb is an industrious
Impertinent. But will he say, There is no ground for my Affirmation that
Chemistry has a Pretense to Hermes for its Author? He quotes VOSSIVS for the
Derivation of the word from the Greek, [p. 51.] If he had read out that leaf in
Vossius, he would have found a reason for that passage of mine. That learned
man tells us, Transiit Alchymia Disciplina ad nos ab Arabibus, sive Mauris, --
Mauros vero ab Aegyptiis accepisse autumant, -- Egyptii rursum edocti
existimantur ab Hermete seu Mercurio Trismegisto, [ Vos. de Philos. c. 9. p.
68.] This Saying of Vossius had been enough to justify so transient a passage:
But again, SENNERTVS is an Author, against whom M. Stubb says, he hopes there
is no Exception, [p. 58.] This Author he quotes in that Page; If he had here
either read out the Chapter, which he cites, he would have seen another reason,
why I say, Chemistry has a Pretense to Hermes for its Author. For thus that
celebrated Writer, Post Diluvium a plerisque sive Inventio, sive Propagatio
Chymiae ad Hermetem Trismegistum refertur, and ab eo Ars Chymica dicitur hodie
Ars Hermetica, Vas Hermetis, and Sigillum Hermetis provulgantur, -- Omnes
Chymici hactenus censuerunt, ut scribit Albertus Magnus, quod Hermes fit Radix,
super quam omnes Philosophi sustentati sunt, -- [ Sen. de Natura Chym. cap. 3.]
This is another instance how well M. Stubb himself is acquainted with the
Authors he quotes, and an evidence that he reads only such Scraps of them, as
he thinks make for his turn. And may it not reflect Shame upon a man of his
Pretenses, that his Adversary should be justified by the very Books he himself
cites, and even in the same Chapter and Leaf, whence he takes passages from
them; yea, and in a thing too that relates to his own Profession.

And here I cannot but take notice of an other instance of his Knowledge in the
Authors, with which he has the most reason to be acquainted; He tells us, [p.
112.] That Dr. HARVY in his two Answers to Riolanus, and his Book of
Generation, no where asserts the Invention ( viz. of the Circulation,) so to
himself as to deny that he had the Intimation or Notion from Caesalpinus, which
Silence (says he) I take for a tacit Confession, -- How true this is, may be
seen in the Book he last mentioned, De Generatione Anim. Edit. Amst. p. 309.
There Dr. HARVY in express terms assumes the Invention to himself in these
words, CIRCVITUM SANGVINIS admirabilem a me jampridem Inventum, video
propemodum omnibus placuisse, -- M. Stubb tells us, That His Ambition of Glory
made him willing to be thought the Author of a Paradox he had so illustrated,
-- yet such was his Modesty as not to vindicate it to himself by telling a Lie;
[ubi sup.] This we see he did if Cesalpinus was the Author. That this last
named Person was the Inventer of the Circulation, M. Stubb labors much to
prove, and struts mightily in his supposed performance; I shall not undertake
to examine that matter now, only I cannot but take notice, that M. Stubb is
impertinent in all that Discourse: For if Caesalpinus be the Author, the
Invention is however modern, for he writ his Quaest. Medicae not above eighty
years ago, and in them it is pretended he discovered the Circulation. And I am
the less concerned in all the Animadverters voluminous Nothing about the Author
of that Discovery, because I took care before to prevent such Impertinences;
but I see M. Stubb will be impertinent, do I what I can to prevent it. I
ascribe the Invention to D. Harvy, as almost all men now do, except the
Animadverter; but take notice withal, that not only diverse Ancients, but some
Moderns have had the Glory fastened on them, among these, I mention this
CAESALPINVS, and add, [ For these though either of them should be acknowledged
to be the Author, it will make as much for the Design of my Discourse, as if
Harvy have the Credit; and therefore here I am no otherwise concerned, but to
have justice for that excellent man, -- Plus Ult. p. 16.] But M. Stubb's malice
against Dr. Harvy, and spite against me would not permit him to discern that
he had no reason here to fall on this Controversy; and it is nothing to him
whether he have reason, or not; He follows the Impetus, and writes on, if it
happen to be to purpose, it is well, if not, he cannot help it.

AND now, Sir, I am quite weary of discovering the Falsehoods, and Follies, and
Impertinences of this insulting man. The Instances I have given are enough for
my present purpose; They will more abundantly appear in the further
Animadversions I intend, in those I shall take all things to task, in which I
may be thought to be concerned. But for that work I must have time; I have
other things enough to do, which it is more my Concern and more my Inclination to
mind; And that Business will require me to examine a multitude of Authors,
which I have reason to be confident M. Stubb has mis-reported and abused; I
have given you a taste already of some of his dealings with the Writers he
quotes, I shall present the World with a great deal more of the same kind in my
next engagement. But that will be a thing of Labor, and it is not so agreeable
to my humor neither, and therefore the execution of this my Design will be the
slower.

I Thought here to have added an Account of my other Antagonist M. Cross; But
that Adversary is to be pitied, all that he can do in the Controversy is but
to call Names and invent Stories, and make scurrilous Rhimes; These are the
Arms he has used against me, ever since our Controversy began; I speak not
this in a way of contemptuous Abuse, but with all that seriousness, with which
I can affirm any thing, which I do most heartily believe. This I say (and I am
sorry I can say no better of him) has been the course he has taken: I
represented the Contents of his Book in a private Letter to Dr. Ingelo, that
afterward, coming to a Friends hands in London was printed by him, and called
the Chue Gazett, (for M. Cross lives at a place called Chue.) It was printed,
but there were not an hundred Copies of it, and those all given into private
hands, that his shame might not be made public. In that Letter, I presented a
Collection of some of the Names he had called me, which were as foul and
scurrilous, as the most ill-bred Ruffian could have vented in a distempered
Huff; I recited about sixteen of his gross Falsehoods, which were the broadest
and silliest that ever were framed, for they were so pitifully contrived, that
every one that knows me, knew most of them to be false, and he himself could
not but know, that they were notoriously untrue; yea, some passages of things
he had said, which he publicly denied again in his Book, and with most solemn
Invocations of the name of God, have been attested to his face. So that I am as
much astonished at the prodigious Indiscretion of this mavelous man, as at his
matchless Legends. And in him I see an Instance how far Rage and Malice will
carry a proud and intemperate Spirit. He did not know nor care what he said, so
he could gratify his wild Passion against me. If ever you chance to light upon
that Paper, you will see that this Censure is sober and true. In the same
Letter I discovered the contemptible Impertinency of his Book, which does not
as much against mine, as M. Stubb did, when he confuted the Errata of the
Press. I give a Specimen also of the Learning he shows in Schoolscraps, and
little ends of Verse, and Childrens Phrases, which are all the Reading he
discovers. These things are in brief represented in the Gazett, and much more
largely in a Latin Account of his Performance, which I have ready by me.

After my Letter was abroad, to divert his Trouble and Disorder, he fell into a
fit of Rhiming, and writ scurrilous Ballads to abuse me further; upon this
occasion he was so given to versifying, that he could not write a Note but it
must be in Meeter. As for instance, sending to a Neighbor Minister to preach
for him, he presents his Request thus, Good M. Battin,
You speak good Latin,
And so you do English too:
Your Neighbor Cross
Is taking Horse,
And you must preach at Chue.
With such Poetry as this, my Praises, and those of the City of Bath, were
celebrated. And so taken he was himself with his vein, that I have heard, he
used to vaunt how much he was in a Poetic Dispensation above Hudibras.

But the likeliest course he ever took, was the engaging M. Stubb in his
Quarrel. He has a Pen that is always ready to be retained in pay. M. Cross (as
I was told by the Animadverter himself) sent him his Book, which he then
despised; and said even to me, that he was an old -- that had been asleep these
forty years, and knew not what the World had been doing; But it is like M. Stubb
did not know then, what Advantage might be made of M. Crosses Friendship, by
one that would undertake his rescue. The Reverend Disputer after this caressed,
and courted him highly; treated him at Bath, and entertained him diverse times
with dear welcome at his House, so that at last he was fastened. How like these
two are in their Genius's and Performances, I may have an occasion to show in a
parallel. What Assistance M. Cross can afford his Friend in the Cause against
the Royal Society, he shall not want: I am told, that he is doing that, which
is suitable to his Temper and Abilities, viz. collecting the Legends, that
Himself and his Confederates have made and driven about concerning one of
those, they call the Virtuosi, to furnish M. Stubb with them; worthy work for a
second Cobbler of Gloucester! But their Labor will be lost, and worse: That
Person despises their malicious Figments; and will make some body repent the
infamous Project.

And now while I am speaking of Legends, I remember one, by which I have been
much abused to the GENTRY of WILTS, as if I had spoken rudely and injuriously
concerning them. You, Sir, are of that County; and I owe a Justification of my
self to you, and those other ingenious and worthy Persons, who have heard the
Fable. The occasion of the the false Report, which it is like you have been
told, was this, I commended an Honorable Gentleman of your County, and
particularly for his Skill in Mathematics, adding, that I knew none other in
the parts where I was then, (being not in Wiltshire) so acquainted with those
Studies; or to that purpose; This happened to be mistaken and mis-reported, and
after coming to the ears of some, whose Tongues are their own, they formed it
into that abusive Falsehood that went about. I know you cannot believe me guilty
of any thing so rude, or if I were capable of such Folly or Incivility, I
should not have vented it against Persons, by some of which I have been so
highly obliged; And when there are not Three Gentlemen, that I know there, for
whom I have not a very great Honor and Esteem. And particularly for your self,
I have all that Respect and Value, which so many and so great Accomplishments
both intellectual and moral, as you eminently possess, can claim from one, that
is sensible, and obliged by innumerable Civilities to be

SIR, Your Affectionate Humble Servant, Jos. Glanvill.

Postscript.
MR. Stubbe being resolved to charge the Enemy home, (as he told us) has
published two other Books, since that against me; The First he calls LEGENDS NO
HISTORIES, against Dr. Spratt, and M. Henshaw; The other he names CAMPANELLA
REVIVED, designed to prove, That the Royal Society is managing projects to
introduce Popery: In these worthy works I cannot tell which I shall admire
most, his impudence, or his impertinence; The former will sufficiently appear
in the bare recital of some of his expressions, which I shall present for a
Taste; The other virtue will require Animadversions, which I suppose the
Gentleman concerned may bestow upon the Legends; and the other Pamphlet I may
perhaps take an occasion to examine. The shorter work I undertake now, as a
Supplement to my Account of M. Stubbe's modesty, and civilities.

And the First thing I take notice of, is, That this doughty man of Warwick
sends public Defiances beforehand, to those he intends to assault, and, as I
have read somewhere of the Great Turk, in the pride of his puissance gives
solemn warning where he intends to make War: It Is unbecoming his mightiness to
surprise an Enemy. He therefore informs M. Evelyn, and Dr. Merrett what he
intends against them [ Camp. rev.] which is somewhat less, it seems, then he
could do, should he give himself the trouble; For he says, he could make M.
Evelyn' s account of the Birch Tree appear as ridiculous, as the History of
Saltpeter; It Is like he understands that Tree, He experimented something more
than ordinary of it at Oxford; and perhaps if he had right done him, he would
have more experience of another Tree. But I must not stay, to remark here. He
gives out, That he will make the Lord Bishop of CHESTER smart, and writ to one
(as I am credibly told) that he was making inquiries into his Lordships
Learning, parts, and qualifications for a Bishop. How fit is he to be a
visitour of Bishops? But to confine my self to what is printed.

He gives notice in the Preface of his Legends of several Books more, that he
has coming, in pursuance of the Projects of his former; Particularly he
threatens one against my LETTER concerning ARISTOTLE; a Design suitable to the
Grandeur of M. Stubbe's mind. That short Discourse was first only a private
Letter, written when I was not 23 years of Age, and printed six, or seven years
ago. Let the mighty man, in the glory of his conquests, insult over an essay of
a green youth, and take six years time to write against two sheets of Paper,
which for ought he can tell the Author by this time disrellisheth himself. But
the truth is, I do not know, whether I have any reason to do so, or not, having
not read it over since. Whatever other faults there may be in the Composure,
I Am sure there is no Lying, as M. Stubbe charge it, according to the usual
way of his civility. I reported no matter of Fact concerning Aristotle or his
Philosophy, but from some good and approved Author; though perhaps I should
find trouble now in the particular citations, because I want the opportunity of
those Books that I then used, and I have lost the Notes that I took from them.
Whether it will be worth my Labor to answer what M. Stubbe shall write against
that young exercise of my Pen. I cannot certainly foresee, but I shrewdly
guess. Perhaps the sole consideration of my youth, when I writ it, will excuse
more faul^s than M. Stubbe's wit, and spite together can discover, or as much
as pretend to find there. If he confutes that Letter with the like Ignorance,
and impertinence as he has used in his Animadversions on Plus Ultra, Twill be
answer enough to print it again. The Lies he pretends it guilty of, will, I may
expect, be disproved by some that are so indeed, for his Authors must sp^ak
what he would have them say, and he tells a gross one in the few words in which
he mentions the design of confuting me, when he says, that I have never as
much as read over Diogenes Laertius, which were impossible he should know,
though it were true. I only take notice further, concerning this, that
according to that little cunning which I mentioned before, He would fain draw
in the Royal Society to be concerned in that Letter of mine, That so his
intended Triumph might be greater, and the Virtuosi prejudiced by his pretended
advantages against it. The Letter (forsooth!) is joined to the Edition of my
Sc^psis Scientifica, which bears the Arms, and is dedicated to the Royal
Society, [Pref. to Leg.] That Book was indeed Dedicated to the Society, but I
was not then a Member of it: And are Patrons of Books responsible for their
imperfections? If so, 'twere very bad news for the modest Dr. Willis to whom
the cleanly discourse of Chocolate is directed. The Prefixing the Societies
Arms to my Dedication was the Stationers conceit; and the mention of it, puts
me in mind of a ridiculous offense that was once taken against another Book of
mine: The Printer had set a flourish at the beginning over the Dedication,
'Twas a Cut of Henry 8. lying by a Tree, which some took for an emblem of
Protestantism coming out of his Codpiece; Just such Arguments M. Stubbe uses
to prove that the Royal Society have a design to reduce us to Popery: And I
remember, when the Theater at Oxford was newly built, he very sadly told me,
(and made a deal of tragical talk about it) That They had pictured God the
Father in the midst of the Cieling in the shape of an old man; when the figure
he meant was but a Mythological picture; what particularly, I have forgot. I
wonder this was not insisted on to prove that the Society designs Popery; no
doubt it had been as good a one, as any he has produced.

But I am a little stepped besides my design of presenting some Instances of his
rare modesty, and civility, in his last Books, I shall now do it briefly.

He calls the Royal Society Trojan Horse, [ Pref. to Camp.] and an illiterate
Company [ p. 21. ] The Members of it, Great Impostors [ Pref. 10 C.] Fopps [
Pref. to Leg.] and poor Devils, in his Letter to Sir N. N. viz. Sir Nicholas
Nemo. And p. 21. in his Postscript, speaking of the overthrow of the Royal
Society, He expresses himself thus -- which not only all Doctors, but all good
men o^ght to endeavor; That the disasters of the late Dutch War, the Plague,
and Fire of London were less inconveniences than their perpetuity; That these
calamities admitted some remedy hereafter; but the evils they are likely to
occasion us, would never be corrected by any humane Providence, and I doubted
not whether God would support us by his Prudence, when they had debauched the
Nation from all piety, and morality, as well as civil wisdom; This was, he
says, part of the purport of another Discourse of his about the errors and
cheats of the Virtuosi.

I now begin to repent that I have troubled my self so much with this
hotheaded Impertinent, for I perceive that no one is so fit to answer him, as
the Keeper of Bedlam. I begin to pity him, and to wish, that The College of
Physicians to requite him, for that grandeur, he says, he designs for them,
would prescribe somewhat for him; For certainly there is much ground to think,
that the fancy of his supposed great exploits, has blown him up to a great
distraction: Let us hear how he swaggers on, [ It is said that my
Animadversions on M. Glanvill contain little of matter, to which I answer, That
they contain enough to have made twenty Uirtuost famous, and would h^ve
acquired them a memorial of ingenious, and noble experimentators: They contain
enough to show the Ignorance of that person, who had so insulted over all
Vniversity-Learning, and particularly over the Physicians: They contain enough,
since they contain more then They All Knew, and think I have done great service
to the Learned, in showing that these Virtuosi are very great Impostors -- To
the Reader in Camp.] Again, in the Dedication of his Legends to the
Universities, thus, I have stooped the Talbots their Supporters for them, and
if ever They hunt well hereafter, this Age knows whom they are obliged to] In a
Letter to Dr. Merrett, which is after inserted, He rants thus, If you will
proceed with them, you must be trampled on with Them who are irrecoverably
lost; To the same (...) he speaks, in his Epistle to Sir Nicholas Nemo, p. 18.
The removal of these, viz. (The Royal Society) will not derogate from, but
illustrate [the Kings] renown, and confirm England in the Reverence of his
generosity, and their Detestableness].

By the way, what sense is this^ The Reverence of their Detestableness? M.
Stubbe says in the Preface to his Legends, That if there be any person worthy
of his indignation, that will justify the rhetoricalness of the History of the
Royal Society, he will write about that, and make the Comical wits renounce the
Ancient Orators, as they do now the Philosophers.] A rare Censor of Rhetoric,
and Oratory this, that does not himself write Grammatical sense! This I should
offer to him, if he were recovered, and fit to be discours't soberly with. That
I will show more gross non sense in his writings, than he can of pretended
mistake^ in all the Virtuosi that ever writ; I do not mean in the stupidity,
ignorance, and incoherence of his reasonings only, but in the frame of the very
words. But for a little more of his vapouring.

[ I have a thousand faults more to charge them with, but I reserve them for
another Treatise, which if they do not submit to the Coll^dge of Physicians,
and the two Universities, I will publish. In his Letter to his Friend Sir N.
N^mo. p. 16.] Submit O ye Virtuosi, for fear of that dreadful Treatise! If that
be once publishe^, you are more then irrecoverably lost; For he has told you,
you are so far gone already. How he would have you submit he expresses in
Camp. Rev. p. 15 viz. You must declare solemnly to the world that you
understand nothing of ancient, or modern Writers, that is the best way he
says, to secure your credit, from being thought Plegiaries, and Cheats, ibid.]
Nonsense again; but that is no News. He adds, if they would but get any one to
teach them Latin, and Greek^ it would have saved me some trouble, as you will
see in my Animadversions on their History. Neither is this period, true
English. If any one had taught M. Stubbe to write sense, he might have saved me
trouble, as any one may see in my Animadversions on his.

But for a passage or two more; [ As for M. Glanvill' s Book, it was perused by
several of their members, and corrected by them (a broad falsehood, as I have
shown in my Preface) and how much we are red^vable to a Society, that could
allow of that, and would not at my reiterated importunities, call it in, or
disclaim it, let all Physicians judge, Pref. to Camp.] And again, p. 15. They
might have appeased me, (Goodly!) would they have called (...) these two Books,
(viz. the HISTORY of the Royal Society and PLUS ULTRA) but since they would not
do that, I suspect their intentions, that they drive on Campanella^^ project;
why else should they scruple at it?] If They will not call in and renounce all
Books that offend M. Stubbe, It Is evident they drive on Campanella's projects^
There can be no other reason why they should scruple it.

Further, in the Preface thus, [ Nor would I have any man believe that there
are so many eminent Physicians of the Royal Society, for neither is the number
of those admitted considerable, (I find 30 Doctors of Physic in the last years
Catalogue, and many if not most of them of the College,) Few of note, but have
deserted it again; The rest approve not of it, so that all the talk will not
amount to three understanding persons.] I am assured, that it is false that any
of note, except one or two have deserted it, and M. Stubbe should tell us, How
those that remain have signified their disapproval. Among several other very
ingenious persons of the faculty of Physic, I remember these of Note in the
number of Fellows of the Royal Society, Sir Geo. Ent, Dr. Glisson, Dr. Goddard,
Dr. Willis, Dr. Whistler, Dr. Walter Needham, Dr. Iasp. Needham, Dr. Clerk, Dr.
Allen, Dr. Horshaw, Dr. Merrett, Dr. Croon, Dr. Power, Dr. Trustan: one or two
of these are understanding persons, M. Stubbe says, not three; would he tell
us now which are the one or two that have understanding among them; At this
rate M. Stubbe makes the College of Physicians as illiterate a Company, as the
Virtuosi; And let any one in that famed body of Learned men, be named in
opposition to any thing he shall think fit to say, and that person, be he who
he will, shall be cast among the Fools, and Illiterate. I have more reason for
this saying then I Will mention here. All the famous Doctors named excepting one
or two, are Prattle-boxes and Ignoramus's; who can escape the lash of such a
Tongue?

But I had almost forgot, that to show his candor and good nature he
acknowledges some of the Society. For he says in the Preface to his Legends,
That he must be insensible of all merit that can derogate from Sir Rob. Moray,
Dr. Wren, and Dr. Wallis, and it does not (he tells us) become any one that
knows M. Boil, to think that he would abet a design to subvert Piety, and the
Protestant Religion. It seems he allows Sir R. M. Dr. Wren and Dr. Wallis to be
understanding persons, and rather then leave out M. Boil, he shall be brought
in too, though but for a negative merit. These are the excepted persons that
have the hon^^r of some place in his favor: The rest are Virtuosi, and deserve
all that contempt with which we depretiate the Illiterate and Fools. But how
comes Dr. Wallis that was branded by him with so many charges of illiterateness
and ignorance, and all things else of contempt, as we have seen, how comes this
Gentleman now to be so highly in his Books? It seems the Doctor is exceedingly
improved in 10 or 11 years, and has got a great stock of merit, since M.
Stubbe writ against him; or rather men shall have merit when M. Stubbe
pleases, and when he pleases, they shall have none. It Is to be hoped that the
rest of the Virtuosi in ten years more, may get a little merit too, and obtain
from him at least a negative commendation.

And now what can any one think that reads these passages, but that M. Stubbe
is overheated in his head? This is the most charitable thought can be
entertained of him. I expect that hereafter he should make it his excuse, and
certainly 'twill be a better Apology then that of serving a Patron.

I lately received a Letter of his which he writ to Dr. Merrett, with a desire
that I would print it in this Postscript; It Is very pleasant stuff, and I here
present it to the Reader for a little further entertainment.

A Letter from M. Henry Stubbe to Dr. Merrett Doctor of Physic and Fellow of
the College of Physicians.
Dr. Merrett,
HAving not yet seen your book, wherein I am concerned, I cannot tell how far I
am to resent it: But I understand you are exasperated against M. Starky, about
a Postscript, bearing my name. Sir, There is nothing therein spoken positively,
but upon supposition -- If one may judge of your abilities, by what you have
writ against the Apothecaries then -- These words are not ^ctionable, at least
till the case be decided in Physic: And it is but fi^ting that you suspend your
process, till I appear against you in Print, which I will do next Term, and
appeal in the judgment of the Colled^e, or what Members thereof you will choose^
It is all one to me, For whosoever differ^ from my judgment, where I oppose
you, will but injure himself and betray his ignorance in Physic. But Sir, to
let you see how civil I am to my own faculty, if you will desert the ROYAL
SOCIETY, and endeavor to adjust the differences, rather then to widen them
betwixt Physicians, and Apothecaries, and join in the common interest, and
support of our profession, against the Quacks, and Virtuosi, I will be ready so
far to gratify the desires^ of some of your friends, and mine, as to add,
aft^r the debate betwixt you and me upon the case, That I do believe your
haste, and passion might occasion the miscarriage, and that your abilities are
not to be measured of by any single failure. I beseech you consider the
interest, and honor of our profession in your quarrels, and let us not, out of
passion against the Apothecaries, destroy our selves, and give advantage to the
multitude of Quacks, under the protection of the Royal Society, and the
pretense of making their own Medicaments. You see with what success, I have
managed the quarrel, in behalf of Physic, against the Uirtu^^t. Desert these
ignorant, and insolent persons, and let me not be blown up behind by the
divisions of the College, the Grandeur whereof is my Design. If you will
comply herein I will treat you civilly enough; If you will proceed with them,
you must be content to be trampled on with them, who are irrecoverably lost.
You s^^ what miserable Apologies the Wit of Dr. Spratt, and the revi^ing of the
Bishop of Chester has produced: What man of Common since would associate with
such Partisans? It Is your interest, and it is for your credit to abandon these
^atch doterels. I know my advan^ages over that book of yours, which I write
against, and your repute will extremely depend (considering the odium you are
under) upon my ^ibility to you. The world will laugh to see our pens revenge
themselves in Westminster Hall. Let us not divert any eye from scorning the
Royal Society: That is the interest of every English man, I Am sure. You may
tell them from me, that their dull Letter to me is answered; and that I will
bestow a Preface on Glanvill, and the rest, when that against you is published;
which is not yet gone to the Press, because I attend the news of your
dep^rtment, who I hear are upon disclaiming the Royal Society; the Declaration
thereof will be enough to make me

Your very humble Servant, H. Stubbe.
Warwick, Aug. 16. 1670.

Dr. Merrett sent me his Answer to this Letter, and I had made it public
(having his permission to do so) but that my Postscript swells to too great a
bigness; Nor indeed does it need any De^^ant to render it contemptible, and
ridiculous. Only this I think ^it to ins^rt out of the Doctors remarks; That
whereas the Quack of Warwick says, he hears He is de^e^^ing the Royal Society,
(to which he threatens, and invites him) The Doctor professes his great, and
just esteem of that Honorable Assembly in the words that follow [I shall save
my self the labor of apologizing for the ROYAL SOCIETY, whose repute with
foreign Princes, and learned men of all sorts, witnessed by their pens, and the
imitation of the like Societies by them The resort of Ambassadors to their
Meetings, and the many Books published by the Members thereof, evidence to the
world the ignorance and insolence of this pitiful Scribler. He goes on, owning
his relation to them with great respect, and though he confesses, that for a
year or so, he has by his occasions been often diverted from their meetings,
yet adds that he hopes to frequent them more for the future.

Thus we see, in another instance, how impudently M. Stubbe romanceth in his
Stories of persons withdrawing from the Royal Society. He names but two, of
those he pretends to be declining from it, viz. Dr. More, and Dr. Merrett, and
I have, I suppose, presented such effectual confutations of his bold falsehood,
from both these learned Gentlemen, as would make any man blush, but M. Stubbe.
--

I shall make no other remarks upon the recited Letter; Every Reader will make
enough for the credit of the writer.

He tells us in one of his last Books. That he has some virtues of the most
celebrated times; I hope he does not mean veracity, or modesty. If he would let
us know what the celebrated Times were, in which the Qualities I have noted
from his writings, were Virtues, 'twould be a discovery; and I Will assure him
none of the Virtuosi would take the honor from him, of finding out the new
virtues, or being the most eminent in them. But now I remember, he has already
given hint enough for the discovery; For in the Preface to his la^e Book of
Chocolate, He says of Presbytery, that it is malice, and disingenuity
heightened with all the circumstances im^ginable in men this (...) Hell. We know
he celebrated the Times in which the Creatures, and Supplanters of Presbytery
reigned, and there is no doubt but They abounded as much with those good
Qualities which he makes the essence of Presbytery, as any men, this side the
place he speaks of; And since Those were his celebrated Times, we may learn
easily what were the virtues; and in how high a degree M. Stubbe p^ss^sseth
them, he is blind that does not see.

For my part, However ignorant I am otherwise, He has suf^^ciently informed me
in this; and there is no doubt, but after what I have done in the foregoing
Account, I must expect further exercis^ of his celebrated virtues toward me.
I^ his r^ge and ^^ight were ^o kindled only ^y a Cut finger, How will he be
inflamed by the wounds my representation of his impudence, falsehoods and
impertitencies has given him?

Let him now raise his malicious pride to it^ most ridiculous height, and spit
his most spightful scorns, and contempts upon me, from it: Let him set his
cavilling invention on work for more falsehoods and sland^rs to vilify and
debase me, and call in his friend M. Cross to help him, out of his Storehouse
of L^g^nds, and Reproache^. Let him wrest my (...) and confute his own dreams,
and the E^^ata of the Press, to stuff up a Book of m^re folly and impertin^nce;
or, which it may be he may think the wiser course, Let him ne^ give me up to
the Common pens (as he threatens) to be laughed at, and leave them to prove what
he has courageously affirmed, as he did in the case of M. Baxter. These
returns I may expect from one, that has so many good Qualities of his
Celebrated Times. In this way he can write on for ever, for such proceedings
are most suitable to his parts and virtues: By them he will make himself the
admiration of Envious Fools, but the scorn of the wise and intelligent; which
latter he has sufficiently done already. And therefore I shall leave him to
the Appl^^d^ of hi^ Friends, and the Contempts of the Friends of virtue, and
wisdom; after I have justified my self in a thing, which is like to be objected
by this Antagonist.

I am told he will Answer all that I have produced out of his writings to show
the Hypocrisy of his pretenses for Monarchy, and the Church of England, by
recharging me with compliance with those Times; An Answer befitting such a
Writer; and let him make the most of that charge. My great fault was that I was
born in that unhappy season, and bred in those dismal days^ But can he accuse
me of any thing I ever said or did, that was Disloyal? Did I write a Defense of
the Cause of Regicides, and Vsurpers^ or Defame Kingly Government, or blaspheme
my persecuted Sovereign, or promote Anarchy, and public ruin? If M. Stubbe
cannot prove any of th^se (as I da^e him to offer at it) He cannot recriminate;
And his charges of this kind will b^ contemptible^ and like all the rest. He
had best write against me for coming into the world in an ill Time, and for
being born a Child^ I have not the least offense besides to answer for^ in
reference to the Government^ except what I apologized for before, the recital I
have made of his former Tr^asons and Impieties.

I have now done for the present with M. Stubbe; But must add this to some
silly sneaks, who think he has written things not to be answer'd^ That
Impudence and nonsense are the most troublesome things to answer in the world.
I have proved already^ and shall yet more fully show, that the Argumentative
part of his Book against me, is so far from being unanswerable, that it cannot
deserve any other Answer then a smile, and silence: For most of that he says,
is lamentably inconsistent and impertinent. He tells us He sends the things to
the Press that were suggested as he traveled; and one may judge by their
incoherence that he rid upon a trotting Horse; upon which I leave him pursuing
the Virtuosi, and add this Advertisement.

If any man has a design to write his Life, and further to describe this Sir
Hudibr^s and his Steed; He will do well to hold his hand a while, For M.
Stubbe's Friend M. Cross has writ a Book called Biographia, which gives Rules,
how Lives are to be writ; This will be printed, if the Licensers will permit
the good man to spoil so much paper, and so make himself publicly ridiculous;
And the H^storian had no^ best begin, till he has M. C. directions, for fear
he transgress the Rules, and incur the lash of the Methodical Pedant. This
Book, it seems, is intended to correct the Learned and pious Dr. ^ell, for his
way of writing the Life of Dr. Hammond, and it is M. C. revenge upon that
excellent person, for his denying License to the scurrilous and non-sensical
Book he writ against me. I have not heard many particulars of it, but only
this, He calls that Reverend Divine who has been long Doctor of Divinity,
presides over the chief College of Oxford, is Dean of that Diocese, and has
governed the University as Vice Chancellor, with singular wisdom, diligence,
and applause, I say, he calls that venerable man, Iubenis; and I believe that
name of diminution does not go alone; but the Reverend person from whom I had
this, lighted on that by chance as he cast his eye upon the Disputer's Papers,
which he carrie^h about for a show. 'Twould be well for an old man I know, if
he had this excuse of being young, for his weakness, and puerilities, for which
there can be no Apology made, except he confes^ himself arrived to his second
childhood. And so I take leave of him out of pity, and, for ought I know, for
ever.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT Concerning the ERRATA, and some passages liable to be mistaken.
THat M. Stubbe may not trouble himself to write more Animadversions on the
Errata of the Press, I give notice, That when I speak of his Reporting the
Design of the Roy^l Society to be laid by a Jesuit, p. 2. or 3. It should be,
by a Friar. The mistake was the persons that told i^ me, who said, a Jesuit,
thinking, it seems, That Campanella was of that order.

In Dr. More's Letter (...), is se^ instead of (...). I know not whether the
mistake be the Printers, or Transcribers; 'Twas not mine, I never writ out that
Letter.

There are several other small errors I took notice of in running over my
Printed Papers, as (...), Pigmy, which should have had no Comma between, and
the like; But I have not my Book now at hand to note them particularly, and
therefore must lie at M. Stubbe's mercy.

But these following things were noted, while my Papers were by me, to prevent
mistake.

[ P. 174.] When I say, It must be granted that two pair, viz. of Spectacles
ordinarily hind^r (...) sight, I would not be understood, (...) they do so,
when used by those of Great^^ Age. For two pair to them have but the power of
one.

[ P. 178.] When I say Telescopes represent ^^jects as they ar^, only in larger
proporti^ns; I mean as they are, for figure, and only represent them larger
then they appear to the (...) eye.

[ P. 179.] When I grant what M. Stubbe says, that in the longest Tubes the
Colors of Objects are more remiss; whatever he mean^, I would not be
understood, as if the length of the Tubes made the remissness o^ the Light, for
that is caused by the number of the Glasses, or ^he darkness of their metal.

Books Printed for and sold by James Collins, at the Kings-Arms i^
Ludgate Street near the West end of St. Paul's, and at the King's Head in
Westminster Hall.
A Discourse of the Religious Temper and T^ndencies of the modern, experimental
Philosophy, which is professed by the Royal Society. To which is annexed a
Recommendation and Defense of Reason in the affairs of Religion. By Ios.
Glanvill. In octavo. Observations upon Military and Political Affairs^ Written
by the most Honorable George Duke of Albemarle, etc. Published by Authority.
In folio. A Private Conference between a Rich Alderman and a Poor Country
Vicar, made Public. Whe^ein is discoursed the Obligation of Oaths which have
been imposed on the Subjects of England. With other Matters relating to ^he
present State of Affairs. In octavo. Praxis Medicinae: or the Universal Body of
Physic. Containing all Inward D^seases incident to the Body of Man. Explaining
the Nature of every Dis^ase, with Proper Remedies assigned to them. Very useful
for Physicians, Chi^urgeons, and Apothecaries, and more ^specially for such who
consult their own Health. Written by that famous and learned Physician Walter
Bruell. In quarto. The Christians Victory over Death. A Sermon at the Funeral
of the most Honorable George Duke of Albemarle, etc. in the Collegiate Church
of St. Peter's Westminster on the 30. of April, 1670. By Seth Lord Bishop of
Sarum. Preached and Published by his Majesty's special Command. In quarto. The
Episcopacy of the Church of England justified to be Apostolical, from the
Authority of the Ancient Primitive Church: And from the Confessions of the most
famous Divines of the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas. Being a full
Satisf^ction in this Cause, as well for the Necessity, as for the Just Right
thereof, as consonant to the Word of God. By the Right Reverend Father in God
Thomas Morton late Lord Bishop of D^resme. Before which is prefixed a Preface
to the Reader concerning this Subject, by Sir Henry Yelverton Baronet. In
octavo.

