Saducismus Triumphatus: OR, Full and Plain EVIDENCE Concerning WITCHES AND
APPARITIONS.

In TWO PARTS.

The First treating of their POSSIBILITY, The Second of their Real EXISTENCE.

By Joseph Glanvil late Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty, and Fellow of the
Royal Society.

With a Letter of Dr. HENRY MORE on the same Subject.

And an Authentic, but wonderful story of certain Swedish Witches; done into
English by Anth. Horneck Preacher at the Savoy.

LONDON: Printed for J. Collins at his Shop under the Temple-Church, and S.
Lownds at his Shop by the Savoy-gate, 1681.

And Saul perceived that it was Samuel, and he stouped with his face to the
ground. and bowed himself. 1st Samuel. Chap: 28: ^. 14. W. Faith orne. fecit


TO THE Right Reverend Father in God SETH Lord Bishop of SARUM, Chancellor of
the GARTER.
This New and Completed EDITION OF Saducismus Triumphatus Is most humbly
Dedicated to your Lordship, By,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Obliged and Humble Servant (The PUBLISHER) James
Collins.

THE PUBLISHER TO THE READER.
Reader,
THat thou have no sooner enjoyed this long-expected Edition, thou can not
justly blame either the Author or my self. Not my self, for I could not publish
the book before I had it; nor the Author, because many unexpected occasions
drove off his mind to other matters, and interrupted him in his present design,
insomuch that he was snatched away by Death before he had quite finished it. But
though the learned World may very well lament the loss of so able and ingenious
a Writer, yet as to this present point, if that may mitigate thy sorrow, in all
likelihood this Book had not seen the light so soon if he had lived, so many
emergent occasions giving him new interruptions, and offering him new
temptations to further delay.

Indeed it had been desirable that it might have had the polishing of his last
hand, as the peruser of his Papers signifies in his last Advertisement. But to
compensate this loss, the said Peruser, a friend as well to his Design as to
his Person, as digested those Materials he left, into that order and
distinctness, and has so tied things together, and supplied them in his
Advertisements, that, to the judicious Reader, nothing can seem wanting that
may serve the ends of his intended Treatise. Not to intimate what considerable
things are added, more than it is likely had been, if he had finished it
himself: For, besides the Advertisements of the careful Peruser of his Papers,
and that notable late Story of the Swedish Witches translated out of German
into the English Tongue, there is also added a short Treatise of the true and
genuine Notion of a Spirit, taken out of Dr. More's Enchiridion Metaphysicum,
to entertain those that are more curious searchers into the nature of these
things.

The Number also of the Stories are much increased above what was designed by
Mr. Glanvil, though none admitted, but such as seemed very well attested and
highly credible to his abovesaid Friend, and such, as rightly understood,
contain nothing but what is consonant to right Reason and sound Philosophy, as
I have heard him earnestly avouch, though it had been too tedious to have
explained all; and it may be more grateful to the Reader to be left to exercise
his own wit and ingeny upon the rest. These are the advantages this Edition of
Mr. Glanvil's Demon of Tedworth, and his Considerations about Witchcraft have,
above any Edition before, though the last of them was so bought up, that there
was not a Copy of them to be had in all London and Cambridge, but the Peruser
of his Papers was fain to break his own to serve the Press with; If these
intimations may move thy Appetite to the reading so pleasant and useful a
Treatise.

And yet I can add one thing more touching the story of the Demon of Tedworth
which is very considerable. It is not for me indeed to take notice of that
meanness of spirit in the Exploders of Apparitions and Witches, which very
strangely betrayed it self in the decrying of that well-attested Narrative
touching the Stirrs in Mr. Mompesson's house. Where, although they that came to
be Spectators of the marvelous things there done by some invisible Agents, had
all the liberty imaginable (even to the ripping of the Bolsters open) to search
and try if they could discover any natural cause or cunning Artifice whereby
such strange feats were done; and numbers that had free access from day to day,
were abundantly satisfied of the reality of the thing, that the house was
haunted and disturbed by Demons or Spirits; yet some few years after the
Stirrs had ceased, the truth of this story lying so uneasy in the minds of the
disgusters of such things, they raised a Report, (when none of them, no not the
most diligent and curious could detect any trick or fraud themselves in the
matter) that both Mr. Glanvil himself, who published the Narrative, and Mr.
Mompesson, in whose house these wonderful things happened, had confessed the
whole matter to be a Cheat and Imposture. And they were so diligent in
spreading abroad this gross untruth, that it went current in all the three
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland. An egregious discovery of what kind
of Spirit this sort of men are! which, as I said, though it be not for me to
take notice of, yet I will not stick to signify (it being both for mine own
Interest and the Interest of Truth) that those Reports raised touching Mr.
Glanvil and Mr. Mompesson, are by the present Edition of this Book demonstrated
to be false to all the world. That concerning Mr. Glanvil, by his Preface to
the second Part of the Book; That touching Mr. Mompesson, by two Letters of his
own, the one to Mr. Glanvil, the other to my self, which are subjoyned to the
said Preface: Which thing alone may justly be deemed to add a very great weight
to the value, as of that Story, so of this present Edition.

But I will not, upon pretense of exciting thy Appetite, keep thee from the
satisfying it by an overlong Preface: which yet if it may seem to be defective
in any thing, the Doctors Letter (where amongst other things you shall meet
with that famous and wellattested story of the Apparition of Anne Walker's
Ghost to the Miller) will, I hope make an abundant supply. I shall add nothing
more my self, but that I am

Your humble Servant J. C.

Dr. H. M. his LETTER WITH THE POSTSCRIPT, To Mr. J. G.
Minding him of the great Expedience and Usefulness of his new intended Edition
of the Demon of Tedworth, and briefly representing to him the mavelous
weakness and gullerie of Mr. Webster's Display of Witchcraft.

SIR,
WHen I was last at London, I called on your Bookseller, to know in what
forwardness this new intended Impression of the story of the Demon of Tedworth
was, which will undeceive the world touching that Fame generally spread abroad,
as if Mr. Mompesson and your self had acknowledged the business to have been a
mere Trick or Imposture. But the Story, with your ingenious Considerations
about Witchcraft, being so often printed already, he said, it behoved him to
take care how he ventured on a new Impression, unless he had some new matter of
that kind to add, which might make this new Edition the more certainly
salable; and therefore he expected the issue of that noised story of the
Spectre at Exeter, seen so often for the discovering of a Murder committed some
thirty years ago. But the event of this business, as to juridical process, not
answering expectation, he was discouraged from making use of it, many things
being reported to him from thence in favor to the party most concerned. But I
told him a story of one Mrs. Britton her appearing to her Maid after her death,
very well attested, though not of such a Tragical kind as that of Exeter, which
he thought considerable.

But of Discoveries of Murder I never met with any story more plain and
unexceptionable than that in Mr. John Webster his Display of supposed
Witchcraft. The Book indeed it self, I confess, is but a weak and impertinent
piece; but that story weighty and convincing, and such as himself (though
otherwise an affected Caviller against almost all stories of Witchcraft and
Apparitions) is constrained to assent to, as you shall see from his own
confession. I shall for your better ease, or because you happily may not have the
Book, transcribe it out of the Writer himself, though it be something long,
Chap. 16. Page 298.

About the year of our Lord 1632, (as near as I can remember, having lost my
Notes and the Copy of the Letter to Sergeant Hutton, but am sure that I do most
perfectly remember the substance of the story) near unto Chester in the Street,
there lived one Walker a Teoman-man of good estate, and a Widower, who had a
young Woman to his Kinswoman that kept his House, who was by the Neighbors
suspected to be with Child, and was toward the dark of the Evening one night
sent away with one Mark Sharp, who was a Collier, or one that dug Coals
under ground, and one that had been born in Blakeburn- Hundred in Lancashire;
and so she was not heard of a long time, and no noise or little was made about
it. In the Wintertime after, one James Graham or Grime (for so in that
Country they call them) being a Miller, and living about Two miles from the
place where Walker lived, was one night alone very late in the Mill grinding
Corn; and as, about twelve or one a Clock at night, he came down the Stairs
from having been putting Corn in the H^pper, the Mill-doors being shut, there
stood a Woman upon the midst of the Floor with her Hair about her Head hanging
down and all bloody, with five large Wounds on her Head. He being much
affrighted and amazed, began to bless him, and at last asked her who she was,
and what she wanted? To which she said, I am the Spirit of such a Woman, who
lived with Walker; and being got with Child by him, he promised to send me to a
private place, where I should be well looked to until I was brought in bed and
well again, and then I should come again and keep his House.

And accordingly, said the Apparition, I was one night late sent away with one
Mark Sharp, who, upon a Moor (naming a place that the Miller knew) slew me with
a Pick, (such as men dig Coals withal) and gave me these five Wounds, and after
threw my Body into a Coal-pit hard by, and hid the Pick under a Bank: and his
Shoes and Stockings being bloody, he endeavored to wash; but seeing the blood
would not wash sorth, he hid them there. And the Apparition further told the
Miller, that he must be the man to reveal it, or else that she must still
appear and haunt him. The Miller returned home very sad and heavy, but spoke
not one word of what he had seen, but eschewed as much as he could to slay in
the Mill within night without company, thinking thereby to escape the seeing
again of that frightful Apparition.

But notwithstanding, one night when it began to be dark, the Apparition met
him again, and seemed very fierce and cruel, and threatened him. That if he did
not reveal the Murder, she would continually pursue and haunt him. Tet for all
this, he still concealed it until St. Thomas- Eve before Christmas, when being
soon after Sun set walking in his Garden, she appeared again, and then so
threatened him and affrighted him, that he faithfully promised to reveal it next
morning.

In the morning he went to a Magistrate, and made the whole matter known, with
all the circumstances; and diligent search being made, the Body was found in a
Coal-pit with five Wounds in the Head, and the Pick, and Shoes, and Stockings
yet bloody, in every circumstance as the Apparition had related unto the
Miller. Whereupon Walker and Mark Sharp were both apprehended, but would
confess nothing. At the Assizes following (I think it was at Durham) they were
arraigned, found guilty, condemned, and executed, but I could never hear that
they confessed the Fact. There were some that reported that the Apparition did
appear to the Judge, or the Foreman of the Jury, (who was alive in Chester in
the Street about Ten years ago, as I have been credibly informed) but of that I
know no certainty.

There are many persons yet alive that can remember this strange Murder, and
the Discovery of it; for it was, and sometimes yet is, as much discoursed of in
the North-Countrey, as any thing that almost has ever been heard of, and the
Relation Printed, though now not to be gotten. I relate this with the greater
confidence. (though I may fail in some of the Circumstances) because I saw and
read the Letter that was sent to Sergeant Hutton, who then lived at Goldsbrugh
in Yorkshire, from the Judge before whom Walker and Mark Sharp were tried, and
by whom they were condemned; and had a Copy of it until about the year 1^58,
when I had it and (...) other Books and Papers taken from me. And this I
confess to be one of the most convincing Stories (being of undoubted verity)
that ever I read, heard, or knew of, and carries with it the most evident
force to make the most incredulous spirit to be satisfied that there are really
sometimes such things as Apparitions. Thus far He.

This Story is so considerable, that I make mention of it in my Scholia on my
Immortality of the Soul, in my Volumen Philosophicum, Tom. 2. which I
acquainting a Friend of mine with, a prudent intelligent person, Dr. J. D. he
of his own accord offered me, it being a thing of such consequence, to send to
a friend of his in the North for greater assurance of the truth of the
Narration; which motion I willingly embracing, he did accordingly. The Answer
to his Letter from his friend Mr. Shepherdson, is this.

I have done what I can to inform my self of the passage of Sharp and Walker.
There are very few men that I could meet, that were then men, or at the Trial,
saving these two in the enclosed Paper, both men at that time, and both at the
Trial. And for Mr. Lumley, he lived next door to Walker; and what he has given
under his hand, can depose if there were occasion. The other Gentleman writ his
Attestation with his own hand; but I being not there, got not his Name to it. I
could have sent you twenty hands that could have said thus much and more by
hearsay, but I thought these most proper that could speak from their own Eyes
and Ears. Thus far Mr. Shepherdson, the Doctor's discreet and faithful
Intelligencer. Now for Mr. Lumley's Testimony, it is this.

Mr. William Lumley of Lumley, being an ancient Gentleman, and at the Trial of
Walker and Sharp upon the Murder of Anne Walker, says, that he does very well
remember that the said Anne was Servant to Walker, and that she was supposed to
be with Child, but would not disclose by whom. But being removed to her Aunts
in the same Town, called Dame Carry, told her Aunt that he that had got her
with Child, would take care both for her and it, and bid her not trouble her
self. After some time she had been at her Aunts, it was observed that Sharp
came to Lumley one night, being a sworn Brother of the said Walker' s; and they
two that night called her forth from her Aunts House, which night she was
murdered.

About fourteen days after the murder, there appeared to one Graime a Fuller,
at his Mill, six miles from Lumley, the likeness of a Woman, with her Hair
about her head, and the appearance of five Wounds in her Head, as the said
Graime gave it in Evidence. That that appearance bid him go to a Justice of
Peace, and relate to him how that Walker and Sharp had murdered her, in such a
place as she was murdered: But he fearing to disclose a thing of that nature
against a person of credit as Walker was, would not have done it; but she
continually appearing night by night to him, and pulling the Clothes off his
Bed, told him, he should never rest till he had disclosed it. Upon which he the
said Graime did go to a Justice of Peace, and related the whole matter.
Whereupon the Justice of Peace granted Warrants against Walker and Sharp, and
committed them to prison. But they found Bail to appear at the next Assizes. At
which time they came to their Trial, and upon evidence of the Circumstances
with that of Graime of the Appearance, they were both found guilty, and
executed.

Will. Lumley.

The other Testimony is of Mr. James Smart of the City of Durham; who says,
That the Trial of Sharp and Walker was in the month of August 1631, before
Judge Davenport. One Mr. Fairhair gave it in Evidence upon Oath, that he see
the likeness of a Child stand upon Walker' s Shoulders during the time of the
Trial: At which time the Judge was very much troubled, and gave Sentence that
night the Trial was; which was a thing never used in Durham before nor after.

Out of which Two Testimonies several things may be corrected or supplied in
Mr. Websters Story, though it be evident enough that in the main they agree:
For that is but a small disagreement as to the Year, when Mr. Webster says
about the year of our Lord 1632. and Mr. Smart, 1631. But unless at Durham they
have Assizes but once in the year, I understand not so well how Sharp and
Walker should be apprehended some little while after St. Thomas day, as Mr.
Webster has it, and be tried the next Assizes at Durham, and yet that be in
August according to Mr. Smarts Testimony. Out of Mr. Lumley' s Testimony the
Christen Name of the young Woman is supplied, as also the Name of the Town near
Chester in the Street, namely Lumley. The Circumstances also of Walker' s
sending away his Kinswoman with Mark Sharp, are supplied out of Mr. Lumley' s
Narrative; and the time rectified, by telling it was about fourteen days till
the Spectre appeared after the Murder, whenas Mr. Webster makes it a long time.

Two Errors also more are corrected in Mr. Webster' s Narration, by Mr.
Lumley' s Testimony: The distance of the Miller from Lumley where Walker dwelt,
which was Six miles, not Two miles, as Mr. Webster has it. And also, that it
was not a Mill to grind Corn in, but a Fullers Mill. The Apparition night by
night pulling the Clothes off Graime' s Bed, omitted in Mr. Webster' s story,
may be supplied out of Mr. Lumley' s. And Mr. Smart' s Testimony puts it out of
controversy that the Trial was at Durham, and before Judge Davenport, which is
omitted by Mr. Webster. And whereas Mr. Webster says, there were some that
reported that the Apparition did appear to the Judge, or the Fore man of the
Jury, but of that he knows no certainty: This confession of his, as it is a
sign he would not write any thing in this story of which he was not certain for
the main, so here is a very seasonable supply for this out of Mr. Smart, who
affirms that he heard one Mr. Fairhair give Evidence upon Oath, that he saw the
likeness of a Child stand upon Walker' s Shoulders during the time of the
Trial. It is likely this Mr. Fairhair might be the Fore man of the Jury; and in
that the Judge was so very much troubled, that himself also might see the same
Apparition as Mr. Webster says report went, though the mistake in Mr. Webster
is, that it was the Apparition of the Woman. But this of the Child was very fit
and apposite, placed on his Shoulders, as one that was justly loaded or charged
with that Crime of getting his Kinswoman with Child, as well as of complotting
with Sharp to murder her.

The Letter also which he mentions writ from the Judge before whom the Trial
was heard, to Sergeant Hutton, it is plain out of Mr. Smart' s Testimony, that
it was from Judge Davenport; which in all likelihood was a very full and
punctual Narrative of the whole business, and enabled Mr. Webster, in some
considerable things, to be more particular than Mr. Lumley. But the agreement
is so exact for the main, that there is no doubt to be made of the truth of the
Apparition. But that this, forsooth, must not be the Soul of Anne Walker, but
her Astral Spirit, this is but a fantastic conceit of Webster and his
Paracelsians, which I have sufficiently shown the folly of in the Scholia on my
Immortality of the Soul, Volum. Philos. Tom. 2. p. 384.

This Story of Anne Walker I think you will do well to put amongst your
Additions in the new Impression of your Demon of Tedworth, it being so
excellently well attested, and so unexceptionably in every respect; and to
hasten as fast as you can that Impression, to undeceive the half-witted World,
who so much exult and triumph in the extinguishing the belief of that
Narration, as if the crying down the truth of that story of the Demon of
Tedworth, were indeed the very slaying of the Devil, and that they may now with
more gaiety and security than ever sing in a loud note that mad drunken Catch,
Hay ho! the Devil is dead, etc.
which wild Song, though it may seem a piece of levity to mention, yet believe
me, the application thereof bears a sober and weighty intimation along with it,
viz. that these sort of People are very horribly afraid there should be any
Spirit, lest there should be a Devil, and an account after this life; and
therefore they are impatient of any thing that implies it, that they may with a
more full swing, and with all security from an after-reckoning, indulge their
own Lusts and Humors in this. And I know by long experience, that nothing
rouzes them so out of that dull Lethargy of Atheism and Sadducism, as
Narrations of this kind. For they being of a thick and gross spirit, the most
subtle and solid deductions of reason does little execution upon them; but
this sort of sensible Experiments cuts them and stings them very sore, and so
startles them, that by a less considerable story by far than this of the
Drummer of Tedworth, or of Anne Walker, a Doctor of Physic cried out
presently, If this be true, I have been in a wrong Box all this time, and must
begin my account anew.

And I remember an old Gentleman in the Country of my acquaintance, an
excellent Justice of Peace, and a piece of a Mathematician; but what kind of
Philosopher he was, you may understand from a Rhyme of his own making, which he
commended to me at my taking horse in his yard; which Rhyme is this, Ens is
nothing till Sense find it out:
Sense ends in nothing, so naught goes about.
Which Rhyme of his was so rapturous to himself, that at the reciting of the
second Verse, the old Gentleman turned himself about upon his Toe a, nimbly as
one may observe a dry Leaf whisked round in the corner of an Orchard-walk by
some little Whirlwind. With this Philosopher I have had many Discourses
concerning the Immortality of the Soul, and its distinction from the Body, and
of the existence of Spirits. When I have ran him quite down by Reason, he would
but laugh at me, and say, This is Logic, H. calling me by my Christen-Name. To
which I replied, This is Reason, Father L. (for so I used, and some others, to
call him) but it seems you are for the New Lights, and immediate Inspiration.
Which, I confess, he was as little for as for the other; but I said so only in
way of drollery to him in those times. But truth is, nothing but palpable
experience would move him: And being a bold man, and fearing nothing, he told
me he had used all the Magical Ceremonies of Conjuration he could to raise the
Devil or a Spirit, and had a most earnest desire to meet with one, but never
could do it. But this he told me, when he did not so much as think of it, while
his Servant wa^ pulling off his Boots in the Hall, some invisible Hand gave him
such a clap upon the Back, that it made all ring again. So, thought he, now I
am invited to the converse of some Spirit; and there fore so soon as his Boots
were off and his Shoes onout goes he into the Tard and next Field, to find out
the Spirit that had given him this familiar clap on the back, but found none,
neither in the Yard nor Field next to it.

But though he did not, this stroke, albeit he thought it afterward (finding
nothing come of it) a mere delusion; yet not long before his death it had more
force with him than all the Philosophical Arguments I could use to him, though
I could wind him and nonplus him as I pleased; but yet all my Arguments, how
solid soever, made no impression upon him. Wherefore after several reasonings
of this nature, whereby I would prove to him the Souls distinction from the
Body and its immortality, when nothing of such subtle consideration did any
more execution on his mind, than some Lightning is said to do, though it melt
the Sword, on the fuzzy consistency of the Scabbard: Well, said I, Father L.
though none of these things move you, I have something still behind, and what
your self has acknowledged to me to be true, that may do the business. Do you
remember the clap on your back when your Servant was pulling off your Boots in
the Hall? Assure your self, said I, Father L. that Goblin will be the first
that will bid you welcome into the other World. Upon that his Countenance
changed most sensibly, and he was more confounded with this rubbing up his
memory, than with all the Rational or Philosophical Argumentations that I could
produce.

Indeed, if there were any modesty left in mankind, the Histories of the Bible
might abundantly assure men of the existence of Angels and Spirits. But these
Wits, as they are taken to be, are so jealous, forsooth, and so sagacious, that
whatsoever is offered to them by way of established Religion, is suspected for
a piece of politic Circumvention; which is as silly notwithstanding, and as
childish, as that conceit of a Friend of yours when he was a School boy in the
lowest Form of a Country Gramar school, who could not believe scarce that there
were any such men as Cato, and AEsop, and Ovid, and Virgil, and Tully, much
less that they wrote any such Books, but that it was a trick of our Parents to
keep us up so many hours of the day together, and hinder us from the enjoying
our innocent pastime in the open Air, and the pleasure of planting little
Gardens of Flowers, and of hunting of Butter-flies and Bumble-bees.

Besides, though what is once true never becomes false, so that it may be
truly said it was not once true; yet these shrewd Wits suspect the truth of
things for their antiquity, and for that very reason think them the less
credible: Which is as wisely done as of the Old Woman the Story goes of, Who
being at Church in the week before Easter, and hearing the tragical Description
of all the circumstances of our Savior's Crucifixion, was in great sorrow at
the reciting thereof; and so sollicitous about the business, that she came to
the Priest after Service with tears in her Eyes, dropping him a Courtsie, and
asked him how long ago this sad accident happened; to whom he answering about
Fifteen or Sixteen hundred years ago, she presently began to be comforted, and
said, Then in grace of God it may not be true. At this pitch of wit in Children
and Old Wives is the Reason of our professed Wit-would-be's of this present
Age, who will catch at any slight occasion o^ pretense of misbelieving those
things that they cannot endure should be true.

And for as much assuch course-grain'd Philosophers as those Hobbians and
Spinozians, and the rest of that Rabble, slight Religion and the Scriptures,
because there is such express mention of Spirits and Angels in them, things
that their dull Souls are so inclinable to conceit to be impossible; I look
upon it as a special piece of Providence that there are ever and anon such
fresh examples of Apparitions and Witchcrafts as may rub up and awaken their
benumbed and lethargick Minds into a suspicion at least, if not assurance that
there are other intelligent Beings besides those that are clad in heavy Earth
or Clay. In this, I say, methinks the Divine Providence does plainly outwit the
Powers of the dark Kingdom, in permiting wicked men and women and vagrant
Spirits of that Kingdom to make Leagues or Covenants one with another, the
Confession of Witches against their own Lives being so palpable an evidence,
(besides the miraculous feats they play) that there are bad Spirits, which will
necessarily open a Door to the belief that there are good ones, and lastly that
there is a God.

Wherefore let the small Philosophic Sir Fopling of this present Age deride
them as much as they will, those that lay out their pains in committing to
writing certain well-attested Stories of Witches and Apparitions, do real
service to true Religion and sound Philosophy, and the most effectual and
accommodate to the confounding of Infidelity and Atheism, even in the Judgment
of the Atheists themselves, who are as much afraid of the truth of these
stories as an Ape is of a Whip; and therefore force themselves with might and
main to disbelieve them by reason of the dreadful consequence of them as to
themselves. The wicked fear where no fear is, but God is in the generation of
the Righteous. And he that fears God and has Faith in Jesus Christ, need not
fear how many Devils there be, nor be afraid of himself or his own Immortality.
And therefore it is nothing but a foul dark Conscience within, or a very gross
and dull constitution of Blood, that makes men so averse from these Truths.

But however, be they as averse as they will, being this is the most
accommodate Medicine for this Disease, their diligence and care of Mankind is
much to be commended that make it their business to apply it, and are resolved,
though the peevishness and perverseness of the Patients makes them pull off
their Plaster, (as they have this excellent one of the Story of the Demon of
Tedworth by decrying it as an Imposture, so acknowledged by both your self and
Mr. Mompesson) are resolved, I say, with meekness and charity to bind it on
again, with the addition of new Filletting, I mean other Stories sufficiently
fresh and very well attested and certain. This worthy design therefore of
yours, I must confess, I cannot but highly commend and approve, and therefore
wish you all good success therein; and so, committing you to God, I take leave,
and rest

Your affectionate Friend to serve you, H. M.
THE Postscript.
THis Letter lying by me some time before I thought it opportune to conveigh
it, and in the mean while meeting more than once with those that seemed to have
some opinion of Mr. Webster's Criticisms and Interpretations of Scripture, as
if he had quitted himself so well there, that no proof thence can hereafter be
expected of the Being of a Witch, which is the scope that he earnestly aims at;
and I reflecting upon that passage in my Letter, which does not stick to
condemn Webster's whole Book for a weak and impertinent piece, presently
thought fit, (that you might not think that Censure over-rash or unjust) it
being an endless task to show all the weaknesses and impertinencies of his
Discourse, briefly by way of Postscript, to hint the weakness and impertinency
of this part which is counted the Masterpiece of the Work, that thereby you
may perceive that my judgment has not been at all rash touching the whole.

And in order to this, we are first to take notice what is the real scope of
his Book: which if you peruse, you shall certainly find to be this: That the
parties ordinarily deemed Witches and Wizzards, are only Knaves and Queans, to
use his Phrase, and arrant Cheats, or deep Melancholists; but have no more to
do with any evil Spirit, or Devil, or the Devil with them, than he has with
other Sinners or wicked Men, or they with the Devil. And Secondly, we are
impartially to desine what is the true Notion of a Witch or Wizzard, which is
necessary for the detecting of Webster's Impertinencies.

As for the words Witch and Wizzard, from the Notation of them, they signify
no more than a wise Man, or a wise Woman. In the word Wizzard, it is plain at
the very first sight. And I think the most plain and least op^rose deduction of
the name Witch, is from Wit, whose derived Adjective might be Wittigh or
Wittich, and by contraction afterward, Witch; as the Noun wit is from the Verb
to weet, which is, to know. So that a Witch, thus far, is no more than a
Knowing woman; which answers exactly to the Latin word Saga, according to that
of Festus, Sag^ dictae anus quae multa sciunt. Thus in general: But use
questionless had appropriated the word to such a kind of skill and knowledge,
as was out of the common road or extraordinary. Nor did this peculiarity imply
in it any unlawfulness. But there was after a further restriction and most
proper of all, and in which alone now adays the words Witch and Wizzard are
used. And that is, for one that has the knowledge or skill of doing or telling
things in an extraordinary way, and that in virtue of either an express or
implicit sociation or consederacy with some evil Spirit. This is a true and
adequate definition of a Witch or Wizzard, which to whomsoever it belongs, is
such, and vice versa. But to prove or defend, that there neither are, nor ever
were any such, is, as I said, the main scope of Webster's Book: In order to
which, he endeavors in his sixth and eighth Chapters to evacuate all the
Testimonies of Scripture: which how weakly and impertinently he has done, I
shall now show with all possible brevity and perspicuity.

The words that he descants upon, are Deuteronomy. chapter 18. v. 10, 11. There shall not
be found among you any one that uses divination, or an observer of times, or
an Enchanter, or a Witch, or a Charmer, or a Consulter with familiar Spirits,
or a Wizzard, or a Necromancer. The first word or name in the Hebrew is (...)
[Kosem Kesamim] a diviner. Here because (...) [Kasam] sometimes has an
indifferent sen^e, and signifies to divine by natural Knowledge or humane
Prudence and Sagacity; therefore nothing of such a Witch as is imagined to mak^
a visible League with the Devil, or to have her Body sucked by him, or have
carnal copulation with him, or is really turned into a Cat, Hare, Wolf, or Dog,
can be deduced from this word. A goodly inference indeed, and hugely to the
purpose, as is apparent from the foregoing definition. But though that cannot
be deduced, yet in that this Divination that is here forbidden, is plainly
declared abominable and execrable, as it is v. 12. it is manifest that such a
Divination is understood that really is so; which cannot well be conceived to
be, unless it imply either an express or implicit inveaglement with some evil
invisible Powers who assist any kind of those Divinations that may be
comprehended under this general term. So that this is plainly one name of
Witchcraft according to the genuine desinition thereof. And the very words of
Saul to the Witch of Endor, are, (...) that is to say, Divine to me, I pray
thee, by thy familiar Spirit. Which is more than by natural knowledge or humane
sagacity.

The next word is (...) [Megnonen] which though our English Translation renders
(from (...) [Gnon] Tempus) an observer of Times; (which should rather be a
Declarer of the seasonableness of the time, or unseasonableness as to success;
a thing which is enquired of also from Witches) yet the usual sense rendered by
the Learned in the Language, is Praestigiator, an Imposer on the sight,
Sapientes prisci, says Buxiorf, a (...) [Gnajin, Oculus] deduxerunt and (...)
[Megnonen] esse eum dixerunt, qui tenet and praestringit oculos, ut falsum pro
vero videant. Lo another word that signifies a Witch or a Wizzard, which has
its name properly from imposing on the sight, and making the bystander believe
he sees Forms or Transformations of things he sees not. As when Anne Bodenham
transformed herself before Anne Styles into the shape of a great Cat; Anne
Styles her sight was so imposed upon, that the thing to her seemed to be done,
though her eyes were only deluded. But such a delusion certainly cannot be
performed without confederacy with evil Spirits. For to think the word
signifies Praestigiator in that sense we translate it in English, Juggler, or
an Hocus-Pocus, is so fond a conceit, that no man of any depth of wit can
endure it. As if a merry Juggler that plays tricks of Legerdemain at a Fair or
Market, were such an abomination to either the God of Israel, or to his
Lawgiver Moses; or as if an Hocus-Pocus were so wise a wight as to be
consulted as an Oracle: For it is said v. 14. For the Nations which thou shall
possess, they consult (...) [Megnonenim]. What, do they consult Jugglers and
Hocus-Pocusses? No certainly they consult Witches or Wizzards, and Diviners, as
Anne Styles did Anne Bodenham. Wherefore here is evidently a second name of a
Witch.

The Third word in the Text, is (...) [Menachesh] which our English Translation
renders, an Enchanter. And with Mr. Webster's leave, (who insulteth so over
their supposed ignorance) I think they have translated it very learnedly and
judiciously: For Charming and Enchanting, as Webster himself acknowledges, and
the words intimate, being all one, the word (...) [Menachesh] here, may very
well signify Enchanters or Charmers; but such properly as kill Serpents by
their charming, from (...) [Nachash] which signifies a Serpent, from whence
comes (...) [Nichesh] to kill Serpents or make away with them. For a Verb in
Pihel, sometimes (especially when it is formed from a Noun) has a contrary
signification. Thus from (...) radix is (...) radices cvulsit, from (...) Cinis
(...) removit Cineres, from (...) peccavit (...) expiavit a peccato; and so
lastly from (...) Serpens, is made (...) liberavit a serpentibus, nempe
occidendo vel fugando per incantationem. And therefore there seems to have been
a great deal of skill and depth of judgment in our English Translators that
rendered (...) [Menachesh] an Enchanter, especially when that of Augur or
South-sayer, which the Septuagint call (...) (there being so many harmless
kinds of it) might seem less suitable with this black List: For there is no
such abomination in adventuring to tell, when the wild Geese sly high in great
companies and cackle much, that hard weather is at hand. But to rid Serpents by
a Charm, is above the power of Nature; and therefore an indication of one that
has the assistance of some invisible Spirits to help him in this exploit, as it
happens in several others; and therefore this is another name of one that is
really a Witch.

The Fourth word is, (...) [Mecasseph] which our English Translators render, a
Witch; for which I have no quarrel with them, unless they should so understand
it that it must exclude others from being so in that sense I have defined,
which is impossible they should. But this, as the foregoing, is but another
term of the same thing; that is, of a Witch in general, but so called here from
the prestigious imposing on the sight of Beholders. Buxtorf tells us, that Aben
Ezra defines those to be (...) [Mecassephim] qui mutant and transformant res
naturales ad aspectum oculi. Not as Jugglers and Hocus-Pocusses, as Webster
would ridiculously insinuate, but so as I understood the thing in the second
name: For these are but several names of a Witch, who may have several more
properties than one name intimates. Whence it is no wonder that Translators
render not them always alike. But so many names are reckoned up here in this
clause of the Law of Moses, that, as in our common Law, the sense may be more
sure, and leave no room to evasion. And that here this name is not from any
tricks of Legerdemain as in common Jugglers that delude the sight of the people
at a Market or Fair, but that it is the name of such as raise Magical Specter
to deceive men's sight, and so are most certainly Witches, is plain from Exodus
22. 18. Thou shall not suffer (...) [Mecassephah] that is, a Witch to live.
Which would be a Law of extreme severity, or rather cruelty, against a poor
Hocus-pocus for his tricks of Legerdemain.

The Fifth name is (...) [Chobher Chebher] which our English Translators render
Charmer, which is the same with Enchanter. Webster upon this name is very
tedious and slat, a many words, and small weight in them. I shall dispatch the
meaning briefly thus: This (...) [Chobher Chebher] that is to say, Socians
Societatem is another name of a Witch, so called specially either from the
consociating together Serpents by a Charm, which has made men usually turn it
(from the example of the Septuagints (...)) a Charmer, or an Enchanter: or else
from the society or compact of the Witch with some evil Spirits; which Webster
acknowledges to have been the opinion of two very learned men, Martin Luther,
and Perkins; and I will add a third, Aben-Ezra, (as Martinius has noted) who
gives this reason of the word (...) [Chobher] an Enchanter, which signifies
Socians or Jungens, viz. Quod malignos Spiritus sibi associat. And certainly
one may charm long enough, even till his Heart ache, e're he make one Serpent
assemble near him, unless helped by this confederacy of Spirits that drive them
to the Charmer. He keeps a pudder with the sixth verse of the fifty eighth
Psalm to no purpose: Whenas from the Hebrew, (...), if you repeat (...) before
(...) you may with ease and exactness render it thus; That hears not the voice
of muttering Charmers, no not the voice of a confederate Wizzard or Charmer
that is skilful. But seeing Charms, unless with them that are very shallow and
sillily credulous, can have no such effects of themselves, there is all the
reason in the world (according as the very word intimates, and as Aben-Ezra has
declared) to ascribe the effect to the assistance, confederacy, and
cooperation of evil Spirits, and so (...) [Chobher Chabharim] or (...)
[Chobher Chebher] will plainly signify a Witch or a Wizzard according to the
true definition of them. But for J. Webster's rendering this verse p. 119. thus,
Quae non audiet vocem mussitantium incantationes docti Incantantis, (which he
says is doubtless the most genuine rendering of the place) let any skilful man
apply it to the Hebrew Text, and he will presently find it Grammatical
Nonsense. If that had been the sense, it should have been (...).

The Sixth word is, (...) [Shoel Obh] which our English Translation renders, a
Consulter with familiar Spirits; but the Septuagint (...). Which therefore must
needs signify him that has this familiar Spirit: And therefore (...) [Shoel
Obh] I conceive, (considering the rest of the words are so to be understood) is
to be understood of the Witch or Wizzard himself that asks counsel of his
Familiar, and does by virtue of him give Answers unto others. The reason of the
name of (...) [Obh] it is likely was taken first from that Spirit that was in
the Body of the party, and swelled it to a protuberancy like the side of a
Bottle. But after, without any relation to that circumstance, OBH signisies as
much as Pytho; as Pytho also, though at first it took its name from the Pythii
Vates, signifies no more than Spiritum Divinationis, in general, a Spirit that
tells hidden things or things to come. And OBH and Pytho also agree in this,
that they both signisie either the divinatory Spirit itself, or the party that
has that Spirit. But here in (...) [Shool Obh] it being rendered by the
Septuagint (...), OBH is necessarily understood of the Spirit itself, as Pytho
is Acts 16. 16. if you read (...) with Isaac Casaubon; but if (...), it may be
understood either way. Of this (...) it is recorded in that place, That Paul
being grieved, turned and said to that Spirit, I command thee, in the name of
Jesus Christ, to come out of her, and he came out at the same hour; which
signifies as plainly as any thing can be signified, that this Pytho or Spirit
of Divination, that this OBH was in her: For nothing can come out of the Sack
that was not in the Sack, as the Spanish Proverb has it; nor could this Pytho
come out of her, unless it was a Spirit distinct from her: wherefore I am
amazed at the profane impudence of J. Webster, that makes this Pytho in the
Maid there mentioned, nothing but a wicked humor of cheating and couzening
Divination: and adds, that this Spirit was no more cast out of that Maid, than
the seven Devils out of Mary Magdalen, which he would have understood only of
her several Vices; which foolish Familistical conceit he puts upon Beza, as
well as Adie. Wherein as he is most unjust to Beza, so he is most grossly
impious and blasphemous against the Spirit of Christ in St. Paul and St. Luke,
who makes them both such Fools as to believe that there was a Spirit or
divining Devil in the Maid, when according to him there is no such thing. Can
any thing be more srantick or ridiculous than this passage of St. Paul, if
there was no Spirit or Devil in the Damsel? But what will this prosane shussler
stick to do in a dear regard to his beloved Hags, of whom he is a sworn
Advocate and resolved Patron ^ght or wrong?

But to procced, that (...) [Obh] signifies the Spirit itself that divines, not
only he that has it, is manifest from Levit. 20. v. 27. Vir autem sive mulier
cum fuerit [(...)] in eis Pytho. And 1 Samuel chapter 28. v. 8. Divina quaeso mihi
[(...)] per Pythonem. In the Septuagint it is (...), that is, by that Spirit
that sometimes goes into the body of the party, and thence gives answers; but
here it only signifies a Familiar spirit. And lastly, (...) [Bagnalath Obh] 1 Samuel 28. v. 7. Quae habet Pythonem; there OBH must needs signify the Spirit it
self, of which she of Endor was the owner or possessor; that is to say, it was
her Familiar spirit. But see what brazen and slupid impudence will do, here
(...) [Bagnalath Obh] with Webster must not signify one that has a Familiar
spirlt, but the Mistress of the Bottle. Who but the Master of the Bottle, or
rather of whom the Bottle had become Master, and by guzling had made his wits
excessively muddy and frothy, could ever stumble upon such a foolish
Interpretation? But because (...) [Obh] in one place of the Scripture signifies
a Bottle, it must signify so here, and it must be the Instrument, forsooth,
out of which this cheating Queen of Endor does whisper, peep, or chirp like a
Chicken coming out of the Shell, p. 129, 165. And does she not, I beseech you,
put her Neb also into it sometimes, as into a Reed, as it is said of that Bird,
and cry like a Butterbump? certainly he might as well have interpreted (...)
[Bagnalath Obh] of the great Tun of Heydleberg, that Tom. Coriat takes such
special notice of, asof the Bottle.

And truly so far as I see, it must be some such huge Tun at length, rather
than the Bottle, that is, such a spacious Tub as he in his deviceful
imagination fancies Manasses to have built; a (...) forsooth, or Oracular
AEdifice, for cheating Rogues and Queans to play their couzening tricks in;
from that place 2 Chronicles. 33. 6. (...) Et fecit Pythonem. Now, says he, how
could Manasses make a Familiar Spirit, or make one that had a Familiar Spirit?
Therefore he made a Bottle, a Tun or a large Tub, a (...), or Oracular AEdifice
for cheating Rogues and Queans to play their couzening tricks in. Very wisely
argued and out of the very depth of his ignorance of the Hebrew Tongue! whenas
if he had looked but into Buxtorf's Dictionary, he might have understood that
(...) signifies not only fecit, but also paravit, comparavit, acquisivit,
magnifecit, none of which words imply the making of OBH in his sense, but only
the appointing them to be got, and countenancing them. For in Webster's sense
he did not make (...) [Jidegnoni] neither, that is Wizzards, and yet Manasses
is said to make them both alike. (...) Et fecit Pythonem and Magos. So plain is
it that (...) [Obh] signifies Pytho, and that adequately in the same sense that
Pytho does, either a Familiar Spirit, or him that has that spirit of
divination. But in (...) [Bagnalath Obh] it necessarily signifies the Familiar
spirit itself, which assisted the Witch of Endor; whereby it is manifest she is
rightly called a Witch. As for his Stories of counterfeit Ventriloquists, (and
who knows but some of his counterfeit Ventriloquists may prove true ones) that
is but the threadbare Sophistry of Sadducees and Atheists to elude the faith of
all true stories by those that are of counterfeits or seigned.

The Seventh word is (...) [Jidegnoni] which our English Translators render a
Wizzard. And Webster is so kind as to allow them to have translated this word
aright. Wizzards then Webster will allow, that is to say, He-witches, but not
She-witches. How tender the man is of that Sex! But the word invites him to it,
(...) [Jidegnoni] coming from (...) scire, and answering exactly to Wizzard or
Wiseman. And does not Witch, from wit and weet, signify as well a wise woman,
as I noted above? And as to the sense of those words from whence they are
d^rived, there is no hurt therein; and theresore if that were all, (...)
[Jidegnoni] had not been in this black List. Wherefore it is here understood in
that more restrict and worst sense: so as we understand usually now adays Witch
and Wizzard, such wise men and women whose skill is from the confed^racy of
evil Spirits, and therefore are real Wizzards and Witches. In what a bad sense
(...) [Jidegnoni] is understood, we may learn from Levit. 20. 27. A man also or
woman that has a familiar Spirit, or that is a Wizzard [Jidegnoni] shall be
put to death, they shall stone them with stones, etc.

The last word is (...) [Doresh Hammethim,] which our Translators rightly
render Necromancers; that is, those that either upon their own account, or
desired by others, do raise the Ghosts of the deceased to consult with; which
is a more particular term than (...) [Bagnal Obh:] But he that is Bagnal Obh,
may be also Doresh Hammethim a Necromancer, as appears in the Witch of Endor.
Here Webster by (...) [Hammethim] the Dead, would understand dead Statues; but
let him, if he can, any where show in all the whole Scripture where the word
(...) [Hammethim] is used of what was not once alive. He thinks he hits the
nail on the head in that place of Isaias, chapter 8. v. 19. And when they shall say
unto you, Seek unto ((...), that is, to (...), such as the Witch of Endor was)
them that have familiar Spirits, and to Wizzards that peep and that mutter;
(the Hebrew has it (...) and (...); that is, that speak with a querulous
murmurant or mussitant voice, when they either conjure up the Spirit, or give
responses. If this be to peep like a Chicken, Isaiah himself peept like a
Chicken, chapter 38. 14.) should not a people seek unto their God? for the living,
[(...)] to the dead? where Hammethim is so far from signifying dead Statues,
that it must needs be understood of the Ghosts of dead men, as here in
Deuteronomy. None but one that had either stupidly, or wilfully forgot the
story of Samuel's being raised by that (...) [Bagnalath Obh] the Witch of
Endor, could ever have the face to affirm that (...) [Hammethim] here in Isaiah
is to be understood of dead Statues, when Wizzards or Necromancers were so
immediately mentioned before, especially not Webster, who acknowledges that
(...) [Shoel Obh] signisies a Necromancer in this Deuteronomical List of
abominable names. And therefore, forsooth, would have it a Tautologie that
Doresh Hammethim should signisie so too. But I say it is no Tautologie, this
last term being more express and restrict. And besides, this enumeration is not
intended as an accurate Logical division of Witches or Witchcraft into so many
distinct kinds, but a reciting of several names of that ill Trade, though they
will intersere one with another, and have no significations so precisely
distinct. But, as I said before, this fuller recounting of them is made, that
the prohibition in this form might be the surer sense against the sin. And now
therefore what will J. Webster get by this, if Doresh Hammethim will not
signific a Witch of Endor, when it must necessarily signify a Necromancer,
which is as much against his Tooth as the other? Nay indeed this Necromancer is
also a Witch or Wizzard, according to the definition produced above.

The rest of the Chapter being so inconsiderable, and I having been so long
already upon it, I shall pass to the next, after I have desired you to take
notice how weak and childish, or wild and impudent, Mr. Webster has been in the
Interpretation of Scripture hitherto, in the behalf of his sage Dames, to fence
off their reproach of being termed Witches; whenas there is scarce one word in
this place of Deuteronomy that does not imply a Witch or Wizzard according to
the real definition thereof. And truly he seems himself to be conscious of the
weakness of his own performance, when after all this ado, the sum at last
amounts but to this; That there are no Names in all the old Testament that
signify such a Witch that destroys Men or Beasts, that makes a visible compact
with the Devil, or on whose body he suckcth, or with whom he has carnal
Copulation, or that is really changed into a Cat, Hare, Dog, or such like. And
to show it amounts to no more than so, was the task we undertook in this
Chapter.

But assure your self, if you peruse his Book carefully, you shall plainly find
that the main drist thereof is to prove, as I above noted, that there is no
such Witch as with whom the Devil has any thing more to do than with any other
sinner; which notwithstanding, this Conclusion of his a little before recited,
comes infinitely short of: And therefore this sixth Chapter, consisting of
about Thirty pages in Folio, is a mere piece of impertinency. And there will be
Witches for all this, whether these particularities be noted in them or no: For
it was susficient for Moses to name those ill sounding terms in general, which
imply a Witch according to that general notion I have above delivered; which if
it be prohibited, namely the having any thing to do with evil Spirits, their
being sucked by them, or their having any lustful or venereous transactions with
them, is much more prohibited.

But for some of these particularities also they may seem to be in some manner
hinted at in some of the words, especially as they are rendered sometimes by
skilful Interpreters: for (...) [Mecasseph] is translated by Vatablus and the
vulgar Latin Maleficus, by the Septuagint (...), that is, Veneficus; which
words signify mischievously enough both to man and beast. Besides that
Mecasseph carries along with it the signification of Transformation also; and
happily this may be the difference betwixt (...) [Mecasseph] and (...) [Megnonen]
that the former uses prestigious Transformations to some great mischief, as
where Olaus Magnus tells of those that have transformed themselves into Wolves
to men's thinking, and have presently fallen upon worrying of Sheep. Others
transformed in their Astral Spirit, into various shapes, get into Houses, and
do mischief to men and children, as I remember Remigius reports. And therefore
it is less wonder that that sharp Law of Moses is against the (...)
[Mecassephah] such a Witch as this is, Thou shall not suffer a Witch to live;
this may be a more peculiar signification of that word. And now for making a
compact with the Devil, how naturally does that name (...) [Chobher Chebher]
signify that feat also? But for sucking and copulation, though rightly stated
it may be true, yet I confess there is nothing hinted toward that, so far as I
see, as indeed it was neither necessary that the other should be. But these are
the very dregs, the Foex Magorum and Sagarum that sink into those abominations,
against which a sufficient Bar is put already by this prohibition of Witchcraft
in general by so many names. And the other is so silthy, base, and nasty, that
the mention thereof was neither fit for the sacred Style of Moses his Law, nor
for the Ears of the People.

In my passing to the eighth Chapter I will only take notice by the way of the
shameless impudence of J. Webster, who in favor to his beloved Hags, that they
may never be thought to do any thing by the assistance of the Devil, makes the
victory of Moses, with whom the mighty hand of God was, or of Christ, (who was
the Angel that appeared first to Moses in the Bush, and conducted the Children
of Israel out of Egypt to the promised Land) to be the victory only over so
many Hocus-pocusses, so many Jugglers that were, as it seems, old excellent at
the tricks of Legerdemain; which is the basest derogation to the glory of that
Victory, and the vilest reproach against the God of Israel and the person of
Moses, that either the malicious wit of any Devil can invent, or the dullness of
any sunk Soul can stumble upon. Assuredly there was a real conflict here
betwixt the Kingdom of Light and the Kingdom of Darkness and the evil Spirits
thereof, which assisted the (...) [Hartummim] the Magicians of Egypt; who
before that name is named, that no man may mistake, are called (...)
[Mecassephim] such kind of Magicians as can exhibit to the sight manifold
prestigious Transformations through diabolical assistance* and are rendered
Malesici by good Interpreters* as I noted above; that is, they were Wizzards or
He-witches. The self same word being used in that severe Law of Moses, Thou
shall not suffer a Witch to live. Are not these Magicians then examples plain
enough that there are Witches; that is to say, such wretc^d Wights as do
strange miraculous things by the assistance or consociation of evil Spirits.

O no, says Mr. Webster, these are only (...) [Chacamim] Wise men, and great
Naturalists, who all what they did, they did (...), by their bright glittering
Laminae, for so (...) forsooth must signify. But what necessity thereof that
(...) should signify Lamina? there is only the pretense of that one place,
Genesis 3. 24. (...), where it is (...) only that signifies the Lamina, and that
of a long form, scarce usual in those magical Laminae with Signatures celestial
upon them, which J. Webster would be at; but (...) signifies merely Flamma; so
that (...) by this account must signify by their slames, if it be from (...)
ardere, flammare: And therefore Buxtorfius judiciously places the word under
(...) abscondit, obvolvit, reading not (...) but (...), which is as much as to
say, occult is suis rationibus Magicis, which is briefly rendered in English, by
their Enchantments; which agrees marvellously well with (...) [Mecassephim,]
which is as much as Praestigiatores Magici, or such as do strange wondrous
things in an hidden way by the help of evil Spirits. But that the Egyptian
Magicians should do those things that are there recorded of them in Exodus, by
virtue of any Lamels or Plates of metal with certain Sculptures or Figures
under such or such a Cons^ellation, is a thing so sottish and foolish, that no
man that is not himself bewitched by some old Hag or Hobgoblin, can ever take
Sanctuary here to save himself or his old Dames from being in a capacity, from
this History in Exodus, of being accounted Witches. For if there may be
He-witches, that is, Magicians, such as these of Egypt were, I leave J.
Webster to scratch his head to find out any reason why there may not be
She-witches also.

And indeed that of the Witch of Endor, to pass at length to the eighth
Chapter, is as plain a proof thereof as can be desired by any man whose mind is
not blinded with prejudices. But here J. Webster, not impertinently, I confess,
for the general, (abating him the many tedious particular impertinencies that
he has clogged his Discourse with) betakes himself to these two ways, to show
there was nothing of a Witch in all that whole Narration. First, by pretending
that all the transaction on the woman of Endor's part was nothing but collusion
and a Cheat, Saul not being in the same Room with her, or at least seeing
nothing if he was. And then in the next place, That Samuel that is said to
appear, could neither be Samuel appearing in his Body out of the Grave, nor in
his Soul; nor that it was a Devil that appeared: and therefore it must be some
colluding Knave suborned by the Witch. For the discovering the weakness of his
former Allegation, we need but to appeal to the Text, which is this, 1 Samuel 28.
v. 8.

And Saul said, I pray thee, divine unto me by the familiar spirit, and bring
me up whom I shall name unto thee, (...); that is, do the office of a
Divineress or a Wise woman, I pray thee, unto me, (...) [Beobh] by virtue of
the familiar Spirit, whose assistance thou have, not by virtue of the Bottle,
as Mr. Webster would have it. Does he think that Damsel in the Acts which is
said to have had (...), that is, to have had (...) [Obh] carried an
Aquavitae-bottle about with her, hung at her Girdle, whereby she might divine
and mutter, chirp, or peep out of it, as a Chicken out of an Egg-shell, or put
her Neb into it to cry like a Bittern, or take a dram of the Bottle to make her
wits more quick and divinatory? Who but one that had taken too many drams of
the Bottle could ever fall into such a fond conceit? Wherefore (...) [Obh] in
this place does not, as indeed no where else, signify an oracular Bottle or
(...), into which Saul might desire the woman of Endor to retire into, and
himself expect answers in the next Room; but signifies that familiar Spirit by
virtue of whose assistance she was conceived to perform all those wondrous
offices of a Wise woman. But we proceed to verse 11.

Then said the woman, Whom shall I bring up unto thee? And he said, Bring me up
Samuel. Surely as yet Saul and the woman are in the same Room; and being the
woman asked, Whom shall I bring up unto thee? and he answering, Bring up unto me
Samuel, it implies that Samuel was so to be brought up that Saul might see him,
and not the Witch only. But we go on, Verse 12.

And when the woman saw Samuel, she cried with a loud voice: and the woman
spoke to Saul, saying, Why have thou deceived me? for thou art Saul. Though the
woman might have some suspicions before that it was Saul, yet she now seeing
Samuel did appear, and in another kind of way than her Spirits used to do, and
in another hue, as it is most likely so holy a Soul did, she presently cried
out with a loud voice, (not muttered, chirpt, and peept as a Chicken coming out
of the Shell) that now she was sure it was Saul: For she was not such a Fool as
to think her Art could call up real Samuel, but that the presence of Saul was
the cause thereof: And Josephus writes expressly, (...); i. e. The woman seeing
a grave God like man, is startled at it, and thus astonished at the Vision,
turned her self to the King, and said, Art not thou King Saul? Verse 13.

And the King said unto her, Be not afraid: for what saw thou? And the woman
said unto Saul, I saw Gods ascending out of the Earth. The King here assures
the woman, that though he was Saul, yet no hurt should come to her, and
therefore bids her not be afraid: But she turning her face to Saul, as she
spoke to him, and he to her, and so her sight being off from the object, Saul
asked her, What saw thou? and she in like manner answered, I saw Gods, etc.
For Gods I suppose any free Translator in Greek, Latin and English would say,
(...), Genios, Spirits. And (...) signifies Angels as well as Gods; and it is
likely these Wise women take the Spirits they converse with to be good Angels,
as Anne Bodenham the Witch told a worthy and Learned Friend of mine, That these
Spirits, such as she had, were good Spirits, and would do a man all good
offices all the days of his life; and it is likely this woman of Endor had the
same opinion of hers, and therefore we need not wonder that she calls them
(...) [Elohim] especially Samuel appearing among them, to say nothing of the
presence of Saul. And that more than one Spirit appears at a time, there are
repeated examples in Anne Bodenham's Magical Evocations of them, whose History,
I must confess, I take to be very true.

The case stands therefore thus: The Woman and Saul being in the same Room, she
turning her face from Saul, mutters to her self some Magical form of evocation
of Spirits; whereupon they beginning to appear and rise up, seemingly out of
the Earth, upon the sight of Samuels Countenance, she cried out to Saul, and
turning her face toward him spoke to him. Now that Saul hitherto saw nothing,
though in the same Room, might be either because the body of the woman was
interposed betwixt his eyes and them; or the Vehicles of those Spirits were not
yet attempered to that conspissation that they would strike the eyes of Saul,
though they did of the Witch. And that some may see an Object others not seeing
it, you have an instance in the Child upon Walker's Shoulders appearing to Mr.
Fairhair, and, it may be, to the Judge, but invisible to the rest of the Court;
and many such examples there are: But I proceed to Verse 14.

And he said unto her, What form is he of? and she said, An old man comes up,
and is covered with a mantle. He asks here in the Singular number, because his
mind was only sixth on Samuel. And the woman's answer is exactly according to
what the Spirit appeared to her, when her eye was upon it, viz. (...) An old
man coming up; for he was but coming up when she looked upon him, and
accordingly describes him: For (...) there is a Participle of the present
Tense, and the woman describes Samuel from his Age, Habit, and motion he was
in, while her eye was upon him. So that the genuine sense and Grammatical in
this answer to, What form is he of? is this, an old man coming up, and the same
covered with a mantle, this is his form and condition I saw him in. Wherefore
Saul being so much concerned herein, either the woman or he changing their
postures or standings, or Samuel by this having sufficiently conspissated his
Vehicle and fitted it to Readiness sight also, it follows in the Text, And Saul
perceived it was Samuel, and he stooped with his face to the ground and bowed
himself.

O the impudent profaneness and sottishness of perverse shufflers and
whifflers, that upon the hearing of this passage can have the face to deny that
Saul saw any thing, and merely because the word [perceived] is used, and not
[saw;] when the word [perceived] plainly implies that he saw Samuel, and
something more, namely, that by his former familiar converse with him, he was
assured it was he. So exquisitely did he appear and overcomingly to his senses,
that he could not but acknowledge (for so the Hebrew word (...) signifies) that
it was he, or else why did he stoop with his Face to the very Ground to do him
honor?

No no, says J. Webster, he saw nothing himself, but stood waiting like a
drowned Puppet (see of what a base rude spirit this Squire of Hags is, to use
such language of a Prince in his distress) in another Room, to hear what would
be the issue: for all that he understood was from her cunning and lying
relations. That this Gallant of Witches should dare to abuse a Prince thus, and
feign him as much foolisher and sottisher in his Intellectuals as he was taller
in Stature than the rest of the people even by head and shoulders, and merely,
forsooth, to secure his old Wives from being so much as in a capacity of ever
being suspected for Witches, is a thing extremely coarse, and intolerably
sordid. And indeed upon the consideration of Readiness being said to bow himself
to Samuel, (which plainly implies that there was there a Samuel that was the
object of his sight and of the reverence he made) his own heart misgives him in
this mad adventure. And he shifts o^f from thence to a conceit that it was a
confederate Knave that the woman of Endor turned out into the room where Saul
was, to act the part of Samuel, having first put on him her own short Cloak,
which she used with her maund under her arm to ride to Fairs or Markets in. To
this Country-slouch in the woman's Mantle, must King Saul, stooping with his
face to the very ground, make his profound obeisance. What, was a Market-womans
Cloak and Samuel's Mantle, which Josephus calls (...), a Sacerdotal habit, so
like one another? Or if not, how came this woman, being so surprised o^ a
sudden, to provide her self of such a Sa^rdotal habit to cloak her consederate
Kna^ i^ (...) Was Saul as well a blind as a drowned Puppet, that he could not
discern so gross and bold an Imposture as this? Was it possible that he should
not perceive that it was not Samuel when they came to confer together, as they
did? How could that confederate Knave change his own Face into the same figure,
look, and mien that Samuel had, which was exactly known to Saul? How could he
imitate his Voice thus of a sudden, and they discoursed a very considerable
time together?

Besides, Knaves do not use to speak what things are true, but what things are
pleasing And moreover, this woman of Endor, though a Pythoness, yet she was of
a very good nature and benign, which Josephus takes notice of, and extols her
mightily for it, and therefore she could take no delight to lay further weight
on the oppressed Spirit of distressed King Saul: which is another sign that
this Scene was acted bona fide, and that there was no couzening in it. As also
that is another; that she spoke so magnificently of what appeared to her, that
she saw Gods ascending. Could she then possibly adventure to turn out a
Country-slouch with a Maund-womans Cloak to act the part of so God-like and
divine a Personage as Samuel, who was (...), as the woman describes him in
Josephus Antiqu. Judaic. lib. 7. c. 15. Unto all which you may add, That the
Scripture itself, which was written by Inspiration, says expressly, v. 20. that
it was Samuel. And the son of Sirach, chapter 46. that Samuel himself prophesyed
after his death, referring to this story of the woman of Endor. But for our
new-inspired Seers, or Saints, S. Scot, S. Adie, and if you will S. Webster
sworn Advocate of the Witches, who thus madly and boldly, against all sense and
reason, against all antiquity, all Interpreters, and against the inspired
Scripture itself, will have no Samuel in this Scene, but a cunning confederate
Knave, whether the inspired Scripture, or these inblown Buffoons, puffed up
with nothing but ignorance, vanity, and stupid infidelity, are to be believed,
let any one judge.

We come now to his other Allegation, wherein we shall be brief, we having
exceeded the measure of a Postscript already. It was neither Samuel's Soul,
says he, joined with his Body, nor his Soul out of his Body, nor the Devil; and
therefore it must be some confed^rate Knave suborned by that cunning cheating
Queen of Endor. But I briesly answer, it was the Soul of Samuel himself; and
that it is the fruitfulness of the great ignorance of J. Webster in the sound
Principles of Theosophy and true Divinity, that has enabled him to heap
together no less than Ten Arguments to disprove this Assertion, and all little
to the purpose: So little indeed, that I think it little to the purpose
particularly to answer them, but shall hint only some few Truths which will
rout the whole band of them.

I say therefore, that departed Souls, as other Spirits, have an (...) in them,
such as Souls have in this life; and have both a faculty and a right to move of
themselves, provided there be no express Law against such or such a design to
which their motion tends.

Again, That they have a Power of appearing in their own personal shapes to
whom there is occasion, as Anne Walker's Soul did to the Miller; and that this
being a faculty of theirs either natural or acquirable, the doing so is no
miracle. And

Thirdly, That it was the strong piercing desire, and deep distress, and agony
of mind in Saul, in his perplexed circumstances, and the great compassion and
goodness of Spirit in the holy Soul of Samuel, that was the effectual Magic
that drew him to condescend to converse with Saul in the woman's house at Endor;
as a keen sense of Justice and Revenge made Anne Walker's Soul appear to the
Miller with her sive Wounds in her head.

The rigid and harsh severity that Webster sancies Samuel's Ghost would have
used against the woman, or sharp reproofs to Saul; As for the latter, it is
somewhat expressed in the Text, and Saul had his excuse in readiness, and the
good Soul of Samuel was sensible of his perplexed condition. And as for the
former, since the Soul of Samuel might indeed have terrified the poor woman, and
so unhinged her, that she had been sit for nothing after it, but not converted
her, it is no wonder if he passed her by; Goodness and Forbearance more
befitting an holy Angelical Soul, than bluster and fury, such as is fancied by
that rude Goblin that actuates the Body and Pen of Webster.

As for departed Souls, that they never have any care or regard to any of their
fellow-Souls here upon Earth, is expressly against the known example of that
great Soul, and universal Pastor of all good Souls, who appeared to Stephen at
his stoning, and to S. Paul before his Conversion, though then in his glorified
Body; which is a greater condescension than this of the Soul of Samuel, which
was also to a Prince, upon whose shoulders lay the great affairs of the People
of Israel: To omit that other notable example of the Angel Raphael so called,
(from his office at that time, or from the Angelical Order he was adopted into
after his death) but was indeed the Soul of Azaria^ the son of Ananias the
Great, and of Tobit's Brethren, Tobit chapter 5. 12. Nor does that which occurs,
Tob. 12. 15. at all clash with what we have said, if rightly understood: for
his saying, I am Raphael one of the seven holy Angels which present the prayers
of the Saints, and which go in and out before the glory of the Holy One, in the
Cabbalistick sense signisies no more than thus, That he was one of the
universal society of the holy Angels, (and a Raphael in the Order of the
Raphaels) which minister to the Saints, and reinforce the Prayers of good and
holy men by joining thereto their own; and as they are moved by God, minister
to their necessities, unprayed to themselves, which would be an abomination to
them, but extreme prone to second the Petitions of holy sincere souls, and
forward to engage in the accomplishing of them, as a truly good man would
sooner relieve an indigent creature, overhearing him making his moan to God in
Prayer, than if he begged Alms of himself, though he might do that without sin.
This Cabbalistical account, I think, is infinitely more probable, than that
Raphael told a downright lie to Tobit, in saying he was the son of Ananias when
he was not. And be it so, will J. Webster say, what is all this to the purpose,
when the Book of Tobit is Apocryphal, and consequently of no Authority? What of
no Authority? certainly of infinitely more Authority than Mr. Wagstaf, Mr.
Scot, and Mr. Adie, that Mr. Webster so srequently and reverently quoteth.

I but, will he further add, these Apparitions were made to good and holy men,
or to elect Vessels; but King Saul was a wretched Reprobate. This is the third
liberal badge of honor that this ill-bred Advocate of the Witches has beslowed
on a distressed Prince. First, a drowned Puppet, p. 170. then a distracted
Bedlam, in the same Page, which I passed by before; and now, a wretched
Reprobate: But assuredly Saul was a brave Prince and Commander, as Josephus
justly describes him, and Reprobate only in Type, as Ismael and Esau; which is
a mystery, it seems, that J. Webster was not aware of. And therefore no such
wonder that the Soul of Samuel had such a kindness for him, as to appear to him
in the depth of his distress, to settle his mind, by telling him plainly the
upshot of the whole business, that he should lose the Battle, and he and his
Sons be slain, that so he might give a specimen of the bravest Valor that ever
was achieved by any Commander, in that he would not suffer his Country to be
overrun by the Enemy, while he was alive, without resistance; but though he
knew certainly he should fail of success, and he and his Sons dye in the fight,
yet in so just and honorable a Cause as the defense of his Crown and his
Country, would give the Enemy battle in the Field, and sacrifice his own Lise
for the safety of his People. Out of the knowledge of which noble spirit in
Saul, and his resolved valor in this point, those words happily may come from
Samuel, To morrow shall thou and thy sons be with me, (as an auspicious
insinuation of their savourable reception into the other world) in (...) in
thalamo justorum, as Munster has noted out of the Rabbis.

Lastly, as for that weak imputation that this opinion of its being Samuel's
soul that appeared, is Popish, that is very Plebeianly and Idiotically spoken,
as if every thing that the Popish party are for, were Popish. We divide our
zeal against so many things that we fancy Popish, that we scarce reserve a just
share of detestation against what is truly so: Such as are that gross, rank,
and scandalous impossibility of Transubstantiation, the various modes of
fulsome Idolatry and lying Impostures, the Uncertainty of their Loyalty to
their lawful Sovereigns by their superstitious adhesion to the spiritual
Tyranny of the Pope, and that barbarous and ferine Cruelty against those that
are not either such fools as to be persuaded to believe such things as they
would obtrude upon men, or are not so false to God and their own Consciences,
as knowing better, yet to profess them.

As for that other opinion, that the greater part of the reformed Divines hold,
That it was the Devil that appeared in Samuel's shape; and though Grotius also
seems to be inclined thereto, alleging that passage of Porphyrius, De
Abstinentia Animalium, where he describes one kind of Spirit to be, (...).
(which is, I confess, very apposit^ to this story; nor do doubt but that in
many of these Necromantick Apparitions, they are ludicrous Spirits, not the
Souls of the deceased that appear) yet I am clear for the appearing of the Soul
of Samuel in this story, from the reasons above alleged, and as clear that in
other Necromancies it may be the Devil, or such kind of Spirits as Porphyrius
above describes, that change themselves into omnifarious forms and shapes, and
one while act the parts of Demons, another while of Angels or Gods, and
another while of the Souls of the deceased: And I confess such a spirit as this
might personate Samuel here, for any thing Webster has alleged to the
contrary. For his Arguments indeed are wonderfully weak and wooden, as may be
understood out of what I have hinted concerning the former opinion. But I
cannot further particularize now.

For I have made my Postscript much longer than my Letter, before I was aware;
and I n^d not enlarge to you, who are so well vers^d in these things already,
and can by the quickness of your parts presently collect the whole m^asure of
H^ules by his Foot, and sufficiently understand by this time it is no rash
censure o^ mine in my Letter, That ^ster's Book is but a weak impertinent piece
of work, the very (...) thereof being so weak and impcrti^* and falling so
short of the scope h^ aims it, which was really to prove that there was no such
thing as a Witch or Wizzard, that is, not any mention thereof, in Scripture, by
any name of one that had more to do with the Devil, or the Devil with him, than
with other wicked men; that is to say, of one who in virtue of Covenant either
implicit or explicit did strange things by the help of evil Spirits, but that
there are many sorts of Deceivers and Impostors, and diverse persons, under a
passive delusion of Melancholy and Fancy, which is part of his very Title Page.

Whereby he does plainly insinuate, there is nothing but Couzenage or
Melancholy in the whole business of the feats of Witches. But a little to
mitigate or smother the grossness of this false Assertion, he adds, And that
there is no corporeal League betwixt the Devil and the Witch; and that he does
not suck on the Witches body, nor has carnal Copulation with her, nor the
Witches are turned into Dogs or Cats, etc. All which things, as you may see in
his Book, he understands in the grossest manner imaginable, as if the Imps of
Witches had Mouths of slesh to suck them, and Bodies of slesh to lie with them.
And at this rate he may understand a corporeal League, as if it were no League
or Covenant, unless some Lawyer drew the instrument, and engrossed it in Vellum
or thick Parchment, and there were so many Witnesses with the Hand and Seal of
the party: nor any Transformation into Dogs or Cats, unless it were real and
corporeal, or grossly carnal; which none of his Witchmongers, as he rudely and
slovenly calls that learned and serious person Dr. Casaubon and the rest, do
believe. Only it is a disputable case of their bodily Transformation, bctwixt
Bodinus and Remigius; of which more in my Scholia. But that without this carnal
transmutation a woman might not be accounted a Witch, is so foolish a
supposition, that Webster himself certainly must be ashamed of it.

Wherefore if his Book be writ only to prove there is no such thing as a Witch
that covenants in Parchment with the Devil by the advice of a Lawyer, and is
really and carnally turned into a Dog, Cat, or Hare, etc. and with carnal lips
sucked by the Devil, and is one with whom the Devil lies carnally; the scope
thereof is manifestly impertinent, when neither Dr. Casaubon nor any one else
holds any such thing. But as for the true and adequate notion of a Witch or
Wizzard, such as at first I described, his Arguments all of them are too too
weak or impertinent, as to the disproving the existence of such a Witch as
this, who betwixt his Deceivers, Impostours, and Melancholists on one hand, and
those gross Witches he describes, on the other hand, goes away shere as a Hare
in a green balk betwixt two Lands of Corn, none of his Arguments reaching her
or getting the sight of her, himself in the mean time standing on one side
amongst the Deceivers and Impostours, his Book, as to the main design he drives
at, being a mere Cheat and Impostour.


C. C. C. May 25. 1678.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THis Letter of Dr. Moor being left amongst other Papers appertaining to this
newintended Edition by Mr. Glanvil, and I perceiving in a Letter of his to the
Doctor that he had a mind this Letter should be published together with his
Book, it is done accordingly, and prefixed at the beginning thereof, as natural
Method requires, the Letter being hortatory to quicken Mr. Glanvil to dispatch
his intended new Edition for the undeceiving of the World, and the Postscript
containing many things of a general insluence upon the whole Book. But that the
Doctor may suffer no prejudice through this publishing of his Letter and
Postscript, from the sharpness and satyricalness of them in some places, I
shall for the more rightly understanding his meaning in the using that mode of
writing upon this occasion, transcribe a passage of a Letter of his to his
friend Mr. Glanvil, relating thereto. I pray you send me word whether that
Postscript will not meet with all the elusory cavils of that profane Busfoon,
upon those places of holy Scripture: his unworthy usage of the Holy Writ, and
his derisorious Interpretations of it in the behalf of his beloved Hags,
provoked my indignation to such Schemes of deriding and exposing him, as
otherwise I should never have condescended to. This is a sufficient Testimony
of the Doctor's aversness from such manner of writing. But as Divines tell us,
that Anger and Punishment are God's Opus alienum, his strange work, as being
more abhorrent from his nature; but yet for the good of the Universe he steps
out sometimes into that dispensation: so I think it not misbecoming good men,
sometimes to condescend, as the Doctor calls it, to the chastising profane
Drolls and Abusers of holy things, by a just derision and satirical
reprehension for their freakish and impious sauciness, provided it be done
sincerely, and sor the public good.

Saducismus Triumphatus: OR, Full and plain EVIDENCE Concerning WITCHES AND
APPARITIONS.

The First PART thereof containing Philosophical Considerations Which defend
their POSSIBILITY.

Whereunto is added, The true and genuine NOTION, and consistent Explication of
the Nature OF A SPIRIT, For the more full Confirmation of the POSSIBILITY of
their EXISTENCE.

LONDON: Printed, 1681.

To the Illustrious CHARLES DUKE of Richmond and Lenox.
My LORD,
YOUR Grace having been pleased to command the first, and more imperfect,
Edition of this Discourse, I have presumed that your Candor will accept the
Draught that has had my last hand upon it. And though I am not fond enough to
fancy any Art or Ornament in the composure to recommend it; yet, I know, the
Essay is seasonable, and contains things which relate to our biggest Interests;
the design being to secure some of the Outworks of Religion, and to regain a
parcel of ground which bold Infidelity has invaded. And, my Lord, I cannot but
observe sadly, that while the Sects are venting their Animosities against each
other, and scrambling for their Conceits, and the particular advantages of
their way, they perceive not that Atheism comes on by large strides, and enters
the Breaches they have made. Sober and considerate men see the formidable
danger, and some of them have strenuously endeavored to maintain the Walls,
while the factions within are so busy and so divided, that they cannot attend
the desperate hazard, and will not join in a Common Defense. Among those
generous Defendants I desire to pitch, and have undertaken to make good one of
the Forts upon which the Enemy has made impetuous Assaults, and I hope with no
contemptible success.

For my part, my Lord, I am very little concerned for the small pedlaries that
some men's fondness calls Religion, by which that sacred thing has been exposed
to a great deal of contempt and dishonor. But yet I think it my duty to have a
zeal for those great and certain matters upon which our hopes in an other world
are grounded: And that our expectations of a future Being, are not imaginary
and fantastic, we have reasonable evidence enough from the Attributes of God,
the Phenomenon of Providence, and the nature of our Souls, to convince any, but
those who will stupidly believe that they shall dye like Beasts, that they may
live like them. I confess the Philosophic Arguments that are produced for the
desirable Article, though very cogent, are many of them speculative and deep,
requiring so great an attention and sagacity, that they take no hold upon the
whissling spirits, that are not used to consider; nor upon the common sort,
that cannot reach such heights of Argument: But they are both best convinced by
the proofs that come nearest the sense, which indeed strike our minds fullest,
and leave the most lasting impressions; whereas high Speculations being more
thin and subtle, easily slide off even from understandings that are most
capable to receive them. For this reason, among some others, I appear thus much
concerned for the justification of the belief of Witches, it suggesting
palpable and current evidence of our Immortality, which I am exceedingly
sollicitous to have made good.

For really, my Lord, if we make our computes like Men, and do not suffer our
selves to be abused by the slatteries of sense, and the deceitful gay^ties that
steal us away from God, and from our selves, there is nothing can render the
thoughts of this odd life tolerable, but the expectation of another. And wise
men have said, that they would not live a moment, if they thought they were not
to live again. This perhaps some may take to be the discontented Paradox of a
melancholic, vexed and of mean condition, that is pinched by the straitness of
fortune, and envies the heights of others selicity and grandeurs; But by that
time those that judge so, have spent the heats of frolic youth, and have past
over the several stages of vanity; when they come to sit down, and make sober
reflections upon their pleasures and pursuits, and sum up the accomp^ of all
that is with them, and before them, I doubt not but their considering thoughts
will make Solomon's Conclusion, and find, that it is but a misery to live, if we
were to live for nothing else. So that if the content of the present life were
all I were to have for the hopes of Immortality. I should even upon that
account be very unwilling to believe that I was mortal: For certainly the
pleasures that result from the thoughts of another world in those that not
only see it painted in their imaginations, but feel it begun in their Souls,
are as far beyond all the titillations of sense, as a real lasting happiness is
beyond the delusive Images of a Dream. And therefore they that think to secure
the enjoyment of their pleasures by the insamy of our natures in the overthrow
of our future hopes, endeavor to dam up the Fountain of the fullest and
cleanest delights; and seek for limpid waters in the sinks and puddles of the
strects.

You see, my Lord, how my zeal for this mighty interest transports me to a
greater length in the address, than perhaps may consist with strict decorum;
and I indulge my Pen the rather in the license, because possibly your Grace's
name may draw some eyes hither that have need of such suggestions, and those
that have not need a great deal more. It cannot be proper to add here those
large accounts which would be requisite in a design of full conviction: But for
the present, if they shall please to look forward, they may likely meet some
things not unfit for their serious thoughts; and I intend to take a season to
present them others, more particularly suitable to what I know is as much their
interest, as I doubt it is their want.

But, my Lord, I fear I am importunate, and beseech your Grace to pardon the
boldness of

My LORD, Your Grace's Most obedient Servant, Jos. Glanvil.

Preface.
THere are a sort of narrow and confined Spirits, who account all Discourses
needless, that are not for their particular purposes; and judge all the world
to be of the size and Genius of those within the Circle of their Knowledge and
Acquaintance; so that with a pert and pragmatique Insolence, they censure all
the braver Designs and Notices that lie beyond their Ken, as nice and
impertinent Speculations: an ignorant and proud Injustice; as if this sort were
the only persons, whose humor and needs should be consulted. And hence it
comes to pass, that the greatest and worthiest things that are written or said,
do always meet with the most general neglect and scorn, since the lesser
people, for whom they were not intended, are quick to shoot their bolt, and to
condemn what they do not understand, and because they do not. Whereas on the
other side, those that are able to judge and would encourage, are commonly
reserved and modest in their sentences; or, if they should seek to do right to
things that are worthy, they are sure to be out-voiced by the rout of ignorant
contemners. Upon which accounts I have often thought that he that courts and
values popular estimation, takes not the right way if he endeavor any thing
that is really excellent: but he must study the little plausibilities, and
accommodate the humor of the MANT, who are active Ministers of Fame, being
zealous and loud in their applauses, as they are clamorous and impetuous in
their oppositions. As for these, it is one of my chief cares to make my self as
much unconcerned at their Censures, as I am at the cacklings of a flock of
Geese, or at the eager displeasure of those little snarling Animals, that are
angry when I go along the streets. Nor can any man be either wise or happy,
till he has arrived to that greatness of mind, that no more considers the
tattling of the multitude than the whistling of the wind. Not that I think the
common people are to be contemned for the weakness of their understandings;
it is an insolent meanness of spirit that does that: but w^n conceited ignorance
sits down in the Judgment seat, and gives peremplory Verdicts upon things
beyond its Line* the wise man smiles and passes by. For such (if that may
signify any thing to keep them from troubling themselves about the following
CONSIDERATIONS) I desire they would take notice from me, that I writ not those
things for such as they; and they will do well to throw up the Book upon this
Advertisement, ex^pt they will stay to hear, That though Philosophical
Discourses to justify the common belief about Witches, are nothing at all to
them, or those of their measure; yet they are too seasonable and necessary for
our Age, in which Atheism is begun in Sadducism: And those that dare not
bluntly say, There is NO GOD, content themselves (for a sair step and
Introduction) to deny there are SPIRITS, or WITCHES. Which sort of Infidels,
though they are not ordinary among the mere vulgar, yet are they numerous in a
little higher rank of understandings. And those that know any thing of the
world, know, that most of the looser Gentry, and the small pretenders to
Philosophy and Wit, are generally deriders of the belief of Witches and
Apparitions. And were this a slight or mere speculative mistake, I should not
trouble my self or them about it. But I fear this error has a Core in it that
is worse than Heresy: and therefore how little soever I care what men believe
or teach in matters of Opinion, I think I have reason to be concerned in an
affair that touches so near upon the greatest interests of Religion. And
really I am astonished sometimes to think into what a kind of Age we are fallen,
in which some of the greatest impieties are accounted but Bugs, and terrible
Names, invisible Tittles, Peccadillo's, or Chimera's. The sad and greatest
instances, are SACRILEGE, REBELLION, and WITCHCRAFT. For the two former, there
are a sort of men (that are far from being professed Enemi^s to Religion) who, I
do not know whether they own any such vices. We find no mention of them in
their most particular Confessions, nor have I observed them in those Sermons
that have contained the largest Catalogues of the Sins of our Age and Nation.
'Twere dangerous to speak of them as sins, for fear who should be found guilty.
But my business at present is not with these, but the other, WITCHCRAFT, which
I am sure was a Sin of elder times; and how comes it about that our Age, which
so much outdoes them in all other kinds of wickedness, should be wholly
innocent in this? That there MAY be WITCHES and Apparitions in our days,
notwithstanding the Objections of the modern Sadduce, I believe I have made
appear in the CONSIDERATIONS following; in which I did not primarily intend
direct Proof, but DEFENSE, as the Title of the first Edition, which is reslor'd
in these later mentioned.

And if it should be objected, That I have for the most part used only
supposals and conjectural things in the vindication of the common belief, and
speak with no point blank assurance in my particular Answers, as I do in the
general Conclusion; I need only say, That the Proposition I desend is matter
of fact, which the disbelievers impugn by alleging that it cannot be, or it
is not likely: In return to which, if I show how those things may be, and
probably, notwithstanding their allegations, though I say not downright that
they are in the particular way I offer, yet it is enough for the design of
Defense, though not for that of Proof: for when one says a thing cannot be,
and I tell him how possibly it may, though I hit not the just manner of it, I
yet defeat the Objection against it, and make way for the evidence of the thing
de Facto; which now I have added from the Divine Oracles, and two Modern
Relations that are clear and unexceptionable.

I have no humor nor delight in telling Stories, and do not publish these for
the gratification of those that have; but I record them as Arguments for the
confirmation of a Truth which has indeed been attested by multitudes of the
like Evidences in all places and times. But things remote, or long past, are
either not believed or forgotten: whereas these being fresh and near, and
attended with all the circumstances of credibility* it may be expected they
should have the more success upon the obstinacy of Unbelievers.

But after all this, I must consess, there is one Argument against me, which is
not to be dealt with, viz. a mighty confidence grounded upon nothing, that
swaggers, and huffs, and swears there are no Witches. For such Philosophers as
these, let them enjoy the Opinion of their own Superlative Judgments, and
enter me in the first rank of Fools for crediting my Senses, and those of all
the World, before their sworn Dictates. If they will believe in Scott, Hobbes,
and Osborne, and think them more infallible than the Sacred Oracles, the
History of all Ages, and the full experience of our own, who can help it? They
must not be contradicted, and they are resolved not to be persuaded. For this
sort of men, I never go about to convince them of any thing. I^ I can avoid it,
I throw nothing before them, lest they should turn again, and rend me. Their
Opinions came into their Heads by chance, when their little reasons had no
notice of their entrance; and they must be let alone to go out again of
themselves, the same way they ^ntred. Therefore not to make much noise to
disturb these infallible Hufsers (and they cannot hear a little for their own)
I softly step by them, leaving only this whisper behind me; That though their
worshipful ignorance and sottishness can relish nothing of a Discourse that
does not minister to Sensuality and Unbelief, yet my CONSIDERATIONS have had
the good ^ortune of a better reception from the braver and more generous
Spirits, than my fondest hopes could have expected; and persons whose good
thoughts I have reason to value, have assured me that their kindness to my Book
has improved upon second and more careful perusals: which I mention for this
purpose, that those that need my Remarques, and cannot feel them in a running
reading, may please to turn their eyes back, and deliberately think over what I
have offered; from which course I dare promise them more satisfaction than from
their haste.

Bath June 8. 1668. J. G.

SOME CONSIDERATIONS ABOUT Witchcraft. In a LETTER to ROBERT HUNT, Esquire
SECT. I.
SIR,
THE frequent and late dealings you have had in the Examination of Witches, and
the regards of one that has a very particular honor for you, have brought you
the trouble of some CONSIDERATIONS on the Subject. And though what I have to
say, be but the unaccurate product of a little leisure; yet I hope it may
afford you some, not unreasonable, accounts of the odd Phenomenon of Witchcraft
and Fascination, and contribute to the DEFENSE of the Truth and certainty of
matters, which you know by Experiments that could not deceive, in spite of the
petty exceptions of those that are resolved to believe nothing in affairs of
this nature.

And if any thing were to be much admired in an Age of Wonders, not only of
Nature, (which is a constant Prodigy) but of Men and Manners; it would be to
me matter of astonishment, that Men, otherwise witty and ingenious, are fallen
into the conceit that there is no such thing as a Witch or Apparition, but that
these are the creatures of Melancholy and Superstition, fostered by ignorance
and design; which comparing the confidence of their disbelief with the evidence
of the things denied, and the weakness of their grounds, would almost suggest
that themselves are an Argument of what they deny; and that so confident an
opinion could not be held upon such inducements, but by some kind of Witchcraft
and Fascination in the Fancy. And perhaps that evil Spirit whose influences
they will not allow in actions ascribed to such Causes, has a greater hand and
interest in their Proposition than they are aware of. For that subtle Enemy of
Mankind (since Providence will not permit him to mischief us without our own
concurrence) attempts that by stratagem and artifice, which he could never
effect by open ways of acting; and the success of all wiles depending upon
their secrecy and concealment, his influence is never more dangerous than when
his agency is least suspected. In order therefore to the carrying on the dark
and hidden designs he manageth against our happiness and our Souls, he cannot
expect to advantage himself more, than by insinuating a belief, That there is
no such thing as himself, but that fear and fancy make Devils now, as they did
Gods of old. Nor can he ever draw the assent of men to so dangerous an
assertion, while the standing sensible evidences of his existence in his
practices by and upon his instruments are not discredited and removed.

It Is doubtless therefore the interest of this Agent of darkness to have the
world believe, that the notion they have of him is but a phantome and conceit;
and in order thereunto, that the stories of Witches, Apparitions, and indeed
every thing that brings tidings of another world, are but melancholic Dreams,
and pious Romances. And when men are arrived thus sar to think there are no
diabolical contracts or Apparitions, their belief that there are such Spirits
rests only upon their Faith and Reverence to the divine Oracles, which we have
little reason to apprehend so great in such assertors, as to command much srom
their assent; especially in such things in which they have corrupt interests
against their evidence. ^o that he that thinks there is no Witch, believes a
Devil gratis, or at least upon inducements, which he is like to find himself
disposed to deny when he pleases. And when men are arrived to this degree of
dissidence and infidelity, we are beholden to them if they believe either
Angel, or Spirit, Resurrection of the body, or Immortality of Souls. These
things hang together in a Chain of connection, at least in these men's
Hypothesis; and it is but an happy chance if he that has lost one link holds
another. So that the vitals of Religion being so much interessed in this
subject, it will not be unnecessary employment particularly to discourse it.

And in order to the proof that there have been, and are, unlawful
Confederacies with evil Spirits, by virtue of which the hellish accomplices
perform things above their natural powers: I must premise, that this being
matter of fact, is only capable of the evidence of authority and sense: and by
both these the being os Witches and diabolical Contracts is most abundantly
confirmed. All Histories are full of the exploits of those Instruments of
darkness; and the testimony of all ages, not only of the rude and barbarous,
but of the most civilized and polished world, brings tidings of their strange
performances. We have the attestation os thousands of eye and car-witnesses,
and those not of the easily deceivable vulgar only, but of wise and grave
discern^rs; and that, when no interest could oblige them to agree together in a
common Lie. I say, we have the light of all these circumstances to confirm us
in the belief of things done by persons of despicable power and knowledge,
beyond the reach of Art and ordinary Nature. Standing public Records have been
kept of these well-attested Relations, and Epocha's made of those unwonted
events. Laws in many Nations have been enacted against those vile practices;
those among the Jews and our own are notorious; such cases have been often
determined near us, by wise and reverend Judges, upon clear and convictive
Evidence: and thousands in our own Nation have suffered death for their vile
compacts with apostate spirits. All these I might largely prove in their
particular instances, but that it is not needful, since those that deny the
being of Witches, do it not out of ignorance of these heads of Argument, of
which probably they have heard a thousand times; but from an apprehension that
such a belief is absurd, and the things impossible. And upon these presumptions
they contemn all demonstrations of this nature, and are hardened against
conviction. And I think, those that can believe all Histories are Romances;
That all the wiser world have agreed together to juggle mankind into a common
belief of ungrounded fables; That the sound senses of multitudes together may
deceive them, and Laws are built upon Chimera's; That the gravest and wisest
Judges have been Murderers, and the sagest persons Fools, or designing
Impostors: I say, those that can believe this heap of absurdities, are either
more credulous than those whose credulity they reprehend; or else have some
extraordinary evidence of their persuasion, viz. That it is absurd and
impossible there should be a Witch or Apparition. And I am confident, were
those little appearances removed which men have formed in their fancies against
the belief of such things, their own evidence would make its way to men's
assent, without any more arguments than what they know already to enforce it.
There is nothing then necessary to be done, in order to the establishing the
belief I would reconcile to men's minds, but to endeavor the removal of those
prejudices they have received against it: the chief of which I shall
particularly deal with. And I begin with that bold Assertion, That

SECT. II.
I.
(I.) THe NOTION of a Spirit is impossible and contradictious, and consequently
so is that of Witches, the belief of which is founded on that Doctrine.

TO WHICH OBJECTION I answer,

(1) If the notion of a Spirit be absurd as is pretended, that of a GOD and a
SOUL distinct from matter, and immortal, are likewise absurdities. And then,
that the world was jumbled into this elegant and orderly Fabric by chance; and
that our Souls are only parts of matter that came together we know not whence
nor how, and shall again shortly be dissolved into those loose Atoms that
compound them; That all our conceptions are but the thrusting of one part of
matter against another; and the Idea's of our minds mere blind and casual
motions. These, and a thou^and more the grossest impossibilities and
absurdities (consequents of this Proposition, That the notion of a Spirit is
absurd) will be sad certainties and demonstrations. And with such Assertors I
would cease to discourse about Witches and Apparitions, and address my self to
obtain their assent to Truths infinitely more sacred.

And yet (2) though it should be granted them, that a substance immaterial is
as much a contradiction as they can fancy; yet why should they not believe that
the Air and all the Regions above us, may have their invisible intellectual
Agents, of nature like unto our Souls, be that what it will, and some of them
at least as much degenerate as the vilest and most mischievous among men? This
Hypothesis will be enough to secure the possibility of Witches and Apparitions.
And that all the upper Stories of the Universe are furnished with Inhabitants,
it is infinitely reasonable to conclude, from the analogy of Nature; since we
see there is nothing so contemptible and vile in the world we reside in, but
has its living Creatures that dwell upon it; the Earth, the Water, the
inferior Air, the bodies of Animals, the flesh, the skin, the entrails; the
leaves, the roots, the stalks of Vegetables; yea, and all kind of Minerals in
the subterraneous Regions. I say, all these have their proper Inhabitants; yea,
I suppose this rule may hold in all distinct kinds of Bodies in the world, That
they have their peculiar Animals. The certainty of which, I believe the
improvement of microscopical Observations will discover. From whence I infer,
That since this little Spot is so thickly peopled in every Atome of it, it is
weakness to think that all the vast spaces above, and hollows under ground, are
desert and uninhabited. And if both the superior and lower Continents of the
Universe have their Inhabitants also, it is exceedingly improbable, arguing from
the same analogy, that they are all of the mere sensible nature, but that there
are at least some of the Rational and Intellectual Orders. Which supposed,
there is good foundation for the belief of Witches and Apparitions, though the
notion of a Spirit should prove as absurd, and unphilosophical, as I judge the
denial of it. And so this first Objection comes to nothing. I descend then to
the second Prejudice, which may be thus formed in behalf of the Objectors.

SECT. III.
II.
(II.) THERE ARE Actions in most of those Relations ascribed to Witches, which
are ridiculous and impossible in the nature of things; such are (1) their
flying out of windows, after they have anointed themselves, to remote places.
(2) Their transformation into Cats, Hares, and other Creatures. (3) Their
feeling all the hurts in their own bodies which they have received in those.
(4) Their raising Tempests, by muttering some nonsensical words, or performing
ceremonies alike impertinent as ridiculous. And (5) their being sucked in a
certain private place of their bodies by a Familiar. These are presumed to be
actions inconsistent with the nature of Spirits, and above the powers of those
poor and miserable Agents. And therefore the Objection supposes them performed
only by the Fancy; and that the whole mystery of Witchcraft is but an illusion
of crasie imagination.

TO this aggregate Objection I return, (1) In the general, The more absurd and
unaccountable these actions seem, the greater confirmations are they to me of
the truth of those Relations, and the reality of what the Objectors would
destroy For these circumstances being exceeding unlikely, judging by the
measures of common belief, it is the greater probability they are not
fictitious: For the contrivers of Fictions use to form them as near as they can
conformably to the most unsuspected realities, endeavoring to make them look
as like truth as is possible in the main supposals, though withal they make
them strange in the circumstance. None but a fool or madman would re^ate, with
a purpose of having it believed, that he saw in Ireland Men with hoofs on their
heads, and eyes in their breasts; or if any should be so ridiculously vain, as
to be serious in such an incredible Romance, it cannot be supposed that all
Travelers that come into those parts after him should tell the same story.
There is a large field in fiction; and if all those Relations were arbitrary
compositions, doubtless the first Romancers would have framed them more
agreeable to the common doctrine of Spirits; at least, after these supposed
absurdities had been a thousand times laughed at, people by this time would
have learned to correct those obnoxious extravagancies; and though they have
not yet more veracity than the Ages of Ignorance and Superstition, yet one
would expect they should have got more cunning. This supposed impossibility
then of these performances, seems to me a probable argument that they are not
wilful and designed Forgeries. And if they are Fancies, it is somewhat strange,
that Imagination, which is the most various thing in all the world, should
infinitely repeat the same conceit in all times and places.

But again (2) the strange Actions related of Witches, and presumed impossible,
are not ascribed to their own powers; but to the Agency of those wicked
Confederates they employ. And to affirm that those evil spirits cannot do that
which we conceit impossible, is boldly to stint the powers of Creatures, whose
natures and faculties we know not; and to measure the world of Spirits by the
narrow rules of our own impotent beings. We see among our selves the
performances of some out-go the conceits and possibilities of others; and we
know many things may be done by the Mathematics and Mechanic Artifice, which
common heads think impossible to be effected by the honest ways of Art and
Nature. And doubtless, the subtilties and powers of those mischievous Fiends
are as much beyond the reach and activities of the most knowing Agents among
us, as theirs are beyond the wit and ability of the most rustic and
illiterate. So that the utmost that any man's reason in the world can amount to
in this particular, is only this, That he cannot conceive how such things can
be performed; which only argues the weakness and imperfection of our knowledge
and apprehensions, not the impossibility of those performances: and we can no
more from hence form an Argument against them, than against the most ordinary
effects in Nature. We cannot conceive how the Foetus is formed in the Womb, nor
as much as how a Plant springs from the Earth we tread on; we know not how our
Souls move the Body, nor how these dislant and extreme natures are united; as I
have abundantly shown in my SCEPSIS SCIENTIFICA. And if we are ignorant of the
most obvious things about us, and the most considerable within our selves, it is
then no wonder that we know not the constitution and powers of the Creatures,
to whom we are such strangers. Briesly then, matters of fact well proved ought
not to be denied, because we cannot conceive how they can be performed. Nor is
it a reasonable method of inserence, first to presume the thing impossible, and
thence to conclude that the fact cannot be proved. On the contrary, we should
judge of the action by the evidence, and not the evidence by the measures of
our fancies about the action. This is proudly to exalt our own opinions above
the clearest testimonies and most sensible demonstrations of fact: and so to
give the Lie to all Mankind, rather than distrust the conceits of our bold
imaginations. But yet further,

(3) I think there is nothing in the instances mentioned, but what may as well
be accounted for by the Rules of Reason and Philosophy, as the ordinary affairs
of Nature. For in resolving natural Phenomenon, we can only assign the
probable causes, sheing how things may be, not presuming how they are. And in
the particulars under our Examen, we may give an account how it is possible, and
not unlikely, that such things (though somewhat varying from the common road of
Nature) may be acted. And if our narrow and contracted minds can furnish us
with apprehensions of the way and manner of such performances, though perhaps
not the true ones, it is an argument that such things may be effected by
creatures whose powers and knowledge are so vastly exceeding ours. I shall
endeavor theresore briefly to suggest some things that may render the
possibility of these performances conceivable, in order to the removal of this
Objection, that they are contradictions and impossible.

For the FIRST then, That the confederate Spirit should transport the Witch
through the Air to the place of general Rendezvous, there is no difficulty in
conceiving it; and if that be true which great Philosophers affirm, concerning
the real separability of the Soul from the Body without death, there is yet
less; for then it is easy to apprehend, that the Soul having left its gross and
sluggish body behind it, and being clothed only with its immediate vehicle of
Air, or more subtle matter, may be quickly conducted to any place it would be
at by those officious Spirits that attend it. And though I adventure to affirm
nothing concerning the truth and certainty of this Supposition, yet I must
needs say, it does not seem to me unreasonable. And our experience of
Apoplexies, Epilepsies, Ecstasies, and the strange things men report to have
seen during those Deliquiums, look favorably upon this conjecture; which seems
to me to contradict no principle of Reason or Philosophy; since Death consists
not so much in the actual separation of Soul and Body, as in the indisposition
and unfitness of the Body for vital union, as an excellent Philosopher has
made good. On which Hypothesis, the Witches anointing her self before she takes
her flight, may perhaps serve to keep the Body tenantable, and in fit
disposition to receive the Spirit at its return. These things, I say, we may
conceive, though I affirm nothing about them; and there is not any thing in
such conceptions but what has been owned by men of worth and name, and may
seem fair and accountable enough to those who judge not altogether by the
measures of the populace and customary opinion. And there is a saying of the
great Apostle that seems to countenance this Platonic notion; what is the
meaning else of that expression, [Whether in the body or out of the body, I
cannot tell] except the Soul may be separated from the Body without death?
which if it be granted possible, it is sufficient for my purpose. And

(2) The Transformations of Witches into the shapes of other Animals, upon the
same supposal is very conceivable, since then it is easy enough to imagine,
that the power of imagination may form those passive and pliable vehicles into
those shapes, with more ease than the fancy of the Mother can the stubborn
matter of the Foetus in the womb, as we see it frequently does in the instances
that occur of Signatures and monstrous Singularities; and perhaps sometimes the
confederate Spirit puts tricks upon the senses of the Spectators, and those
shapes are only illusions.

But then (3) when they feel the hurts in their gross bodies, that they receive
in their airy vehicles, they must be supposed to have been really present, at
least in these latter; and it is no more difficult to apprehend how the hurts of
those should be translated upon their other bodies, than how diseases should be
inflicted by the imagination, or how the fancy of the Mother should wound the
Foetus, as several credible relations do attest.

And (4) for their raising Storms and Tempests, They do it not, be sure, by
their own, but by the power of the Prince of the Air, their Friend and Allie;
and the Ceremonies that are enjoined them are doubtless nothing else but
entertainments for their imaginations, and are likely designed to persuade
them, that they do these strange things themselves.

And (lastly) for their being sucked by the Familiar, I say (1) we know so
little of the nature of Doemons and Spirits, that it is no wonder we cannot
certainly divine the reason of so strange an action. And yet (2) we may
conjecture at some things that may render it less improbable. For some have
thought that the Genii (whom both the Platonical and Christian Antiquity
thought embodied) are recreated by the reeks and vapors of humane blood, and
the spirits that proceed from them: Which supposal (if we grant them bodies) is
not unlikely, every thing being refreshed and nourished by its like. And that
they are not perfectly abstract from all body and matter, besides the reverence
we owe to the wisest antiquity, there are several considerable Arguments I
could allege to render it exceeding probable. Which things supposed, the
Devil's sucking the Sorceress is no great wonder, nor difficult to be accounted
for. Or perhaps (3) this may be only a diabolical Sacrament and Ceremony to
confirm the hellish Covenant. To which I add, (4) That which to me seems most
probable, viz. That the Familiar does not only suck the Witch, but in the
action infuseth some poisonous ferment into her, which gives her Imagination
and Spirits a magical tincture, whereby they become mischievously influential;
and the word venefica intimates some such matter. Now that the imagination has
a mighty power in operation, is seen in the just now mentioned Signatures and
Diseases that it causes; and that the fancy is modified by the qualities of
the blood and spirits, is too evident to need proof. Which things supposed,
it is plain to conceive that the evil spirit having breathed some vile vapor
into the body of the Witch, it may taint her blood and spirits with a noxious
quality, by which her infected imagination, heightened by melancholy and this
worse cause, may do much hurt upon bodies that are impressible by such
influences. And it is very likely that this ferment disposes the imagination of
the Sorceress to cause the mentioned (...), or separation of the Soul from the
Body, and may perhaps keep the Body in sit temper for its re-entry; as also it
may facilitate transformation, which, it may be, could not be effected by
ordinary and unassisted imagination.

Thus we see, it is not so desperate to form an apprehension of the manner of
these odd performances; and though they are not done the way I have described,
yet what I have said may help us to a conceit of the possibility, which
suffices for my purpose. And though the Hypotheses I have gone upon will seem
as unlikely to some, as the things they attempt to explain are to others; yet I
must desire their leave to suggest, that most things seem improbable
(especially to the conceited and opinionative) at first proposal: and many
great truths are strange and odd, till custom and acquaintance have reconciled
them to our fancies. And I Will presume to add on this occasion, (though I love
not to be confident in assirming) that there is none of the Platonical
supposals I have used, but what I could make appear to be fair and reasonable,
to the capable and unprejudiced.

SECT. IV.
III.
BUT (III.) I come to another prejudice against the being of Witches, which is,
That it is very improbable that the Devil, who is a wise and mighty Spirit,
should be at the beck of a poor Hag, and have so little to do, as to attend the
Errands and impotent Lusts of a silly Old woman.

TO which I might answer, (1) That it is much more improbable that all the world
should be deceived in matters of fact, and circumstances of the clearest
evidence and conviction; than that the Devil, who is wicked, should be also
unwise; and that he that persuades all his subjects and accomplices out of
their wits, should himself act like his own Temptations and Persuasions. In
brief, there is nothing more strange in this Objection, than that wickedness is
baseness and servility; and that the Devil is at leisure to serve those, he is
at leisure to tempt, and industrious to ruin. And again, (2) I see no
necessity to believe that the Devil is always the Witches Confederate; but
perhaps it may fitly be considered, whether the Familiar be not some departed
humane Spirit, forsaken of God and goodness, and swallowed up by the unsatiable
desire of mischief and revenge, which possibly by the Laws and capacity of its
state it cannot execute immediately. And why we should presume that the Devil
should have the liberty of wandering up and down the Earth and Air, when he is
said to be held in the Chains of darkness; and yet that the separated Souls of
the wicked, of whom no such thing is affirmed in any sacred Record, should be
thought so imprisoned, that they cannot possibly wag from the place of their
confinement, I know no shadow of conjecture. This conceit I Am confident has
prejudiced many against the belief of Witches and Apparitions; they not being
able to conceive that the Devil should be so ludicrous as appearing spirits are
sometimes reported to be in their frolicks; and they presume, that souls
departed never revisit the free and open Regions; which confidence, I know
nothing to justify: For since good men in their state of separation are said
to be (...), why the wicked may not be supposed to be (...) in the worst sense
of the word, I know nothing to help me to imagine. And if it be supposed that
the Imps of Witches are sometimes wicked spirits of our own kind and nature,
and possibly the same that have been Sorcerers and Witches in this life: This
supposal may give a fairer and more probable account of many of the actions of
Sorcery and Witchcraft, than the other Hypothesis, that they are always Devils.
And to this conjecture I Will adventure to subjoyn another, which also has its
probability, viz. (3) That it is not impossible but the Familiars of Witches are
a vile kind of spirits, of a very inferior Constitution and nature, and none
of those that were once of the highest Hierarchy, now degenerated into the
spirits we call Devils. And for my part I must confess, that I think the common
division of spirits much too general; conceiving it likely there may be as
great a variety of intellectual Creatures in the invisible world, as there is
of Animals in the visible: and that all the superior, yea, and inferior
Regions, have their several kinds of spirits differing in their natural
perfections, as well as in the kinds and degrees of their depravities; which
being supposed, it is very probable that those of the basest and meanest Orders
are they, who submit to the mentioned servilities. And thus the sagess and
grandeur of the Prince of darkness need not be brought into question.

SECT. V.
IV.
BUt (IV) the opinion of Witches seems to some, to accuse Providence, and to
suggest that it has exposed Innocents to the fury and malice of revengeful
Fiends; yea, and supposes those most obnoxious, for whom we might most
reasonably expect a more special tutelary care and protection; most of the
cruel practices of those presumed Instruments of Hell, being upon Children, who
as they least deserve to be deserted by that Providence that superintends all
things, so they most need its guardian influence.

TO this so specious an Objection I have these things to answer.

(1) Providence is an unfathomable Depth; and if we should not believe the
Phenomenon of our senses, before we can reconcile them to our notions of
Providence, we must be grosser Scepticks than ever yet were extant. The
miseries of the present life, the unequal distributions of good and evil, the
ignorance and barbarity of the greatest part of Mankind, the fatal
disadvantages we are all under, and the hazard we run of being eternally
miserable and undone; these, I say, are things that can hardly be made
consistent with that Wisdom and Goodness that we are sure has made and mingled
it self with all things. And yet we believe there is a beauty and harmony, and
goodness in that Providence, though we cannot unriddle it in particular
instances; nor, by reason of our ignorance and imperfection, clear it from
contradicting appearances; and consequently, we ought not to deny the being of
Witches and Apparitions, because they will create us some difficulties in our
notions of Providence. But to come more close, (2) Those that believe that
Infants are Heirs of Hell, and Children of the Devil as soon as they are
disclosed to the world, cannot certainly offer such an Objection; for what is a
little tri^ling pain of a moment, to those eternal Tortures, to which, if they
die as soon as they are born, according to the Tenor of this Doctrine, they are
everlastingly exposed? But however the case stands as to that, it is certain,
(3) That Providence has not secured them from other violences they are
obnoxious to, from cruelty and accident; and yet we accuse It not when a whole
Townful of Innocents fall a Victim to the rage and ferity of barbarous
Executioners in Wars and Massacres. To which I add (4) That it is likely the
mischief is not so often done by the evil spirit immediately, but by the
malignant influence of the Sorceress, whose power of hurting consists in the
forementioned ferment, which is infused into her by the Familiar. So that I am
apt to think there may be a power of real fascination in the Witches eyes and
imagination, by which for the most part she acts upon tender bodies. Nescio
quis teneros oculus -- For the pestilential spirits being darted by a spightful
and vigorous imagination from the eye, and meeting with those that are weak and
passive in the bodies which they enter, will not fail to infect them with a
noxious quality that makes dangerous and strange alterations in the person
invaded by this poisonous influence: which way of acting by subtle and
invisible instruments, is ordinary and familiar in all natural efficiencies.
And it is now past question, that nature for the most part acts by subtle
streams and aporrhoea's of minute particles, which pass from one body to
another. Or however that be, this kind of agency is as conceivable as any of
those qualities ignorance has called Sympathy and Antipathy, the reality of
which we doubt not, though the manner of action be unknown. Yea, the thing I
speak of is as easy to be apprehended, as how infection should pass in certain
tenuious streams through the Air from one house to another; or, as how the
biting of a mad Dog should fill all the Blood and Spirits with a venomous and
malign ferment; the application of the virtue doing the same in our case, as
that of contact does in this* Yea, some kinds of fascination are performed in
this grosser and more sensible way, as by striking, giving Apples, and the
like, by which the contagious quality may be transmitted, as we see Diseases
often are by the touch. Now in this way of conjecture a good account may be
given why Witches are most powerful upon Children and timorous persons, viz.
because their spirits and imaginations being weak and passive, are not able to
resist the fatal invasion; whereas men of bold minds, who have plenty of strong
and vigorous spirits, are secure from the contagion; as in pestilential Airs
clean bodies are not so liable to infection as other tempers. Thus then we see
it is likely enough, that very often the Sorceress her self does the mischief;
and we know, de facto, that Providence does not always secure us from one
another injuries: And yet I must confess, that many times also the evil spirit
is the mischievous Agent; though this confession draw on me another Objection,
which I next propose.

SECT. VI.
V.
(V.) THEN it may be said, that if wicked spirits can hurt us by the direction,
and at the desire of a Witch, one would think they should have the same power
to do us injury without instigation or compact; and if this be granted, it is a
wonder that we are not always annoyed and infested by them. To which

I RETURN, (1) That the Laws, Liberties, and Restraints of the Inhabitants of
the other world are to us utterly unknown; and this way we can only argue our
selves into confessions of our ignorance, which every man must acknowledge that
is not as immodest as ignorant. It must be granted by all that own the being,
power, and malice of evil Spirits, that the security we enjoy is wonderful,
whether they act by Witches or not; and by what Laws they are kept from making
us a prey, to speak like Philosophers, we cannot tell: yea, why they should be
permitted to tempt and ruin us in our Souls, and restrained from touching or
hurting us in our Bodies, is a mystery not easily accountable. But yet (2)
though we acknowledge their power to vex and torment us in our Bodies also; yet
a reason may be given why they are less frequent in this kind of mischief, viz.
because their main designs are levelled against the interest and happiness of
our Souls* which they can best promote, when their actions are most sly and
secret; whereas did they ordinarily persecute men in their Bodies, their agency
and wicked influence would be discovered, and make a mighty noise in the world,
whereby men would be awakened to a suitable and vigorous opposition, by the use
of such means as would engage Providence to rescue them from their rage and
cruelties; and at last defeat them in their great purposes of undoing us
eternally. Thus we may conceive that the security we enjoy may well enough
consist with the power and malice of those evil Spirits; and upon this account
we may suppose that Laws of their own may prohibit their unlicens'd injuries,
not from any goodness there is in their Constitutions, but in order to the more
successful carrying on the projects of the dark Kingdom; as Generals forbid
Plunder, not out of love to their Enemies, but in order to their own Success.
And hence (3) we may suppose a Law of permission to hurt us at the instance of
the Sorceress, may well s^and with the policy of Hell, since by gratifying the
wicked person, they encourage her in malice and revenge, and promote thereby
the main ends of their black confederacy, which are to propagate wickedness,
and to ruin us in our eternal interests. And yet (4) it is clear to those that
believe the History of the Gospel, that wicked spirits have vexed the bodies of
men, without any instigation that we read of; and at this day it is very likely
that many of the strange accidents and diseases that befall us, may be the
infliction of evil spirits, prompted to hurt us only by the delight they take
in mischief. So that we cannot argue the improbability of their hurting
Children and others by Witches, from our own security and freedom from the
effects of their malice, which perhaps we feel in more instances than we are
aware of.

SECT. VII.
VI.
BUT (VI) another prejudice against the belief of Witches, is, a presumption
upon the enormous force of melancholy and imagination, which without doubt can
do wonderful things, and beget strange persuasions; and to these causes some
ascribe the presumed effects of Sorcery and Witchcraft. To which I reply
briefly; and yet I hope sufficiently,

(I.) THAT to resolve all the clear circumstances os Fact, which we find in
well-attested and confirmed Relations of this kind, into the power of
deceivable imagination, is to make fancy the greater prodigy; and to suppose,
that it can do stranger feats than are believed of any other kind of
fascination. And to think that Pins and Nails, for instance, can by the power
of imagination be conveyed within the skin; or that imagination should deceive
so many as have been witnesses in Objects of sense, in all the circumstances of
discovery; this, I say, is to be infinitely more credulous than the assertors
of Sorcery and Demoniack Contracts. And by the same reason it may be believed,
that all the Battles and strange events of the world, which our selves have not
seen, are but dreams and fond imaginations, and like those that are fought in
the Clouds, when the Brains of the deluded Spectators are the only Theater of
those fancied transactions. And (2) to deny evidence of act, because their
imagination may deceive the Relators, when we have no reason to think so but a
bare presumption that there is no such thing as is related, is quite to destroy
the credit of all humane testimony, and to make all men liars in a larger sense
than the Prophet concluded in his haste. For not only the melancholic and the
fanciful, but the grave and the sober, whose judgments we have no reason to
suspect to be tainted by their imaginations, have from their own knowledge and
experience made reports of this nature. But to this it will possibly be
rejoined, and the Reply will be another prejudice against the belief for which
I contend, viz.

SECT. VIII.
VII.
(VII.) THAT it is a suspicious circumstance that Watchcraft is but a fancy,
since the persons that are accused are commonly poor and miserable old women,
who are overgrown with discontent and melancholy, which are very imaginative;
and the persons said to be bewitched are for the most part Children, or people
very weak, who are easily imposed upon, and are apt to receive strong
impressions from nothing: whereas were there any such thing really, it is not
likely, but that the more cunning and subtle desperado's, who might the more
successfully carry on the mischievous designs of the dark Kingdom, should be
oftener engaged in those black confederacies, and also one would expect effects
of the hellish combination upon others than the innocent and ignorant.

TO which Objection it might perhaps be enough to return (as has been above
suggested) that nothing can be concluded by this and such like arguings, but
that the policy and menages of the Instruments of darkness are to us altogether
unknown, and as much in the dark as their natures; Mankind being no more
acquainted with the reasons and methods of action in the other world, than poor
Cottagers and Mechanics are with the Intrigues of Government, and Reasons of
State. Yea peradventure (2) it is one of the great designs, as it is certainly
the interest of those wicked Agents and Machinators, industriously to hide from
us their influences and ways of acting, and to work, as near as is possible,
incognito: upon which supposal it is easy to conceive a reason, why they most
commonly work by, and upon the weak and the ignorant, who can make no cunning
observations, or tell credible tales to detect their artifice. Besides (3) it is
likely a strong imagination, that cannot be weakened or disturbed by a busy
and subtle ratiocination, is a necessary requisite to those wicked
persormances; and without doubt an heightened and obstinate fancy has a great
influence upon impressible spirits; yea, and as I have conjectured before, on
the more passive and susceptible bodies. And I am very apt to believe, that
there are as real communications and intercourses between our Spirits, as there
are between material Agents; which secret influences, though they are unknown
in their nature and ways of acting, yet they are sufficiently felt in their
effects: for experience attests, that some by the very majesty and greatness of
their Spirits, discovered by nothing but a certain noble air that accompanies
them, will bear down others less great and generous, and make them sneak before
them; and some, by I know not what stupifying virtue, will tie up the tongue,
and consine the spirits of those who are otherwise brisk and voluble. Which
thing supposed, the influences of a Spirit possessed of an active and enormous
imagination, may be malign and fatal where they cannot be resisted; especially
when they are accompanied by those poisonous reaks that the evil spirit
breathes into the Sorceress, which likely are shot out, and applied by a fancy
heightened and prepared by melancholy and discontent. And thus we may conceive
why the melanchclick and envious are used upon such occasions, and for the same
reason the ignorant, since knowledge checks and controuls imagination; and
those that abound much in the imaginative faculties, do not usually exceed in
the rational. And perhaps (4) the Demon himself uses the imagination of the
Witch so qualified for his purpose, even in those actions of mischief which are
more properly his; for it is most probable, that Spirits act not upon bodies
immediately, and by their naked essence, but by means proportionate, and
suitable instruments that they use; upon which account likely it is so strictly
required, that the Sorceress should believe, that so her imagination might be
more at the devotion of the mischievous Agent. And sor the same reason also
Ceremonies are used in Enchantments, viz. for the begetting this diabolical
faith, and heightning the fancy to a degree of strength and vigor sufficient
to make it a fit instrument for the designed performance. Those I think are
reasons of likelihood and probability, why the hellish Confederates are mostly
the ignorant and the melancholic. To pass then to another prejudice.

SECT. IX.
VIII.
(VIII.) THE frequent impostures that are met with in this kind, beget in some
a belief, that all such Relations are Forgeries and Tales; and if we urge the
evidence of a story for the belief of Witches or Apparitions. they will produce
two as seemingly strong and plausible, which shall conclude in mistake or
design; inferring thence, that all others are of the same quality and credit.
But such arguers may please to consider,

(1) THAT a single relation for an Assirmative, sufficiently confirmed and at
tested, is worth a thousand tales of forgery and imposture, from whence an
universal Negative cannot be concluded. So that, though all the Objectors
stories be true, and an hundred times as many more such deceptions; yet one
relation, wherein no fallacy or fraud could be suspected for our Assirmative,
would spoil any Conclusion could be erected on them. And

(2) It seems to me a belief sufficiently bold and precarious, that all these
relations of forgery and mistake should be certain, and not one among all those
which attest the Assirmative reality, with circumstances as good as could be
expected, or wished, should be true; but all fabulous and vain. And they have
no reason to object credulity to the assertors of Sorcery and Witchcraft, that
can swallow so large a morsel. And I desire such Objectors to consider,

(3) Whether it be fair to infer, that because there are some Cheats and
Impostures, that therefore there are no Realities. Indeed frequency of deceit
and fallacy will warrant a greater care and caution in examining; and
scrupulosity and shiness of assent to things wherein fraud has been practiced,
or may in the least degree be suspected: But, to conclude, because that an old
woman's fancy abused her, or some knavish fellows put tricks upon the ignorant
and timorous, that theresore whole Assizes have been a thousand times deceived
in judgments upon matters of fact, and numbers of sober persons have been
forsivorn in things wherein perjury could not advantage them; I say, such
inferences are as void of reason, as they are of charity and good manners.

SECT. X.
IX.
BUT (IX) it may be suggested further, That it cannot be imagined what design
the Devil should have in making those solemn compacts, since persons of such
debauched and irreclaimable dispositions as those with whom he is supposed to
confderate, are pretty securely his, antecedently to the bargain, and cannot be
more so by it, since they cannot put their Souls out of possibility of the
Divine Grace, but by the Sin that is unpardonable; or if they could so dispose
and give away themselves, it will to some seem very unlikely, that a great and
mighty Spirit should oblige himself to such observances, and keep such ado to
secure the Soul of a filly Body, which 'twere odds but it would be His, though
He put himself to no further trouble than that of his ordinary temptations.

TO which suggestions 'twere enough to say, that it is sufficient if the thing
be well proved, though the design be not known. And to argue negatively a fine,
is very unconclusive in such matters. The Laws and Affairs of the other world
(as has been intimated) are vastly differing from those of our Regions, and
therefore it is no wonder we cannot judge of their designs, when we know nothing
of their menages, and so little of their natures. The ignorant looker-on cannot
imagine what the Limner means by those seemingly rude Lines and scrawls which
he intends for the Rudiments of a Picture; and the Figures of Mathematick
operation are nonsense, and dashes at a venture, to one uninstructed in
Mechanics. We are in the dark to one another purposes and intendments; and
there are a thousand intrigues in our little matters, which will not presently
confess their design even to sagacious inquisitors. And therefore it is folly
and incogitancy to argue any thing one way or other from the designs of a sort
of Beings, with whom we so little communicate; and possibly we can take no more
aim, or guess at their projects and designments, than the gazing Beasts can do
at ours, when they see the Traps and Gins that are laid for them, but
understand nothing what they mean. Thus in general.

But I attempt something more particularly, in order to which I must premise,
that the Devil is a name for a Body Politic, in which there are very different
Orders and Degrees of Spirits, and perhaps in as much variety of place and
state, as among our selves; so that it is not one and the same person that makes
all the compacts with those abused and seduced Souls, but they are diverse, and
those it is like of the meanest and basest quality in the Kingdom of darkness:
which being supposed, I offer this account of the probable design of those
wicked Agents, viz. That having none to rule or tyrannize over within the
circle of their own nature and government, they affect a proud Empire over us,
(the desire of Dominion and Authority being largely spread through the whole
circumference of degenerated nature, especially among those, whose pride was
their original transgression) every one of these then desires to get him
Vassals to pay him homage, and to be employed like Slaves in the services of
his Lusts and Appetites; to gratify which desire, it is like enough to be
provided and allowed by the constitution of their State and Government, that
every wicked spirit shall have those Souls as his property, and particular
servants and attendants, whom he can catch in such compacts; as those wild
Beasts that we can take in hunting, are by the allowance of the Law our own;
and those Slaves that a man has purchased, are his peculiar Goods, and the
Vassals of his will. Or rather those deluding Fiends are like the seducing
fellows we call Spirits, who inveigle Children by their false and slattering
promises, and carry them away to the Plantations of America, to be servilely
employed there in the works of their profit and advantage. And as those base
Agents will humor and flatter the simple unwary Youth, till they are on
Shipboard, and without the reach of those that might rescue them from their
hands: In like manner the more mischievous Tempter studies to gratify, please,
and accommodate those he deals with in this kind, till death has lanch'd them
into the Deep, and they are past the danger of Prayers, Repentance, and
Endeavors; and then He uses them as pleases Him. This account I think is not
unreasonable, and 'twill fully answer the Objection. For though the matter be
not as I have conjectured, yet 'twill suggest a way how it may be conceived;
which nulls the pretense, That the Design is unconceivable.

SECT. XI.
X.
BUT then (X) we are still liable to be questioned, how it comes about, that
those proud and insolent Designers practice in this kind upon so few, when one
would expect, that they should be still trading this way, and every where be
driving on the project, which the vileness of men makes so feisable, and would
so much serve the interest of their lusts.

TO which, among other things that might be suggested, I return,

(1) That we are never liable to be so betrayed and abused, till by our vile
dispositions and tendencies we have forfeited the tutelary care, and oversight
of the better Spirits; who, though generally they are our guard and defense
against the malice and violence of evil Angels, yet it may well enough be
thought, that sometimes they may take their leave of such as are swallowed up
by Malice, Envy, and desire of Revenge, qualities most contrary to their Life
and Nature; and leave them exposed to the invasion and solicitations of those
wicked Spirits, to whom such hateful Attributes make them very suitable. And if
there be particular Guardian Angels, as it is not absurd to fancy, it may then
well be supposed, that no man is obnoxious to those projects and attempts, but
only such whose vile and mischievous natures have driven from them their
protecting Genius. And against this dereliction to the power of evil Spirits,
it is likely enough what some affirm, that the Royal Psalmist directs that
Prayer, Psalm. LXXI. ix, x. Cast me not off in the time of old age; forsake me
not when my strength fails. For -- They that keep my Soul [(...), as the LXX
and the Vulgar Latin, Qui custodiunt animam meam] they take counsel together,
say ing, God has forsaken him, persecute him and take him; for there is none
to deliver him. But I add, (2) That it is very probable, that the state wherein
they are, will not easily permit palpable intercourses between the bad Genii
and Mankind, since it is like enough that their own Laws and Government do not
allow their frequent excursions into this World. Or, it may with as great
probability be supposed, that it is a very hard and painful thing for them, to
force their thin and tenuious Bodies into a visible consistence, and such
shapes as are necessary for their designs in their correspondencies with
Witches. For in this action their Bodies must needs be exceedingly compressed,
which cannot well be without a painful sense. And this is perhaps a reason why
there are so few Apparitions, and why appearing Spirits are commonly in such
haste to be gone, viz. that they may be delivered from the unnatural pressure
of their tender vehicles; which I confess holds more, in the apparitions of
good than evil Spirits; most Relations of this kind, describing their
discoveries of themselves, as very transient, (though for those the holy
Scripture records, there may be peculiar reason, why they are not so) whereas
the wicked ones are not altogether so quick, and hasty in their visits: The
reason of which probably is, the great subtilty and tenuity of the Bodies of
the former, which will require far greater degrees of compression, and
consequently of pain, to make them visible; whereas the latter are more
foeculent and gross, and so nearer allied to palpable consistencies, and more
easily reduceable to appearance and visibility.

At this turn, Sir, you may perceive that I have again made use of the
Platonic Hypothesis, That Spirits are embodied, upon which indeed a great part
of my Discourse is grounded: And therefore I hold my self obliged to a short
account of that supposal. It seems then to me very probable, from the nature of
Sense, and Analogy of Nature. For (1) we perceive in our selves, that all Sense
is caused and excited by motion made in matter; and when those motions which
convey sensible impressions to the Brain, the Seat of Sense, are intercepted,
Sense is lost: So that, if we suppose Spirits perfectly to be disjoined from
all matter, it is not conceivable how they can have the sense of any thing; For
how material Objects should any way be perceived, or felt, without vital union
with matter, it is not possible to imagine. Nor does it (2) seem suitable to the
Analogy of Nature, which uses not to make precipitious leaps from one thing to
another, but usually proceeds by orderly steps and gradations: whereas were
there no order of Beings between Us, who are so deeply plunged into the
grossest matter, and pure unbodied Spirits, 'twere a mighty jump in Nature.
Since then the greatest part of the world consists of the finer portions of
matter, and our own Souls are immediately united unto these, it is infinitely
probable to conjecture, that the nearer Orders of Spirits are vitally joined to
such Bodies; and so Nature by degrees ascending still by the more refined and
subtle matter, gets at last to the pure (...) or immaterial minds, which the
Platonists made the highest Order of created Beings. But of this I have
discoursed elsewhere, and have said thus much of it at present, because it will
enable me to add another Reason of the unfrequency of Apparitions and Compacts,
viz.

(3) Because it is very likely, that these Regions are very unsuitable, and
disproportioned to the frame and temper of their Senses and Bodies; so that
perhaps, the courser Spirits can no more bear the Air of our World, than Bats
and Owls can the brightest Beams of Day. Nor can the purer and better any more
endure the noisome steams, and poisonous reeks of this Dunghill Earth, than the
delicate can bear a confinement in nasty Dungeons, and the foul squalid Caverns
of uncomfortable Darkness. So that it is no more wonder, that the better Spirits
no oftener appear, than that men are not more frequently in the dark Hollows
under ground. Nor is it any more strange that evil Spirits so rarely visit us,
than that Fishes do not ordinarily sly in the Air, as it is said one sort of
them does; or that we see not the Batt daily fluttering in the Beams of the
Sun. And now by the help of what I have spoken under this Head, I am provided
with some things wherewith to disable another Objection, which I thus propose.

SECT. XII.
XI.
(XI.) IF THERE be such an intercourse between Evil Spirits and the Wicked, How
comes it about that there is no correspondence between Good Angels and the
Virtuous? since without doubt these are as desirous to propagate the Spirit and
designs of the upper and better World, as those are to promote the Interest of
the Kingdom of Darkness.

WHICH way of arguing is still from our Ignorance of the State and Government
of the other World, which must be confessed, and may, without prejudice to the
Proposition I defend. But particularly, I say, (1) That we have ground enough
to believe, that good Spirits do interpose in, yea, and govern our Affairs. For
that there is a Providence reaching from Heaven to Earth, is generally
acknowledged; but that this supposes all things to be ordered by the immediate
influence, and interposal of the Supreme Deity, some think, is not very
Philosophical to suppose; since, if we judge by the Analogy of the natural
World, all things we see are carried on by the Ministry of second Causes, and
intermediate Agents. And it does not seem so magnificent and becoming an
apprehension of the Supreme Numen, to fancy his immediate hand in every trivial
Management. But it is exceeding likely to conjecture, that much of the
Government of us, and our Affairs, is committed to the better Spirits, with a
due subordination and subserviency to the Will of the chief Rector of the
Universe. And it is not absurd to believe, that there is a Government runs from
highest to lowest, the better and more perfect Orders of Being still ruling the
inferior and less perfect. So that some one would fancy that perhaps the
Angels may manage us, as we do the Creatures that God and Nature have placed
under our Empire and Dominion. But however that is, That God rules the lower
World by the Ministry of Angels, is very consonant to the sacred Oracles,
Thus, Deuteronomy. XXXII. 8, 9. When the most High divided the Nations their
Inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the
people, (...), according to the number of the Angels of God, as the Septuagint
renders it; the Authority of which Translation, is abundantly credited and
asserted, by its being quoted in the New Testament, without notice of the
Hebrew Text; even there where it differs from it, as Learned men have observed.
We know also, that Angels were very familiar with the Patriarchs of old; and
Jacob's Ladder is a Mystery, which imports their ministering in the affairs of
the Lower World. Thus Origin and others understand that to be spoken by the
Presidential Angels, Jerem. LI. 9. We would have healed BABYLON, but she is not
healed: forsake her, and let us go. Like the Voice heard in the Temple before
the taking of Jerusalem by Titus, (...). And before Nebuchadnezzar was sent to
learn Wisdom and Religion among the Beasts, He sees a Watcher, according to the
70. an Angel, and an holy One come down from Heaven, Dan. IV. 13. who
pronounces the sad Decree against Him, and calls it the Decree of the
Watchers, who very probably were the Guardian-Genii of Himself and his Kingdom.
And that there are particular Angels that have the special Rule and Government
of particular Kingdoms, Provinces, Cities, yea and of Persons, I know nothing
that can make improbable: The instance is notorious in Daniel, of the Angels of
Persia and Graecia, that hindered the other that was engaged for the concerns of
Judaea: yea, our Savior himself tells us, that Children have their Angels; and
the Congregation of Disciples supposed that St. Peter had his. Which things, if
they be granted, the good Spirits have not so little to do with us, and our
matters, as is generally believed. And perhaps it would not be absurd, if we
referred many of the strange thwarts, and unexpected events, the
disappointments and lucky co-incidences that befall us, the unaccountable
fortunes and successes that attend some lucky men, and the unhappy fates that
dog others that seem born to be miserable; the Fame and Favor that still waits
on some without any conceivable motive to allure it, and the general neglect of
others more deserving, whose worth is not acknowledged; I say, these, and such
like odd things, may with the greatest probability be resolved into the Conduct
and Menages of those invisible Supervisors, that preside over, and govern our
affairs.

But if they so far concern themselves in our matters, how is it that they
appear not to maintain a visible and confessed correspondence with some of the
better Mortals, who are most fitted for their Communications and their
influence? To which I have said some things already, when I accounted for the
unfrequency of Apparitions; and I now add what I intend for another return to
the main Objection, viz.

(2) That the apparition of good Spirits is not needful for the Designs of the
better world, whatever such may be for the interest of the other. For we have
had the Appearance and Cohabitation of the Son of God; we have Moses and the
Prophets, and the continued influence of the Spirit, the greatest arguments to
strengthen Faith, the most powerful motives to excite our Love, and the noblest
encouragements to quicken and raise our Desires and Hopes, any of which are
more than the apparition of an Angel; which would indeed be a great
gratification of the Animal Life, but 'twould render our* Faith less noble and
less generous, were it frequently s^ assisted: Blessed are they that believe,
and yet have not seen. Besides which, the good Angels have no such ends to
prosecute, as the gaining any Vassals to serve them, they being ministering
Spirits for our good, and no self-designers for a proud and insolent Dominion
over us. And it may be perhaps not impertinently added, That they are not
always evil Spirits that appear, as is, I know not well upon what grounds,
generally imagined; but that the extraordinary detections of Murders, latent
Treasures, falsified and unfulfilled Bequests, which are sometimes made by
Apparitions, may be the courteous Discoveries of the better and more benign
Genii. Yea, it is not unlikely, that those warnings that the world sometimes
has of approaching Judgments and Calamities by Prodigies, and sundry odd
Phenomenon, are the kind Informations of some of the Inhabitants of the upper
world. Thus, was Jerusalem forewarned before its sacking by Antiochus, by those
airy Horsemen that were seen through all the City, for almost forty days
together, 2 Mac. V. 2, 3. and the other Prodigious Portents that fore-ran its
Destruction by Titus: which I mention, because they are notorious instances.
And though, for mine own part, I scorn the ordinary Tales of Prodigies, which
proceed from superstitious fears, and unacquaintance with Nature, and have been
used to bad purposes by the zealous and the ignorant; Yet I think that the
Arguments that are brought by a late very ingenious Author, to conclude against
such Warnings and Predictions in the whole kind, are short and inconsequent,
and built upon too narrow Hypotheses. For if it be supposed, that there is a
sort of Spirits over us, and about us, who can give a probable guess at the
more remarkable futurities, I know not why it may not be conjectured, that the
kindness they have for us, and the appetite of foretelling strange things, and
the putting the world upon expectation, which we find is very grateful to our
own natures, may not incline them also to give us some general notice of those
uncommon Events which they foresee. And I yet perceive no reason we have to
fancy, that whatever is done in this kind, must needs be either immediately
from Heaven, or from the Angels, by extraordinary Commission and Appointment.
But it seems to me not unreasonable to believe, that those officious Spirits
that oversee our Affairs, perceiving some mighty and sad alterations at hand,
in which their Charge is much concerned, cannot choose, by reason of their
affection to us, but give us some seasonable hints of those approaching
Calamities; to which also their natural desire to foretell strange things to
come, may contribute to incline them. And by this Hypothesis, the fairest
probabilities, and strongest ratiocinations against Prodigies, may be made
unserviceable. But this only by the way.

SECT. XIII.
I Desire it may be considered further,

(3) That God himself affords his intimacies and converses to the better Souls,
that are prepared for it; which is a privilege infinitely beyond Angelical
correspondence.

I confess the proud and fantastic pretenses of many of the conceited
Melancholists in this age, to Divine Communion, have prejudiced diverse
intelligent persons against the belief of any such happy vouchsafement; so that
they conclude the Doctrine of immediate Communion with the Deity in this Life
to be but an highflown notion of warm imagination, and overluscious
self-flattery; and I acknowledge I have my self had thoughts of this nature,
supposing Communion with God to be nothing else but the exercise of virtue, and
that peace, and those Comforts which naturally result from it.

But I have considered since, that God's more near and immediate imparting
himself to the Soul that is prepared for that happiness by divine Love,
Humility, and Resignation, in the way of a vital touch, and sense, is a thing
possible in it self, and will be a great part of our Heaven. That Glory is
begun in Grace, and God is pleased to give some excellent Souls the happy
Antepast. That holy men in ancient times have sought and gloried in this
enjoyment, and never complain so sorely as when it was with held, and
interrupted. That the expressions of Scripture run infinitely this way, and the
best of Modern good men, do from their own experience attest it. That this
spiritualizeth Religion, and renders its enjoyments more comfortable and
delicious. That it keeps the Soul under a vivid sense of God, and is a grand
security against Temptation. That it holds it steady amid the flatteries of a
prosperous state, and gives it the most grounded anchorage and sup port amid
the Waves of an adverse condition. That it is the noblest encouragement to
virtue. and the biggest assurance of an happy Immortality. I say, I considered
these weighty things, and wondered at the carelessness and prejudice os thoughts
that occasioned my suspecting the reality of so glorious a Privilege; I saw
how little reason there is in denying matters of inward sense, because our
selves do not feel them, or cannot form an apprehension of them in our minds. I
am convinced that things of gust and relish must be judged by the sentient and
vital faculties, and not by the noetical exercises of speculative
understandings: And upon the whole, I believe infinitely that the Divine Spirit
affords its sensible presence, and immediate beatifick Touch to some rare
Souls, who are divested of carnal self, and mundane pleasures, abstracted from
the Body by Prayer and holy Meditation; spiritual in their Desires, and calm in
their Affections; devout Lovers of God, and virtue, and tenderly affectionate
to all the world; sincere in their aims, and circumspect in their actions;
enlarged in their Souls, and clear in their Minds: These I think are the
dispositions that are requisite to fit us for Divine Communion; and God
transacts not in this near way, but with prepared spirits who are thus disposed
for the manifestation of his presence, and his influence: And such, I believe,
he never fails to bless with these happy foretastes of Glory.

But for those that are passionate and conceited, turbulent and notional,
confident and immodest, imperious and malicious; That dote upon trifles, and
run fiercely in the ways of a Sect, that are lifted up in the apprehension of
the glorious prerogatives of themselves and their party, and scorn all the
world besides; For such, I say, be their pretensions what they will, to divine
Communion, Illapses, and Discoveries, I believe them not; Their fancies abuse
them, or they would us. For what communion has Light with Darkness, or the
Spirit of the HOLY ONE with those whose genius and ways are so unlike him? But
the other excellent Souls I described, will as certainly be visited by the
Divine Presence, and Converse, as the Crystalline streams are, with the beams
of Light, or the fitly prepared Earth whose Seed is in it self, will be
actuated by the spirit of Nature.

So that there is no reason to object here the want of Angelical
Communications, though there were none vouchsafed us, since good men enjoy the
Divine, which are infinitely more satisfactory and indearing.

And now I may have leave to proceed to the next Objection, which may be made
to speak thus:

SECT. XIV.
XII.
(XII.) THE belief of Witches, and the wonderful things they are said to
perform by the help of the Confederate Demon, weakens our Faith, and exposes
the World to Infidelity in the great matters of our Religion. For if they by
Diabolical assistance, can inflict and cure Diseases, and do things so much
beyond the Comprehension of our Philosophy, and activity of common Nature; What
assurance can we have, that the Miracles that confirm our Gospel were not the
effects of a Compact of like nature, and that Devils were not cast out by
Beelzebub? If evil Spirits can assume Bodies, and render themselves visible in
humane likeness; What security can we have of the reality of the Resurrection
of Christ? And if, by their help, Witches can enter Chambers invisibly through
Key-holes and little unperceived Crannies, and transform themselves at
pleasure; What Arguments of Divinity are there in our Saviour' s showing
himself in the midst of his Disciples, when the Doors were shut, and his
Transfiguration in the Mount? Miracles are the great inducements of Belief, and
how shall we distinguish a Miracle from a lying Wonder; a Testimony from
Heaven, from a Trick of the Angels of Hell; if they can perform things that
astonish and confound our Reasons, and are beyond all the Possibilities of
Human Nature? This Objection is spiteful and mischievous; but I thus endeavor
to dispatch it.

(1) THE Wonders done by Confederacy with wicked Spirits, cannot derive a
suspicion upon the undoubted Miracles that were wrought by the Author and
Promulgers of our Religion, as if they were performed by Diabolical Compact,
since their Spirit, Endeavors, and Designs, were notoriously contrary to all
the Tendencies, Aims, and Interests of the Kingdom of Darkness. For, as to the
Life and Temper of the blessed and adorable JESUS, we know there was an
incomparable sweetness in his Nature, Humility in his Manners, Calmness in his
Temper, Compassion in his Miracles, Modesty in his Expressions, Holiness in all
his Actions, Hatred of Vice and Baseness, and Love to all the World; all which
are essentially contrary to the Nature and Constitution of Apostate Spirits,
who abound in Pride and Rancour, Insolence and Rude ness, Tyranny and Baseness,
universal Malice, and Hatred of Men. And their Designs are as opposite, as
their Spirit and their Genius. And now, Can the Sun borrow its Light from the
bottomless Abyss? Can Heat and Warmth flow in upon the World from the Regions
of Sno^ and Ice? Can Fire freeze, and Water burn* Can Natures, so infinitely
contrary, communicate, and jump in projects that are destructive to each others
known Interests? Is there any Balsom in the Cockatrices Egg? or, Can the Spirit
of Life slow from the Venom of the Asp? Will the Prince of Darkness strengthen
the Arm that is stretched out to pluck his Usurpt Scepter, and his Spoils from
him? And will he lend his Legions, to assist the Armies of his Enemy against
him? No, these are impossible Supposals; No intelligent Being will
industriously and knowingly contribute to the Contradiction of its own
Principles, the Defeature of its Purposes, and the Ruin of its own dearest
Interests. There is no fear then, that our Faith should receive prejudice from
the acknowledgement of the Being of Witches, and power of evil Spirits, since
it is not the doing wonderful things that is the only Evidence that the Holy
JESUS was from God, and his Doctrine true; but the conjunction of other
circumstances, the holiness of his Life, the reasonableness of his Religion,
and the excellency of his Designs, added credit to his Works, and strengthened
the great Conclusion, That he could be no other than the Son of God, and
Savior of the world. But besides, I say,

(2) That since infinite Wisdom and Goodness rules the World, it cannot be
conceived, that they should give up the greatest part of men to unavoidable
deception. And if evil Angels by their Confederates are permitted to perform
such astonishing things, as seem so evidently to carry God's Seal and Power
with them, for the confirmation of Falsehoods, and gaining credit to Impostors,
without any counter-evidence to disabuse the World; Mankind is exposed to sad
and fatal delusion. And to say that Providence will suffer us to be deceived in
things of the greatest concernment, when we use the best of our care and
endeavors to prevent it, is to speak hard things of God; and in effect to
affirm, That He has nothing to do in the Government of the World, or does not
concern himself in the affairs of poor forlorn men. And if the Providence and
Goodness of God be not a security unto us against such Deceptions, we cannot be
assured, but that we are always abused by those mischievous Agents, in the
Objects of plain sense, and in all the matters of our daily Converses. If ONE
that pretends he is immediately sent from God, to overthrow the ancient Fabric
of Established Worship, and to erect a New Religion in His Name, shall be born
of a Virgin, and honored by a miraculous Star; proclaimed by a Song of seeming
Angels of Light, and worshipped by the wise Sages of the World; Revered by
those of the greatest austerity, and admired by all for a miraculous Wisdom,
beyond his Education and his Years: If He shall feed multitudes with almost
nothing, and fast himself beyond all the possibilities of Nature: If He shall
be transformed into the appearance of extraordinary Glory, and converse with
departed Prophets in their visible Forms: If He shall Cure all Diseases without
Physic or Endeavor, and raise the Dead to Life after they have stunk in their
Graves: If He shall be honored by Voices from Heaven, and attract the
universal wonder of Princes and People: If He shall allay Tempests with a beck,
and cast out Devils with a word: If He shall foretell his own Death
particularly, with its Tragical Circumstances, and his Resurrection after it:
If the Veil of the most famous Temple in the world shall be rent, and the Sun
darkened at his Funeral: If He shall, within the time foretold, break the bonds
of Death, and lift up his Head out of the Grave: If Multitudes of other
departed Souls shall arise with Him, to attend at the Solemnity of his
Resurrection: If He shall after Death, visibly converse, and eat and drink with
diverse persons, who could not be deceived in a matter of clear sense, and
ascend in Glory in the presence of an astonished and admiring Multitude: I say,
if such a one as this should prove a diabolical Impostor, and Providence should
permit him to be so credited and acknowledged; What possibility were there then
for us to be assured, that we are not always deceived? yea, that our very
faculties were not given us only to delude and abuse us? And if so, the next
Conclusion is, That there is no God that judges in the earth; and the best,
and most likely Hypothesis will be, That the world is given up to the
Government of the Devil. But if there be a Providence that superviseth us. (as
nothing is more certain) doubtless it will never suffer poor helpless Creatures
to be inevitably deceived by the craft and subtilty of their mischievous Enemy,
to their undoing; but will without question take such care, that the works
wrought by Divine Power for the Confirmation of Divine Truth, shall have such
visible Marks and Signatures, if not in their Nature, yet in their
Circumstances, Ends, and Designs, as shall discover* whence they are, and
sufficiently distinguish them from all Impostures and Delusions. And though
wicked spirits may perform some strange things that may excite wonder for a
while, yet He has, and will so provide, that they shall be baffled and
discredited; as we know it was in the case of Moses and the Egyptian Magicians.

These things I count sufficient to be said to this last, and shrewdest
Objection; Though some, I understand, except, that I have made it stronger than
the Answer I have applied. That I have urged the argument of unbelievers home,
and represented it in its full strength, I suppose can be no matter of just
reproof: For to triumph over the weakness of a Cause, and to overlook its
strength, is the trick of shallow and interessed Disputers, and the worst way
to defend a good Cause, or confute a bad one. I have therefore all along urged
the most cogent things I could think of, for the interest of the Objectors,
because I would not impose upon my Reader or my self; and the stronger I make
their premises, the more shall I weaken their Conclusion, if I answer them;
which whether I have done, or not, I refer my self to the judgments of the
ingenious and considerate; from whom I should be very glad to be informed in
what particular points my Discourse is defective. General Charges are no
proofs, nor are they easily capable of an answer. Yet, to the mentioned
exception I say

That the strength of the Objection is not my fault, for the reasons alleged;
and for the supposed incompetency of my return, I propose, that if the
circumstances of the Persons, Ends, and Issues be the best Notes of Distinction
between true Miracles and Forgeries, Divine and Diabolical ones, I have then
said enough to secure the Miracles of our Savior, and the Holy men of Ancient
times. But if these Objectors think, they can give us any better, or more
infallible Criteria, I desire them to weigh what I have offered about Miracles
in some of the following Leaves, before they enter that thought among their
certainties. And if their other marks of difference will hold, notwithstanding
those allegations, I suppose the inquisitive believing world would be glad to
know them; and I shall have particular obligations to the discoverer, for the
strength with which he will thereby assist my Answer.

But till I see that, I can say nothing stronger; or if I saw it, which I shall
not in haste expect, I should not be convinced but that the circumstances of
difference which I have noted, are abundantly sufficient to disarm the
Objection; and to show, that though Apparitions, Witchcraft, and daibolical
Wonders are admitted: yet none of these can fasten any slurre, or ground of
dangerous doubt upon the miraculous performances of the H. JESUS and his
Apostles. If the dissatisfied can show it, I shall yield my self an humble
-proselyte to their Reasons; but till I know them, the general suggestion will
not convince me.

Now, besides what I have directly said to the main Objection, I have this to
add to the Objectors, That I could wish they would take care of such
Suggestions; which, if they overthrow not the Opinion they oppose, will
dangerously affront the Religion they would seem to acknowledge. For he that
says, That if there are WITCHES, there is no way to prove that Christ Jesus
was not a Magician, and diabolical Impostor, puts a deadly Weapon into the
hands of the Infidel, and is himself next door to the SIN AGAINST THE HOLT
GHOST: of which, in order to the persuading greater tenderness and caution in
such matters, I give this short account.

SECT. XV.
THE Sin against the Holy Ghost is said to be Unpardonable; by which sad
Attribute, and the discourse of our Savior, Matth^ XII. from the 22. to the
33. verse, we may understand its Nature. In order to which we consider, That
since the Mercies of God, and the Merits of his Son, are infinite, there is
nothing can make a Sin unpardonable, but what makes it incurable; and there is
no Sin but what is curable by a strong Faith, and a vigorous Endeavor: For all
things are possible to him that believes. So that, That which makes a Sin
incurable, must be somewhat that makes Faith impossible, and obstructs all
means of Conviction. In order to the sinding which, we must consider the ways
and methods the Divine Goodness has taken, sor the begetting Faith, and cure
of Infidelity: which it attempted, first, by the Prophets, and holy men of
ancient times, who, by the excellency of their Doctrine, the greatness of their
Miracles, and the holiness of their Lives, endeavored the conviction and
reformation of a stubborn and unbelieving World. But though Few believed their
Report, and men would not be prevailed on by what they did, or what they said;
yet their Insidelity was not hitherto incurable, because further means were
provided in the ministry of John the Baptist, whose Life was more severe, whose
Doctrines were more plain, pressing, and particular; and therefore 'twas
possible that He might have succeeded. Yea, and where He failed, and could not
open men's hearts and their eyes, the effect was still in possibility, and it
might be expected from Him that came after, to whom the Prophets and John were
but the Twilight and the Dawn. And though His miraculous Birth, the Song of
Angels, the Journey of the Wise Men of the East, and the correspondence of
Prophecies, with the Circumstances of the first appearance of the wonderful
Infant: I say, though these had not been taken notice of, yet was there a
further provision made for the cure of Infidelity, in his astonishing Wisdom,
and most excellent Doctrines; For, He spoke as never man did. And when These
were despised and neglected, yet there were other means toward Conviction, and
cure of Unbelief, in those mighty works that bore Testimony of Him, and wore
the evident marks of Divine Power in their Foreheads. But when after all, These
clear and unquestionable Miracles which were wrought by the Spirit of God, and
had eminently his Superscription on them, shall be ascribed to the Agency of
evil Spirits, and Diabolical Compact, as they were by the malicious and
spightful Pharisees in the periods abovementioned; when those great and last
Testimonies against Infidelity, shall be said to be but the tricks of Sorcery,
and Complotment with Hellish Confederates, This is Blasphemy in the highest,
against the Power and Spirit of God, and such as cuts off all means of
Conviction, and puts the Unbeliever beyond all possibilities of Cure. For
Miracles are God's Seal, and the great and last evidence of the truth of any
Doctrine. And though, while these are only disbelieved as to the Fact, there
remains a possibility of persuasion; yet, when the Fact shall be acknowledged,
but the Power blasphemed, and the effects of the adorable Spirit maliciously
imputed to the Devils; such a Blasphemy, such an Infidelity is incurable, and
consequently unpardonable. I say, in sum, the Sin against the Holy Ghost seems
to be a malicious imputation of the Miracles wrought by the Spirit of God in
our Savior, to Satanical Confederacy, and the power of Apostate Spirits; Than
which nothing is more blasphemous, and nothing is more like to provoke the Holy
Spirit that is so abused, to an Eternal Dereliction of so vile and so incurable
an Unbeliever.

This account, as it is clear and reasonable in it self, so it is plainly lodged
in the mentioned Discourse of our Savior. And most of those that speak other
things about it, seem to me to talk at random, and perfectly without Book. But
to leave them to the fondness of their own conceits, I think it now time to
draw up to a Conclusion of the whole.

SECT. XVI.
THEREFORE briefly, Sir, I have endeavored in these Papers, which my respect
and your concernment in the subject have made yours, to remove the main
prejudices I could think of, against the existence of Witches and Apparitions:
And I Am sure I have suggested much more against what I defend, than ever I
heard or saw in any that opposed it; whose Discourses, for the most part, have
seemed to me inspired by a lofty scorn of common belief, and some trivial
Notions of Vulgar Philosophy. And in despising the common Faith about matters
of fact, and fondly adhering to it in things of Speculation, they very grossly
and absurdly mistake: For in things of Fact, the People are as much to be
believed, as the most subtle Philosophers and Speculators; since here, Sense
is the Judge. But in matters of Notions and Theory, they are not at all to be
heeded, because Reason is to be Judge of these, and this they know not how to
use. And yet thus it is with those wise Philosophers, that will deny the plain
evidence of the Senses of Mankind, because they cannot reconcile appearances
with the fond Crotchets of a Philosophy, which they lighted on in the Highway
by chance, and will adhere to at adventure. So that I profess, for mine own
part, I never yet heard any of the confident Declaimers against Witcheraft and
Apparitions, speak any thing that might move a mind, in any degree instructed
in the generous kinds of Philosophy and Nature of things. And sor the
Objections I have recited, they are most of them such as rose out of mine own
thoughts, which I obliged to consider what was possible to be said upon this
occasion.

For though I have examined SCOT's DISCOVERT, fancying that there I should find
the strong reasons of men's disbelief in this matter; yet I profess I met not
with the least suggestion in all that Farrago, but what it had been ridiculous
for me to have gone about to answer: For the Author does little but tell odd
Tales, and silly Legends, which he confutes and laughs at, and pretends this to
be a Confutation of the Being of Witches and Apparitions In all which, His
Reasonings are trifting and Childish; and when He ventures at Philosophy, He is
little better than absurd: So that 'twill be a wonder to me, if any but Boys
and Buffoons imbibe any prejudices against a Belief so infinitely confirmed,
from the Loose and Impotent Suggestions of so weak a Discourser.

But however, observing two things in that Discourse that would pretend to be
more than ordinary Reasons, I shall do them the civility to examine them. It is
said then,

(1) THat the Gospel is silent, as to the Being of WITCHES; and it is not
likely, if there were such, but that our Savior or his Apostles had given
intimations of their existence. The other is,

(2) MIracles are ceased, and therefore the prodigious things ascribed to
Witchcraft are supposed Dreams and Impostures.

FOR ANSWER to the FIRST in order, I consider (1) That though the History of
the New Testament were granted to be silent in the business of Witches and
Compacts, yet the Records of the Old have a frequent mention of them. The Law,
Exodus XXII. 18. against permitting them to live (which I mentioned in the
beginning) is famous. And we have another remarkable Prohibition of them, Deuteronomy.
XVIII. 10, 11. There shall not be found among you any one that makes his Son
or his Daughter pass through the Fire, or that uses Divination, or an Observer
of Times, or an Enchanter, or a WITCH, or a Charmer, or a Consulter with
Familiar Spirits, or a Wizzard, or a Necromancer. Now this accumulation of
Names, (some of which are of the same sense and import) is a plain indication
that the HEBREW WITCH was one that practiced by compact with evil Spirits. And
many of the same expressions are put together in the Charge against Manasses,
II Chron. XXXIII. viz. That he caused his Children to pass through the Fire,
observed Times, used Enchantments, and Witchcraft, and dealt with Familiar
Spirits, and with WIZZARDS. So that though the Original word which we render
WITCH and WITCHCRAFT, should, as our Sadducees urge, signify only a CHEAT and
a POTSONER; yet those others mentioned, plainly enough speak the thing; and I
have given an account in the former Considerations, how a WITCH in the common
notion is a Poysoner. But why mere poisoning should have a distinct Law against
it, and not be concluded under the general one against Murder; why mere
Legerdemain and Cheating should be so severely animadverted on, as to be
reckoned with Enchantments, converse with Devils, and Idolatrous practices: I
believe the denier of WITCHES will find it hard to give a reason. To which I
may add some other passages of Scripture that yield sufficient evidence in the
case. The Nations are forbid to hearken to the Diviners, Dreamers, Enchanters,
and Sorcerer's, Jer. XXVII. 9. the Chaldoeans are deeply threatened for their
Sorceries and Enchantments, Isa. XLVII. 9. And we read that Nebuchadnezzar
called the Magicians, Astrologers, Sorcerers, and Chaldoeans, to tell his
Dream. My mention of which last, minds me to say, that for ought I have to the
contrary, there may be a sort of Witches and Magicians that have no Familiars,
that they know, nor any express compact with Apostate Spirits; who yet may
perhaps act strange things by diabolick Aids, which they procure by the use of
those Forms, and wicked Arts that the Devil did first impart to his
Confederates: And we know not but the Laws of that dark Kingdom may enjoin a
particular attendance upon all those that practice their Mysteries, whether
they know them to be theirs, or not. For a great interest of their Empire may
be served by this project, since those that find such success in the unknown
Conjurations, may by that be tolled on to more express transactions with those
Fiends, that have assisled them incognito: Or, if they proceed not so far, yet
they run upon a Rock by acting in the dark, and dealing in unknown and
unwarranted Arts, in which the effect is much beyond the proper efficiency of
the things they use, and affords ground of more than supicion that some evil
Spirit is the Agent in those wondrous performances.

Upon this account I say, it is not to me unlikely but that the Devils may by
their own Constitution be bound to attend upon all that use their Ceremonies
and Forms, though ignorantly, and without design of evil; and so Conjuration
may have been performed by those who are none of the Covenant-Sorcerers and
Witches. Among those perhaps we may justly reckon Balaam, and the Diviners. For
Balaam, Moncoeus has undertaken to clear him from the guilt of the greater
Sorcery. And the Diviners are usually distinctly mentioned from those that had
Familiar Spirits. The Astrologers also of Elder times, and those of ours, I
take to have been of this sort of Magicians, and some of them under the color
of that mystical Science, worse. And I question not, but that things are really
done, and foretold by those pretended Artists, that are much beyond the regular
possibilities of their Art; which in this appears to be exceedingly uncertain
and precarious, in that there are no less than six ways of erecting a Scheme,
in each of which the prediction of Events shall be different, and yet every one
of them be justifiable by the Rules of that Science. And the Principles they go
upon, are found to be very arbitrary and unphilosophical, not by the ordinary
Declaimers against it, but by the most profound inquirers into things, who
perfectly understand the whole Mystery, and are the only competent Judges.

Now those Mystical Students may in their first addresses to this Science, have
no other design, but the satisfaction of their curiosity to know remote and
hidden things; yet that in the progress being not satisfied within the bounds
of their Art, does many times tempt the curious Inquirer to use worse means of
Information; and no doubt those mischievous Spirits that are as vigilant as the
Beasts of Prey, and watch all occasions to get us within their envious reach,
are more constant Attenders, and careful Spies upon the Actions and
Inclinations of such, whose genius and designs prepare them for their
Temptations. So that I look on Judicial Astrology as a fair Introduction to
Sorcery and Witchcraft. And who knows but that it was first set on foot by the
Infernal Hunters, as a Lure to draw the Curioso's into those snares that lie
hid beyond it. And yet I believe also, it may be innocently enough studied by
those, that aim only to understand what it is, and how far it will honestly
go; and are not willing to condemn any thing which they do not comprehend. But
that they must take care to keep themselves within the bounds of sober enquiry,
and not indulge irregular solicitudes about the Knowledge of things which
Providence has thought fit to conceal from us; Which whoever does, lays
himself open to the designs and solicitations of evil Spirits; and I believe
there are very few among those who have been addicted to those strange Arts of
wonder, and proediction, but have found themselves attacqued by some unknown
Solicitors, and enticed by them to the more dangerous Actions and
Correspondencies. For as there are a sort of base and sordid Spirits that
attend the envy and malice of the ignorant, and viler sort of persons, and
betray them into Compacts by promises of Revenge: So, no doubt, there are a
kind of more airy, and speculative Fiends, of an higher Rank and Order than
those wretched Imps, who apply themselves to the Curious; and many times
prevail with them by offers of the more recondite knowledge. As we know it was
in the first Temptation. Yea, and sometimes they are so cautious, and wary in
their Conversations with more refined persons, that they never offer to make
any express Covenants with them. And to this purpose I have been informed by a
very Learned and Reverend Doctor, that one Mr. Edwards a Master of Arts of
Trin. Coll. in Cambridge being reclaimed from Conjuration, declared in his
Repentance, That the Doemon always appeared to him like a man of good fashion,
and never required any Compact from him. And no doubt, they sort themselves
agreeably to the state, port, and genius of those with whom they converse: Yea,
it is like, as I conjectured, are assistant sometimes to those, to whom they
dare not show themselves in any openness of appearance, lest they should fright
them from those ways of Sin and Temptation. So that we see, that Men may act by
evil Spirits without their own knowledge that they do so.

And possibly Nebuchadnezzar's Wisemen might be of this sort of Magicians;
which supposal I mention the rather, because it may serve me against some
things that may be objected: For, it may be said, If They had been in
Consederacy with Devils, it is not probable, that Daniel would have been their
Advocate, or in such inoffensive terms have distinguished their skill, from
Divine Revelation; nor should he, one would think, have accepted the Office of
being Provost over them. These Circumstances may be supposed to intimate a
probability, that the Magi of Babylon were in no professed Diabolical
Complotment, and I grant it. But yet they might, and in all likelihood did, use
the Arts and Methods of Action, which obtain Demonaick Cooperation and
Assistance, though without their privity, and so they were a less criminal sort
of Conjurers; For those Arts were conveyed down along to them from one hand to
another, and the Successors still took them up from those that preceded
without a Philosophical Scrutiny, or Examen. They saw strange things were done,
and Events predicted by such forms, and such words; How, they could not tell,
nor it is like, did not inquire; but contented themselves with this general
account, That 'twas by the power of their Arts, and were not sollicitous for
any better reason. This I say was probably the case of most of those
Predictors, though, it may be, others of them advanced further into the more
desperate part of the Mystery. And that some did immediately transact with
appearing evil Spirits in those times, is apparent enough from express mention
in the Scriptures I have alleged.

And the story of the WITCH of ENDOR, 1 Samuel XXVIII. is a remarkable
demonstration of the main Conclusion; which will appear when we have considered
and removed the fancy, and glosses of our Author about it, in his DISCOVERT:
where to avoid this evidence, he affirms, This WITCH to be but a Cozener, and
the whole Transaction a Cheat and Imposture, managed by her self and a
Confederate. And in order to the persuading this, he tells a fine Tale, viz.
That she departed from Saul into her Closet, Where doubtless, says he, she had
a Familiar, some lewd crafty Priest, and made Saul stand at the door like a
Fool, to hear the cozening Answers. He says, she there used the ordinary words
of Conjuration; and after them, Samuel appears, whom he affirms to be no other
than either the Witch her self, or her Confederate. By this pretty knack and
contrivance he thinks he has disabled the Relation from signifying to our
purpose.

But the DISCOVERER might have considered, that all this is an Invention, and
without Book. For there is no mention of the Witches Closet, or her retiring
into another Room, or her Confederate, or her form of Conjuration: I say,
nothing of all this, is as much as intimated in the History; and if we may take
this large liberty in the interpretation of Scripture, there is scarce a story
in the^ Bible but may be made a Fallacy, and Imposture, or any thing that we
please. Nor is this fancy of his only arbitrary, but indeed contrary to the
circumstances of the Text. For it says, Saul perceived it was Samuel, and bowed
himself, and this Samuel truly foretold his approaching Fate, viz. That Israel
should be delivered with him into the hands of the Philistines; and that on the
morrow He and his Sons should be in the state of the Dead, which doubtless is
meant by the expression, that [they should be with him.] Which contingent
particulars, how could the Cozener and her Confederate foretell, if there were
nothing in it extraordinary and preternatural?

It has indeed been a great dispute among Interpreters, whether the real
Samuel was rai sed, or the Devil in his likeness? Most later Writers suppose it
to have been an evil Spirit, upon the supposition that good and happy Souls can
never return hither from their Celestial abodes; and they are not certainly at
the beck and call of an impious Hagg. But then those of the other side urge,
that the Piety of the words that were spoke, and the seasonable reproof given
to despairing Saul, are indications sufficient that they come not from Hell;
and especially they think the Prophecy of Circumstances very accidental to be
an argument, that it was not uttered by any of the infernal Predictors. And for
the supposal that is the ground of that interpretation, it is judged exceedingly
precarious; for who says that happy departed Souls were never employed in any
ministeries here below? And those dissenters are ready to ask a reason, why
they may not be sent in Messages to Earth, as well as those of the Angelical
Order? They are nearer allied to our Natures, and upon that account more
intimately concerned in our assairs; and the example of returning Lazarus is
evidence of the thing de facto. Besides which, that it was the real Samuel they
think made probable by the opinion of Jesus the son of Syrac, Ecclus. XLVI. 19,
20. who says of him, That after his death he prophesied and showed the King
his end: which also is likely from the circumstance of the woman's astonishment,
and crying out when she saw him, intimating her surprise, in that the power of
God had overruled her Enchantments, and sent another than she expected. And
they conceive there is no more incongruity in supposing God should send Samuel
to rebuke Saul for this his last folly, and to predict his instant ruin, than
in his interposing Elias to the Messengers of Ahazias when he sent to
Beelzebub. Now if it were the real Samuel, as the Letter expresses, (and the
obvious sense is to be followed when there is no cogent reason to decline it)
he was not raised by the power of the Witches Enchantments, but came on that
occasion in a Divine Errand. But yet attempts and endeavors to raise her
Familiar Spirit, (though at that time overruled) are Arguments that it had
been her custom to do so. Or if it were as the other side concludes, the Devil
in the shape of Samuel, her diabolical Confederacy is yet more palpable.

SECT. XVIII.
I HAVE now done with SCOT, and his presumptions; and am apt to fancy, that
there is nothing more needful to be said to discover the Discoverer. But there
is an Author infinitely more valuable, that calls me to consider him, It Is the
great Episcopius, who, though he grants a sort of Witches and Magicians, yet
denies Compacts. His Authority, I consess, is considerable, but let us weigh
his Reasons.

His First is, That there is no example of any of the profane Nations that
were in such Compact; whence he would infer, that there are no express
Covenants with evil Spirits in particular instances. But I think that both
proposition and consequence, are very obnoxious and defective. For that there
were Nations that did actually worship the Devil is plain enough in the Records
of ancient times, and some so read that place in the Psalms, The Gods of the
Heathen are Devils; and Satan we know is called the God of this World. Yea,
our Author himself confesses that the Nation of the Jews were so strictly
prohibited Witchcraft, and all transaction with evil Spirits; because of their
proneness to worship them. But what need more? There are at this day that pay
sacrifice, and all sacred homage to the wicked D^e in a visible appearance; and
it is well known to those of our own that traffic, and reside in those parts,
that the Caribbians worship the Devil under the name of Maboya, who frequently
shows himself, and transacts with them; the like Travelers relate concerning
diverse other parts of the barbarous Indies: and it is confidently reported by
sober intelligent men that have visited those places, that most of the
Laplanders, and some other Northern people, are Witches. That it is plain that
there are National Confederacies with Devils; or, if there were none, I see not
how it could be inferred thence, that there are no personal ones, no more, than
that there were never any Doemoniacks, because we know of no Nation universally
possessed; nor any Lunaticks in the world, because there is no Country of
Madmen. But our Author reasons again,

(2) To this purpose; That the profligate persons who are obnoxious to those
gross temptations, are fast enough before; and therefore such a Covenant were
needless, and of no avail to the Tempters projects.

This Objection I have answered already, in my Remarques upon the IX Prejudice;
and mind you again here, that if the designs of those evil Spirits were only
in general to secure wicked men to the dark Kingdom, it might better be
pretended that we cannot give a reason for their temptations, and endeavors in
this kind; But it being likely, as I have conjectured, that each of those
infernal Tempters has a particular property in those he has seduced, and
secured by such compacts, their respective pride and tyrannical desire of
slaves, may reasonably be thought to engage them in such Attempts in which
their so peculiar interest is concerned.

But I add what is more direct, viz. That such desperate Sinners are made more
safe to the infernal Kingdom at large, by such Hellish Covenants and
Combinations; since thereby they confirm, and harden their Hearts against God,
and put themselves at greater distance from his Grace, and his Spirit; give the
deepest wound to Conscience, and resolve to wink against all its light and
convictions; throw a Bar in the way of their own Repentance, and lay a Train
for despair of Mercy. These certainly are sure ways of being undone, and the
Devil we see, has great interest in a project, the success of which is so
attended. And we know he made the assault de facto upon our Savior, when he
tempted him to fall down, and worship. So that this learned Author has but
little reason to object

(3) That to endeavor such an express Covenant is contrary to the interests of
Hell; which indeed are this way so mightily promoted. And whereas he suggests,
that a thing so horrid is like to startle Conscience, and awaken the Soul to
Consideration and Repentance: I Reply, That indeed considering man in the
general, as a rational Creature, acted by hopes, and fears, and sensible of the
joys and miseries of another World, one would expect it should be so: But
then, if we cast our eyes upon man as really he is, sunk into flesh and present
sense; darkened in his mind, and governed by his imagination; blinded by his
passions, and besotted by sin and folly; hardened by evil Customs, and hurried
away by the torrent of his inclinations and desires: I say, looking on man in
this miserable state of Evil, it is not incredible that he should be prevailed
upon by the Tempter, and his own Lusts to act at a wonderful rate of madness,
and continue unconcerned and stupid in it; intent upon his present
satisfactions, without sense or consideration of the dreadfulness and danger of
his condition; and by this I am furnished also to meet a fourth Objection of
our Author's, viz.

(4) That it is not probable upon the Witches part, that they will be so
desperate to renounce God and eternal happiness, and so, everlastingly undo
their Bodies and Souls, for a short and trivial interest; which way of arguing
will only infer, that Mankind acts sometimes to prodigious degrees of
brutishness; and actually we see it in the instances of every day. There is not
a Lust so base, and so contemptible, but there are those continually, in our
eyes, that feed it with the sacrifice of their eternity, and their Souls; and
daring Sinners rush upon the blackest villainies with so little remorse, or
sense, as if it were their design to prove, that they have nothing left them of
that whereby they are men. So that naught can be inferred from this Argument,
but that humane nature is incredibly degenerate; and the vileness and stupidity
of men is really so great, that things are customary, and common, which one
could not think possible, if he did not hourly see them. And if men of liberal
Education, and acute Reason, that know their duty, and their danger, are driven
by their appetites, with their eyes open, upon the most fatal Rocks, and make
all the haste they can from their God, and their happiness; If such can barter
their Souls for trifles, and sell everlastingness for a moment, sport upon the
brink of a Precipice, and contemn all the terrors of the future dreadful day;
Why should it then be incredible that a brutish, vile person, sotted with
Ignorance, and drunk with Malice, mindless of God, and unconcerned about a
future Being, should be persuaded to accept of present, delightful
gratifications, without duly weighing the desperate condition?

Thus, I suppose, I have answered also the Arguments of this great man, against
the Covenants of Witches; and since a person of such sagacity and learning,
has no more to say against what I defend, and another of the same Character,
the ingenious Mr. S. Parker, who directed me to him, reckons these the
strongest things that can be objected in the Case, I begin to arrive to an
higher degree of confidence in this belief; and am almost inclined to fancy,
that there is little more to be said to purpose, which may not by the
improvement of my CONSIDERATIONS be easily answered; and I am yet the more
fortified in my conceit, because I have since the former Edition of this Book,
sent to several acute and ingenious persons of my acquaintance, to beg their
Objections, or those they have heard from others, against my Discourse or
Relations, that I might consider them in this: But I can procure none save
only those few I have now discussed, most of my Friends telling me, that they
have not met with any that need, or deserve my notice.

SECT. XIX.
BY all this it is evident, that there were WITCHES in ancient times under the
Dispensation of the LAW; and that there were such in the times of the GOSPEL
also, will not be much more difficult to make good. I had a late occasion to
say something about this, in a Letter to a person of the highest honor, from
which I shall now borrow some things to my present purpose.

I SAY then (II) That there were Compacts with evil Spirits in those times
also, is methinks intimated strongly in that saying of the Jews concerning our
Savior, That he cast out Devils by Beelzebub. In his return to which, he
denies not the supposition or possibility of the thing in general; but clears
himself by an appeal to the actions of their own Children, whom they would not
tax so severely. And I cannot very well understand why those times should be
privileged from WITCHCRAFT, and Diabolical Compacts, more than they were from
Possessions, which we know were then more frequent (for ought appears to the
contrary) than ever they were before or since. But besides this, There are
intimations plain enough in the Apostles Writings of the being of Sorcery and
WITCHCRAFT. St. Paul reckons Witchcraft next Idolatry, in his Catalogue of the
works of the flesh, Gal. V. 20. and the Sorcerers are again joined with
Idolaters in that sad Denunciation, Rev. XXI. 8. and a little after, Rev. XXII.
15. they are reckoned again among Idolaiers, Murderers, and those others that
are without. And methinks the story of Simon Magus, and his diabolical
Oppositions of the Gospel in its beginnings, should af^ord clear conviction. To
all which, I add this more general consideration,

(3) That though the New Testament had mentioned nothing of this matter, yet
its silence in such cases is not argumentative. Our Savior spoke as he had
occasion, and the thousandth part of what he did, and said, is not recorded, as
one of his Historians intimates. He said nothing of those large unknown Tracts
of America, nor gave he any intimations of as much as the Existence of that
numerous people; much less did he leave instructions about their conversion. He
gives no account of the affairs and state of the other world, but only that
general one of the happiness of some, and the misery of others. He made no
discovery of the Magnalia of Art or Nature; no, not of those, whereby the
propagation of the Gospel might have been much advanced, viz. the Mystery of
Printing, and the Magnet; and yet no one uses his silence in these instances
as an argument against the being of things, which are evident objects of sense.
I confess, the omission of some of these particulars is pretty strange, and
unaccountable, and concludes our ignorance of the reasons, and menages of
Providence; but I suppose, nothing else. I thought, I needed here to have said
no more, but I consider, in consequence of this Objection, it is pretended;
That as CHRIST JESUS drive the Devil from his Temples, and his Altars, (as is
clear in the Cessation of Oracles, which dwindled away, and at last grew silent
shortly upon his appearance) so in like manner, it is said, that he banished Him
from his lesser holds in Sorcerers, and Witches; which argument is peccant both
in what it affirms, and in what it would infer. For

(1) The coming of the H. JESUS did not expel the Devil from all the greater
places of his residence and worship; for a considerable part of barbarous
Mankind do him public, solemn homage, to this day: So that the very foundation
of the pretense fails, and the Consequence without any more ado comes to
nothing. And yet besides,

(2) If there be any credit to be given to Ecclesiastic History, there were
persons possessed with Devils some Ages after Christ, whom the Disciples cast
out by Prayer, and the invocation of his Name: So that Satan was not driven
from his lesser habitations, as soon as he was forced from his more famous
abodes. And I see no reason

(3) Why, Though Divine Providence would not allow him publicly to abuse the
Nations, whom he had designed in a short time after, for Subjects of his Son's
Kingdom, and to stand up in the face of Religion in an open affront to the
Divinity that planted it, to the great hindrance of the progress of the Gospel,
and discouragement of Christian hopes; I say, Though Providence would not allow
this height of insolent opposition; yet I see not why we may not grant, that
God however permitted the Devil to sneak into some private skulking holes, and
to trade with the particular more devoted vassals of his wicked Empire: As we
know that when our Savior had chased him from the man that was possessed, he
permitted his retreat into the herd of Swine. And I might add,

(4) That it is but a bad way of arguing, to set up phancied congruities against
plain experience, as is evidently done by those arguers, who, because they
think that Christ chased the Devil from all his high places of worship when he
came; that it is therefore fit he should have forced him from all his other less
notorious Haunts: and upon the imagination of a decency, which they frame,
conclude a fact, contrary to the greatest evidence of which the thing is
capable. And once more

(5) The consequence of this imagined Decorum, if it be pursued, would be this,
that Satan should now be deprived of all the ways, and tricks of Cozenage,
whereby he abuses us; and mankind since the coming of Christ, should have been
secure from all his Temptations; for there is a greater congruity in believing,
that, when he was sorced from his haunts in Temples and public places, he
should be put also from those nearer ones, about us and within us in his daily
temptations of universal Mankind; than, that upon relinquishing those, he
should be made to leave all professed communication and correspondence with those
profligate persons, whose vileness had fitted them for such company.

So that these Reasoners are very Fair for the denial of all internal
Diabolical Temptations. And because I durst not trust them, I Will crave your
leave here to add some things concerning those.

In order to which, that I may obtain the favor of those wary persons, who are
so coy, and shy of their assent, I grant; That men frequently out of a desire
to excuse themselves, lay their own guilt upon the Devil, and charge him with
things of which in earnest he is not guilty: For, I doubt not but every wicked
man has Devil enough in his own nature to prompt him to Evil, and needs not
another Tempter to incite him. But yet, that Satan endeavors to further our
wickedness, and our ruin by his inticements, and goes up and down seeking whom
he may devour, is too evident in the holy Oracles, to need my endeavors
particularly to make it good; Only those diffident men cannot perhaps apprehend
the manner of the operation, and from thence are tempted to believe, that there
is really no such thing. Therefore I judge it requisite to explain this, and
it is not unsuitable to my general subject.

In order to it I consider, That sense is primarily caused by motion in the
Organs, which by continuity is conveyed to the brain, where sensation is
immediately performed; and it is nothing else, but a notice excited in the Soul
by the impulse of an external object. Thus it is in simple outward sense. But
imagination, though caused immediately by material motion also, yet it differs
from the external senses in this, That it is not from an impress directly from
without, but the prime, and original motion is from within our selves: Thus the
Soul it self sometimes strikes upon those strings, whose motion begets such,
and such phantasms; otherwhile, the loose Spirits wandering up and down in the
brain, casually hit upon such filments and strings whose motion excites a
conception, which we call a Fancy, or Imagination; and if the evidence of the
outward senses be shut out by sleep or melancholy, in either case, we believe
those representations to be real and external transactions, when they are only
within our heads; Thus it is in Enthusiasms, and Dreams. And besides these
causes of the motions which s^ir imagination, there is little doubt, but that
Spirits good, or bad can so move the instruments of sense in the brain, as to
awake such imaginations, as they have a mind to excite; and the imagination
having a mighty influence upon the affections, and they upon the will and
external actions, it is very easy to conceive how good Angels may stir us up to
Religion and Virtue, and the Evil ones tempt us to Lewdness and vice, viz. by
representments that they make upon the stage of imagination, which invite our
affections, and allure, though they cannot compel, our wills.

This I take to be an intelligible account of temptations, and also of
Angelical encouragements; and perhaps this is the only way of immediate
influence that the Spirits of the other world have upon us. And by it, it is
easy to give an account of Dreams both Monitory, and Temperamental,
Enthusiasms, Fanatic Ecstasies, and the like, as I suggested.

Thus Sir, to the FIRST. But the other pretense also must be examined.

SECT. XX.
(2) MIRACLES are ceast, therefore the presumed actions of Witchcraft are
tales, and illusions.]

To make a due return to this, we must consider a great and difficult Problem,
which is, What is a real Miracle? And for answer to this weighty Question, I
think,

(1.) THAT it is not the strangeness, or unaccountableness of the thing done
simply, from whence we are to conclude a Miracle. For then, we are so to
account of all the Magnalia of Nature, and all the Mysteries of those honest
Arts, which we do not understand.

Nor, (2) is this the Criterion of a Miracle, That it is an action or event
beyond all natural powers; for we are ignorant of the extent and bounds of
Natures sphere, and possibilities: And if this were the character, and
essential mark of a Miracle, we could not know what was so; except we could
determine the extent of natural causalities, and six their bounds, and be able
to say to Nature, Hitherto can thou go, and no further. And he that makes
this his measure whereby to judge a Miracle, is himself the greatest Miracle of
knowledge, or immodesty. Besides, though an essect may transcend really all the
powers of mere nature; yet there is a world of spirits that must be taken into
our account. And as to them also I say,

(3) Every thing is not a Miracle that is done by Agents supernatural. There is
no doubt but that evil Spirits can make wonderful combinations of natural
causes, and perhaps perform many things immediately which are prodigious, and
beyond the longest line of Nature: but yet These are not therefore to be called
Miracles; for, THEY are SACRED WONDERS, and suppose the POWER to be DIVINE. But
how shall the power be known to be so, when we so little understand the
capacities, and extent of the abilities of lower Agents? The Answer to this
Question will discover the Criterion of Miracles, which must be supposed to
have all the former particulars; (They are unaccountable, beyond the powers of
mere nature, and done by Agents supernatural) and to these must be superadded,

(4) That they have peculiar circumstances that speak them of a divine
Original. Their mediate Authors declare them to be so, and they are always
persons of Simplicity, Truth, and Holiness, void of Ambition, and all secular
Designs. They seldom use Ceremonies, or natural Applications, and yet surmount
all the activities of known Nature. They work those wonders, not to raise
admiration, or out of the vanity to be talked of; but to seal and confirm some
divine Doctrine, or Commission, in which the good and happiness of the world is
concerned. I say, by such circumstances as these, wonderful actions are known
to be from a Divine cause; and that makes, and distinguishes a Miracle.

And thus I am prepared for an Answer to the Objection, to which I make this
brief return, That though WITCHES by their Confederate Spirit do those odd, and
astonishing things we believe of them; yet are they no Miracles, there being
evidence enough from the badness of their Lives, and the ridiculous Ceremonies
of their performances, from their malice and mischievous designs, that the
POWER that works, and the end for which those things are done, is not Divine,
but Diabolical. And by singular providence they are not ordinarily permitted,
as much as to pretend to any new sacred Discoveries in matters of Religion, or
to act any thing for confirmation of doctrinal Impostures. So that whether
Miracles are ceased, or not, these are none. And that such Miracles as are
only strange, and unaccountable performances, above the common methods of Art
or Nature, are not ceased, we have a late great Evidence in the famous
GREATRAK; concerning whom it will not be impertinent to add the following
Account which I had in a Letter from the Reverend Dr. R. Dean of C. a person of
great veracity, and a Philosopher. This learned Gentleman then is pleased thus
to write.

THE great discourse now at the Coffeehouses, and every where, is about Mr. G.
the famous Irish Stroker, concerning whom it is like you expect an account from
me. He undergoes various censures here, some take him to be a Conjurer, and
some, an Impostor, but others again adore him as an Apostle. I confess I think
the man is free from all design, of a very agreeable Conversation, not addicted
to any Vice, nor to any Sect or Party; but is, I believe, a sincere Protestant.
I was three weeks together with him at my Lord Conwayes, and saw him, I think,
lay his hands upon a thousand persons; and really there is something in it more
than ordinary; but I am convinced it is not miraculous. I have seen pains
strangely sly before his hand till he has chased them out of the Body, Dimness
cleared, and Deafness cured by his touch; Twenty persons at several times in
fits of the Falling Sickness, were in two or three minutes brought to
themselves, so as to tell where their pain was, and then he has pursued it
till he has driven it out at some extreme part; Running Sores of the Kings
Evil dried up, and Kernels brought to a Suppuration by his hand; grievous Sores
of many months date, in few days healed; Obstructions and Stoppings removed,
Cancerous Knots in the Breast dissolved, etc.

But yet I have many reasons to persuade me, that nothing of all this is
miraculous: He pretends not to give Testimony to any Doctrine, the manner of
his Operation speaks it to be natural, the Cure seldom succeeds without
reiterated touches, his Patients often relapse, he fails frequently, he can do
nothing where there is any decay in Nature, and many Distempers are not at all
obedient to his touch. So that, I confess, I refer all his virtue to his
particular Temper and Complexion, and I take his Spirits to be a kind of
Elixir, and universal Ferment; and that he cures (as Dr. M. expresses it) by a
sanative Contagion. Enthusiasm. Triumphat. Sect. 58.

This, Sir, was the First Account of the Healer, I had from that Reverend
Person, which with me signifies more, than the attestations of multitudes of
ordinary Reporters; and no doubt but it will do so likewise, with all that know
that excellent man's singular Integrity and Judgment. But besides this, upon my
enquiry into some other particulars about this matter, I received these further
Informations.

As for Mr. G. what opinion he has of his own Gift, and how he came to know
it? I answer, He has a different apprehension of it from yours, and mine, and
certainly believes it to be an immediate Gift from Heaven; and it is no wonder,
for he is no Philosopher. And you will wonder less, when you hear how he came
to know it, as I have often received it from his own mouth. About three or sour
years ago he had a strong impulse upon his spirit, that continually pursued him
whatever he was about, at his Business, or Devotion, alone, or in company, that
spoke to him by this inward suggestion [I have given thee the gift of curing
the Evil.] This suggestion was so importunate, that he complained to his Wife,
That he thought he was haunted: She apprehended it as an extravagancy of Fancy,
but he told her he believed there was more in it, and was resolved to try. He
did not long want opportunity. There was a Neighbor of his grievously
afflicted with the King's Evil, He stroked her, and the effect succeeded. And
for about a Twelve-moneth together he pretended to cure no other Distemper. But
then the Ague being very rife in the Neighborhood. the same Impulse after the
same manner spoke within him, [I have given thee the gift of curing the Ague;]
and meeting with persons in their Fits, and taking them by the hand, or laying
his hand upon their Brasts, the Ague left them. About half a year after the
accustomed Impulse became more general, and suggested to him [I have given thee
the gift of Healing:] and then he attempted all Diseases indifferently. And
though he saw strange effects, yet he doubted whether the cause were any virtue
that came srom him, or the peoples fancy: To convince him of his incredulity,
as he lay one night in bed, one of his Hands was struck dead, and the usual
Impulse suggested to him to make trial of his virtue upon himself, which he
did, stroking it with his other hand, and then it immediately returned to its
former liveliness. This was repeated two or three nights (or mornings)
together.

This is his Relation, and I believe there is so much sincerity in the person,
that he tells no more than what he believes to be true. To say that this
Impulse too was but a result of his Temper, and that it is but like Dreams that
are usually according to men's constitutions, does not seem a probable account
of the Phoenomenon. Perhaps some may think it more likely, that some Genius who
understood the sanative virtue of his Complexion, and the readiness of his
Mind, and ability of his Body, to put it in execution, might give him notice of
that which otherwise might have been for ever unknown to him, and so the Gift
of God had been to no purpose.

This, Sir, is my Learned and Reverend Friend's Relation, and I judge his
Reflections as ingenious as his Report is sincere. I shall say no more about it
but this, that many of those matters of Fact, have been since critically
inspected and examined by several sagacious and deep searches of the ROYAL
SOCIETY, whom we may suppose as unlikely to be deceived by a contrived
Imposture, as any persons extant

And now, Sir, it is fit that I relieve your patience; and I shall do so, when I
have said, that You can abundantly prove, what I have thus attempted to defend:
And that among the many Obligations your Country has to you, for the Wisdom
and Diligence of your Endeavors in its service; your Ingenious Industry for
the Detecting of those vile Practisers, is not the least considerable. To which
I will add no more, but the Confession who it is that has given you all this
trouble; which I know you are ready to pardon, to the respect and good
Intentions of

SIR, Your Affectionate and Obliged Honourer and Servant, J. G.

ADVERTISEMENT.
HItherto reaches the Author's ingenious Considerations about Witchcraft. But
understanding by his Letters and Papers, that he intended something further to
enlarge this First Part of his Saducismus Triumphatus, which concerns the
Possibility of the Existence of Spirits, Apparitions, and Witches, but that he
has done nothing therein, being prevented by Death, I thought it might prove
not an unuseful Supplement, to translate most of the two last Chapters of Dr.
H. M. his Enchiridion Metaphysicum into English, and add it to this First Part,
as a suitable Appendage thereto. Which is as follows.

AN APPENDAGE To this First PART, Concerning the POSSIBILITY OF APPARITIONS AND
Witchcraft.

Containing The easy, true, and genuine NOTION, and consistent Explication of
the Nature OF A SPIRIT, whereby The POSSIBILITY of the EXISTENCE of SPIRITS,
APPARITIONS, and WITCHCRAFT is further confirmed.

LONDON: Printed, 1681.

The Easy, True, and Genuine NOTION And Consistent EXPLICATION Of the NATURE
of a SPIRIT.
SECT. I.
The Opinions of the NULLIBISTS and HOLENMERIANS proposed.

THat we may explicate the Essence or Notion of Incorporeal Beings or Spirits,
with the greater satisfaction and success, we are first to remove two vast
Mounds of Darkness, wherewith the ignorance of some has encumbred and obscured
their nature.

And the first is of those who though they readily acknowledge there are such
things as Incorporeal Beings or Spirits, yet do very peremptorily contend that
they are no where in the whole World. Which opinion, though at the very first
sight it appears ridiculous, yet it is stiffly held by the maintainers of it,
and that not without some Fastuosity and Superciliousness, or at least some
more sly and tacit contempt of such Philosophers as hold the contrary, as of
men less intellectual and too too much indulging to their Imagination. Those
other therefore because they so boldly affirm that a Spirit is Nullibi, that is
to say, Nowhere, have deservedly purchased to themselves the Name or Title of
Nullibists.

The other Mound of Darkness laid upon the nature of a Spirit, is by those who
willingly indeed acknowledge that Spirits are somewhere; but add further, That
they are not only entirely or totally in their whole Ubi or place, (in the
most general sense of the word) but are totally in every part or point thereof,
and describe the peculiar nature of a Spirit to be such, that it must be Totus
in toto and totus in qualibet sui part. Which therefore the Greeks would fitly
and briefly call (...), [an Essence that is all of it in each part] and this
propriety thereof ((...)) the Holenmerism of Incorporeal Beings. Whence also
these other Philosophers diametrically opposite to the former, may most
significantly and compendiously be called Holenmerians.

SECT. II.
That Cartesius is the Prince of the Nullibists, and wherein chiefly consists
the force of their Opinion.

THe Opinions of both which kind of Philosophers having sufficiently explained,
we will now propose and confute the Reasons of each of them; and first of the
Nullibists. Of whom the chief Author and Leader seems to have been that
pleasant Wit Renatus Des Carts, who by his jocular Metaphysical Meditations,
has so luxated and distorted the rational Faculties of some otherwise sober and
quick-witted persons, but in this point by reason of their overgreat
admiration of Des Carts not sufficiently cautious, that deceived, partly by
his counterfeit and prestigious subtilty, and partly by his Authority, have
persuaded themselves that such things were most true and clear to them; which
had they not been blinded with these prejudices, they could never have thought
to have been so much as possible. And so they having been so industriously
taught, and diligently instructed by him, how they might not be imposed upon,
no not by the most powerful and most ill-minded fallacious Deity, have
heedlesly, by not sufficiently standing upon their guard, been deceived and
illuded by a mere man, but of a pleasant and abundantly-cunning and abstruse
Genius; as shall clearly appear after we have searched and examined the reasons
of this Opinion of the Nullibists to the very bottom.

The whole force whereof is comprised in these three Axioms. The first, That
whatsoever thinks is Immaterial, and so on the contrary. The second, That
whatever is extended is Material. The third, That whatever is unextended is
Nowhere. To which third I shall add this fourth, as a necessary and manifest
Consectary thereof, viz. That whatsoever is somewhere is extended. Which the
Nullibists of themselves will easily grant me to be most true. Otherwise they
could not seriously contend for their Opinion, whereby they affirm Spirits to
be nowhere; but would be found to do it only by way of an oblique and close
derision of their Existence, saying indeed they exist, but then again hiddenly
and cunningly denying it, by affirming they are nowhere. Wherefore doubtlesly
they affirm them to be nowhere, if they are in good earnest, for this reason
only; for fear they granting them to be somewhere, it would be presently
extorted from them, even according to their own Principles, that they are
extended, as whatever is Extended, is Material, according to their second
Axiom. It is therefore manifest that we both agree in this, that whatever real
Being there is that is somewhere, is also Extended.

SECT. III.
The Sophistical weakness of that reasoning of the Nullibists, who, because we
can conceive Cogitation without conceiving in the mean while Matter, conclude,
That whatsoever thinks is Immaterial.

WIth which truth notwithstanding we being furnished and supported, I doubt not
but we shall with ease quite overthrow and utterly root out this Opinion of the
Nullibists. But that their levity and credulity may more manifestly appear, let
us examine the Principles of this Opinion by parts, and consider how well they
make good each member.

The first is, Whatever thinks is Immaterial, and on the contrary. The
conversion of this Axiom I will not examine, because it makes little to the
present purpose. I will only note by the by, that I doubt not but it may be
false, although I easily grant the Axiom itself to be true. But it is this new
Method of demonstrating it I call into question, which from hence, that we can
conceive Cogitation, in the mean time not conceiving Matter, concludes that
Whatever thinks is Immaterial. Now that we can conceive Cogitation without
conceiving Matter, they say is manifest from hence, That although one should
suppose there were no Body in the Universe, and should not flinch from that
position, yet notwithstanding he would not cease to be certain; that there was
Res cogitans, a thinking Being, in the World, he sinding himself to be such.
But I further add, though he should suppose there was no Immaterial Being in
nature, (nor indeed Material) and should not flinch from that position, yet he
would not cease to be certain that there was a thinking Being, (no not if he
should suppose himself not to be a thinking Being) because he can suppose
nothing without Cogitation. Which I thought worth the while to note by the by,
that the great levity of the Nullibists might hence more clearly appear.

But yet I add further, that such is the nature of the Mind of man, that it is
like the Eye, better fitted to contemplate other things than itself; and that
therefore it is no wonder that thinking nothing of its own Essence, it does
fixedly enough and intently consider in the mean time and contemplate all other
things, yea, those very things with which she has the nearest affinity, and yet
without any reflection that herself is of the like nature. Whence it may easily
come to pass, when she is so wholly taken up in contemplating other things
without any reflection upon herself, that either carelessly she may consider
herself in general as a mere thinking Being, without any other Attribute, or
else by resolvedness afterward, and by a force on purpose offered to her own
faculties. But that this reasoning is wonderfully weak and trifling as to the
proving of the Mind of man to be nothing else; that is to say, to have no other
Attributes but mere Cogitation, there is none that does not discern.

SECT. IV.
The true Method that ought to be taken for the proving that MATTER cannot
think.

LAstly, if Cartesius with his Nullibists would have dealt bona fide, they
ought to have omitted all those ambagious windings and Meanders of feigned
Abstraction, and with a direct stroke to have saln upon the thing itself, and
so to have sisted Matter, and searched the nature of Cogitation, that they
might thence have evidently demonstrated that there was some inseparable
Attribute in Matter that is repugnant to the Cogitative faculty, or in
Cogitation that is repugnant to Matter. But out of the mere diversity of Idea's
or Notions of any Attributes, to collect their separability or real
distinction, yea their contrariety and repugnancy, is most foully to violate
the indispensable Laws of Logic, and to confound Diversa with Opposita, and
make them all one. Which mistake to them that understand Logic must needs
appear very coarse and absurd.

But that the weakness and vacillancy of this Method may yet more clearly
appear, let us suppose that which yet Philosophers of no mean name seriously
stand for and assert, viz. That Cogitative substance is either Material or
Immaterial; does it not apparently follow thence, that a thinking substance may
be precisely conceived without the conception of Matter, as Matter without the
conception of Cogitation, when notwithstanding in one of the members of this
distribution they are joined sufficiently close together?

How can therefore this newfangled Method of Cartesius convince us that this
Supposition is false, and that the distribution is illegitimate? Can it from
thence, that Matter may be conceived without Cogitation, and Cogitation without
Matter? The first all grant, and the other the distribution itself supposes;
and yet continues sufficiently firm and sure. Therefore it is very evident,
that there is a necessity of our having recourse to the known and ratified Laws
of Logic, which many Ages before this new upstart Method of Des Carts
appeared, were established and approved by the common suffrage of Mankind;
Which teach us that in every legitimate distribution the parts ought consentire
cum toto, and dissentire inter se, to agree with the Whole, but disagree one
with another. Now in this Distribution that they do sufficiently disagree, it
is very manifest. It remains only to be proved, that one of the parts, namely
that which supposes that a Cogitative substance may be Material, is repugnant
to the nature of the Whole. This is that clear, solid and manifest way or
method according to the known Laws of Logic; but that new way, a kind of
Sophistry and pleasant mode of trisling and prevaricating.

SECT. V.
That all things are in some sort extended, demonstrated out of the Corollary
of the third Principle of the Nullibists,

AS for the second Axiom or Principle, viz. That whatsoever is extended is
Material; for the evincing the falsity thereof, there want no new Arguments, if
one have but recourse to the Sixth, Seventh, and Eighth Chapters of Enchiridium
Metaphysicum, where by unanswerable reasonings it is demonstrated, That there
is a certain Immaterial and Immovable Extensum distinct from the movable
Matter. But however, out of the Consectary of their third Principle, we shall
prove at once, that all Spirits are Extended as being somewhere, against the
wild and ridiculous Opinion of the Nullibists.

Whose third Principle, and out of which immediately and precisely they
conclude Spirits to be nowhere, is, Whatsoever is unextended is nowhere. Which
I very willingly grant; but on this condition, that they on the other side
concede (and I doubt not but they will) That whatsoever is somewhere is also
extended; from which Consectary I will evince with Mathematical certainty, That
God and our Soul, and all other Immaterial Beings, are in some sort extended:
For the Nullibists themselves acknowledge and assert, that the Operations
wherewith the Soul acts on the Body, are in the Body; and that Power or Divine
Virtue wherewith God acts on the Matter and moves it, is present in every part
of the Matter. Whence it is easily gathered, That the Operation of the Soul and
the moving Power of God is somewhere, viz. in the Body, and in the Matter. But
the Operation of the Soul wherewith it acts on the Body and the Soul itself,
and the Divine Power wherewith God moves the Matter and God himself, are
together, nor can so much as be imagined separate one from the other; namely,
the Operation from the Soul, and the Power from God. Wherefore if the Operation
of the Soul is somewhere, the Soul is somewhere, viz. there where the
Operation. And if the Power of God be somewhere, God is somewhere, namely,
there where the Divine Power is; He in every part of the Matter, the Soul in
the humane Body. Whosoever can deny this, by the same reason he may deny that
common Notion in Mathematics, Quantities that are singly equal to one third,
are equal to one another.

SECT. VI.
The apert confession of the Nullibists that the ESSENCE of a Spirit is where
its OPERATION is; and how they contradict themselves, and are forced to
acknowledge a Spirit extended.

ANd verily that which we contend for, the Nullibists seem apertly to assert,
even in their own express words, as it is evident in Lambertus Velthusius in
his De Initiis Primae Philosophiae, in the Chapter De Ubi. Who though he does
manifestly affirm that God and the Mind of man by their Operations are in every
part or some one part of the Matter; and that in that sense, namely, in respect
of their Operations, the Soul may be truly said to be somewhere, God
everywhere; as if that were the only mode of their presence: yet he does
expressly grant that the Essence is nowhere separate from that whereby God or a
created Spirit is said to be, the one everywhere, the other somewhere; that no
man may conceit the Essence of God to be where the rest of his Attributes are
not. That the Essence of God is in Heaven, but that his Virtue diffuses itself
beyond Heaven. No by no means, says he, Wheresoever God's Power or Operation
is, there is the Nature of God; forasmuch as God is a Substance devoid of all
composition. Thus far Velthusius. Whence I assume, But the Power or Operation
of God is in or present to the Matter, Therefore the Essence of God is in or
present to the Matter, and is there where the Matter is, and therefore
somewhere. Can there be any deduction or illation more close and coherent with
the Premises?

And yet that other most devoted follower of the Cartesian Philosophy,
Ludovicus De-la-Forge, cannot abstain from the offering us the same advantage
of arguing, or rather from the inferring the same conclusion with us, in his
Treatise De Mente Humana, Chap. 12. where occur these words: Lastly, when I say
that God is present to all things by his Omnipotency, (and consequently to all
the parts of the Matter) I do not deny but that also by his Essence or
Substance he is present to them: For all those things in God are one and the
same.

Do thou hear, my Nullibist, what one of the chiefest of thy Condisciples and
most religious Symmists of that stupendous secret of Nullibism plainly
professes, namely, that God is present to all the parts of Matter by his
Essence also, or Substance? And yet you in the mean while blush not to assert,
that neither God nor any created spirit is any where; than which nothing more
contradictious can be spoke or thought, or more abhorring from all reason.
Wherefore whenas the Nullibists come so near to the truth, it seems impossible
they should, so all of a sudden, start from it, unless they were blinded with
a superstitious admiration of Des Carts his Metaphysics, and were deluded,
effascinated and befooled with his jocular Subtilty and prestigious
Abstractions there: For who in his right wits can acknowledge that a Spirit by
its Essence may be present to Matter and yet be nowhere, unless the Matter were
nowhere also? And that a Spirit may penetrate, possess, and actuate some
determinate Body, and yet not be in that Body? In which if it be, it is plainly
necessary it be somewhere.

And yet the same Ludovicus De-la-Forge does manifestly assert, that the Body
is thus possessed and actuated by the Soul, in his Preface to his Treatise De
Mente Humana, while he declares the Opinion of Marcilius Ficinus concerning the
manner how the Soul actuates the Body in Marsilius his own words, and does of
his own accord assent to his Opinion. What therefore do these Forms to the Body
when they communicate to it their Esse? They thoroughly penetrate it with their
Essence, they bequeath the Virtue of their Essence to it. But now whereas the
Esse is deduced from the Essence, and the Operation flows from the Virtue, by
conjoyning the Essence they impart the Esse, by bequeathing the Virtue they
communicate the Operations; so that out of the congress of Soul and Body, there
is made one Animal Esse, one Operation. Thus he. The Soul with her Essence
penetrates and pervades the whole Body, and yet is not where the Body is, but
nowhere in the Universe!

With what manifest repugnancy therefore to their other Assertions the
Nullibists hold this ridiculous Conclusion, we have sufficiently seen, and how
weak their chiefest prop is, That whatever is Extended is Material; which is
not only confuted by irresragable Arguments, Chap. 6, 7, and 8. Enchirid.
Metaphys. but we have here also, by so clearly proving that all Spirits are
somewhere, utterly subverted it, even from that very Concession or Opinion of
the Nullibists themselves, who concede or aver that whatsoever is somewhere is
extended. Which Spirits are and yet are not Material.

SECT. VII.
The more light reasonings of the Nullibists whereby they would confirm their
Opinion. The first of which is, That the Soul thinks of those things which are
nowhere.

BUt we will not pass by their more slight reasonings in so great a matter, or
rather so monstrous. Of which the first is, That the Mind of man thinks of such
things as are nowhere, nor have any relation to place, no not so much as to
Logical place or Ubi. Of which sort are many truths as well Moral as
Theological and Logical, which being of such a nature that they are nowhere,
the Mind of man which conceives them is necessarily nowhere also. But how
crazily and inconsequently they collect that the humane Soul is nowhere, for
that it thinks of those things that are nowhere, may be apparent to any one
srom hence, and especially to the Nullibists themselves; because from the same
reason it would follow that the Mind of man is somewhere, because sometimes, if
not always in a manner, it thinks of those things which are somewhere, as all
Material things are. Which yet they dare not grant, because it would plainly
follow from thence, according to their Doctrine, that the Mind or Soul of man
were extended, and so would become corporeal and devoid of all Cogitation. But
besides, These things which they say are nowhere, namely, certain Moral,
Logical, and Theological Truths, are really somewhere, viz. in the Soul itself
which conceives them; but the Soul is in the Body, as we proved above. Whence
it is manifest that the Soul and those Truths which she conceives are as well
somewhere as the Body itself. I grant that some Truths as they are
Representations, neither respect Time nor Place in whatever sense. But as they
are Operations, and therefore Modes of some Subject or Substance, they cannot
be otherwise conceived than in some substance. And forasmuch as there is no
substance which has not some amplitude, they are in a substance which is in
some so^t extended; and so by reason of their Subject they are necessarily
conceived to be somewhere, because a Mode is inseparable from a Subject.

Nor am I at all moved with that giddy and rash tergiversation which some
betake themselves to here, who say we do not well in distinguishing betwixt
Cogitation (such as are all conceived verities) and the Substance of the Soul
cogitating: For Cogitation itself is the very Substance of the Soul, as
Extension is of Matter; and that therefore the Soul is as well nowhere as any
Cogitation, which respects neither time nor place, would be, if it were found
in no Subject. But here the Nullibists, who would thus escape, do not observe
that while they acknowledge the Substance of the Soul to be Cogitation, they
therewithal acknowledge the Soul to have a Substance, whence it is necessary it
have some amplitude. And besides, This Assertion whereby they assert Cogitation
to be the very substance of the Soul, is manifestly false. For many Operations
of the Soul, are, as they speak, specifically different; Which therefore
succeeding one after another, will be so many Substances specifically
different. And so the Soul of Socrates will not always be the same specifical
Soul, and much less the same numerical; Than which what can be imagined more
delirant, and more remote from common sense?

To which you may add, That the Soul of man is a permanent Being, but her
Cogitations in a flux or succession; How then can the very substance of the
Soul be its successive Operations? And when the substance of the Soul does so
perpetually cease or perish, what I beseech you will become of Memory? From
whence it is manifestly evident, that there is a certain permanent Substance of
the Soul, as much distinct or different from her succeeding Cogitations, as the
Matter itself is from its successive figures and motions.

SECT. VIII.
The second reason of the Nullibists, viz. That COGITATION is easily conceived
without EXTENSION.

THe second Reason is somewhat coincident with some of those we have already
examined; but it is briefly proposed by them thus: There can be no conception,
no not of a Logical Place, or Ubi, without Extension. But Cogitation is easily
conceived without conceiving any Extension: Wherefore the Mind cogitating,
exempt from all Extension, is exempt also from all Locality whether Physical or
Logical; and is so loosened from it, that it has no relation nor applicability
thereto; as if those things had no relation nor applicability to other certain
things without which they might be conceived.

The weakness of this argumentation is easily deprehended from hence, That the
Intensness of heat or motion is considered without any respect to its
extension, and yet it is referred to an extended Subject, viz. To a Bullet
shot, or red hot Iron. And though in intent and defixed thoughts upon some
either difficult or pleasing Object, we do not at all observe how the time
passes, nor take the slightest notice of it, nothing hinders notwithstanding
but those Cogitations may be applied to time, and it be rightly said, that
about six a clock, suppose, in the Morning they began, and continued till
eleven; and in like manner the place may be defined where they were conceived,
viz. within the Walls of such an ones Study, although perhaps all that time
this so fixed Contemplator did not take notice whether he was in his Study or in
the Fields.

And to speak out the matter at once, From the precision of our thoughts to
infer the real precision or separation of the things themselves, is a very
putid and puerile Sophism; and still the more enormous and wild, to collect
also thence, that they have no relation nor applicability one to another. For
we may have a clear and distinct apprehension of a thing which may be connected
with another by an essential Tie, that Tie being not taken notice of, (and much
more when they are connected only with a circumstantial one) but not a full
and adequate apprehension, and such as sees through and penetrates all the
degrees of its Essence with their properties; Which unless a man reach to, he
cannot rightly judge of the real separability of any nature from other natures.

From whence it appears how soully Cartesius has imposed, if not upon himself,
at least upon others, when from this mental precision of Cogitation from
Extension, he defined a Spirit (such as the humane Soul) by Cogitation only,
Matter by Extension, and divided all Substance into Cogitant and Extended, as
into their first species or kinds. Which distribution notwithstanding is as
absonous and absurd, as if he had distributed Animal into Sensitive and
Rational. Whenas all Substance is extended as well as all Animals sensitive.
But he fixed his Animadversion upon the specific nature of the humane Soul;
the Generical nature thereof, either on purpose or by inadvertency, being not
considered nor taken notice of by him, as has been noted in Enchiridion
Ethicum, lib. 3. cap. 4. sect. 3.

SECT. IX.
The third and last Reason of the Nullibists, viz. That the Mind is conscious
to herself, that she is nowhere, unless she be disturbed or jogged by the Body.

THe third and last Reason, which is the most ingenious of them all, occurs in
Lambertus Velthusius, viz. That it is a truth which God has infused into the
Mind itself, That she is nowhere, because we know by experience that we cannot
tell from our spiritual Operations where the Mind is. And for that we know her
to be in our Body, that we only perceive from the Operations of Sense and
Imagination, which without the Body or the motion of the Body the Mind cannot
perform. The sense whereof, if I guess right, is this; That the Mind by a
certain internal sense is conscious to herself that she is nowhere, unless she
be now and then disturbed by the motions or joggings of the Body; which is, as
I said, an ingenious presage, but not true: For it is one thing to perceive
herself to be nowhere, another not to perceive herself to be somewhere. For she
may not perceive herself to be somewhere, though she be somewhere, as she may
not take notice of her own Individuality, or numerical Distinction, from all
other minds, although she be one Numerical or Individual mind distinct from the
rest: For, as I intimated above, such is the nature of the mind of man, that
like the eye, it is better fitted for the contemplating all other things, than
for contemplating itself. And that indeed which is made for the clearly and
sincerely seeing other things, ought to have nothing of itself actually
perceptible in it, which it might mingle with the perception of those other
things. From whence the Mind of man is not to have any stable and fixed sense of
its own Essence; and such as it cannot easily lay aside upon occasion: And
therefore it is no wonder, whenas the Mind of man can put off the sense and
consciousness to itself of its own Essence and Individuality, that it can put
off also therewith the sense of its being somewhere, or not perceive it; whenas
it does not perceive its own Essence and Individuality, (of which Hic and Nunc
are the known Characters:) And the chief Objects of the Mind are Universals.

But as the Mind, although it perceives not its Individuality, yet can by
reason prove to herself that she is some one Numerical or Individual Mind, so
she can by the same means, although she by inward sense perceives not where she
is, evince notwithstanding that she is somewhere, from the general account of
things, which have that of their own nature, that they are extended, singular,
and somewhere. And besides, Velthusius himself does plainly grant, that from
the Operations of Sense and Imagination, we know our Mind to be in our Body.
How then can we be ignorant that she is somewhere, unless the Body itself be
nowhere?

SECT. X.
An Appeal to the internal sense of the Mind, if she be not environed with a
certain infinite Extension; together with an excitation of the Nullibist out of
his Dream, by the sound of Trumpeters surrounding him.

THe Reasons of the Nullibists whereby they endeavor to maintain their
Opinion, are sufficiently enervated and subverted. Nor have we need of any
Arguments to establish the contrary Doctine. I will only desire by the by,
that he that thinks his Mind is nowhere, would make trial of his faculty of
Thinking; and when he has abstracted himself from all thought or sense of his
Body, and fixed his Mind only on an Idea of an indefinite or infinite
Extension, and also perceives himself to be some particular cogitant Being, let
him make trial, I say, whether he can any way avoid it, but he must at the same
time perceive that he is somewhere, namely, within this immense Extension, and
that he is environed round about with it. Verily, I must ingenuously consess,
that I cannot conceive otherwise, and that I cannot but conceive an Idea of a
certain Extension infinite and immovable, and of necessary and actual
Existence: Which I most clearly deprehend, not to have been drawn in by the
outward sense, but to be innate and essentially inherent in the Mind itself;
and so to be the genuine object not of Imagination, but of Intellect; and that
it is but perversely and without all judgment determined by the Nullibists, or
Cartesians, that whatever is extended, is also (...) or the Object of
Imagination; When notwithstanding there is nothing imaginable, or the Object of
Imagination, which is not sensible: For all Phantasms are drawn from the
senses. But this infinite Extension has no more to do with things that are
sensible and sall under Imagination, than that which is most Incorporeal. But
of this happily it will be more opportune to speak elsewhere.

In the mean time I will subjoyn only one Argument, whereby I may manifestly
evince that the Mind of man is somewhere, and then I will betake my self to the
discussing of the Opinion of the Holenmerians. Briefly therefore let us suppose
some one environed with a Ring of Trumpeters, and that they all at the same
time sound their Trumpets. Let us now see if the circumsonant clangor of those
surrounding Trumpets sounding from all sides will awake these Nullibists out of
their Lethargick Dream. And let us suppose, which they will willingly concede,
that the Conarion or Glandula Pinealis, A, is the seat of the common sense, to
which at length all the motions from external Objects arrive. Nor is it any
matter whether it be this Conarion, or some other part of the Brain, or of what
is contained in the Brain: But let the Conarion, at least for this bout, supply
the place of that matter which is the common Sensorium of the Soul. Fig. 1.
And whenas it is supposed to be surrounded with Eight Trumpeters, let there be
Eight Lines drawn from them, namely, from B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I; I say that
the clangour or sound of every Trumpet is carried from the Ring of the
Trumpeters to the extreme part of every one of those Lines, and all those
sounds are heard as coming from the Ring B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, and perceived
in the Conarion A; and that the perception is in that part to which all the
Lines of motion, as to a common Center, do concur; and therefore the extreme
parts of them, and the perceptions of the Clangours or Sounds, are in the
middle of the Ring of Trumpeters, viz. where the Conarion is: Wheresore the
Percipient itself, namely the Soul, is in the midst of this Ring as well as the
Conarion, and therefore is somewhere. Assuredly he that denies that he
conceives the force of this Demonstration, and acknowledges that the Perception
indeed is at the extreme parts of the said Lines, and in the middle of the Ring
of Trumpeters, but contends in the mean time that the Mind herself is not
there, forasmuch as she is nowhere; this man certainly is either delirant and
crazed, or else plays tricks, and slimly and obliquely insinuates that the
perception which is made in the Conarion is to be attributed to the Conarion
itself; and that the Mind, so far as it is conceived to be an Incorporeal
Substance, is to be exterminated out of the Universe, as an useless Figment and
Chimaera.

SECT. XI.
The Explication of the Opinion of the Holenmerians, together with their Two
Reasons thereof proposed.

ANd thus much of the Opinion of the Nullibists. Let us now examine the Opinion
of the Holenmerians, whose Explication is thus: Let there be Fig. 2.
what Body you please, suppose C, D, E, which the Soul or a Spirit may possess
and penetrate. The Holenmerians affirm, that the whole Soul or Spirit does
occupy and possess the whole Body C, D, E, by its Essence; and that it is also
wholly or all of it in every part or point of the said Body C, D, E, as in A,
for example, and in B, and the rest of the least parts or points of it. This is
a brief and clear Explication of their Opinion.

But the Reasons that induce them to embrace it, and so stifsly to maintain it,
are these two only, or at least chiesly, as much as respects the Holenmerism
of Spirits. The first is, That whereas they grant that the whole Soul does
pervade and possess the whole Body, they thought it would thence follow that
the Soul would be divisible, unless they should correct again this Assertion of
theirs, by saying, that it was yet so in the whole Body, that it was totally in
the mean time in every part thereof: For thus they thought themselves sure,
that the Soul could not thence be argued in any sort divisible, or corporeal,
but still remain purely spiritual.

Their other Reason is, That from hence it might be easily understood, how the
Soul being in the whole Body C, D, E, whatever happens to it in C, or B, it
presently perceives it in A; Because the whole Soul being perfectly and
entirely as well in C, or B, as in A, it is necessary that after what fashion
soever C or B is affected, A should be affected after the same manner;
forasmuch as it is entirely and perfectly one and the same thing, viz. the
whole Soul, as well in C or B, as in A. And from hence is that vulgar saying in
the Schools, That if the Eye were in the Foot, the Soul would see in the Foot.

SECT. XII.
The Examination of the Opinion of the Holenmerians.

BUt now, according to our custom, let us weigh and examine all these things
in a free and just Balance. In this therefore that they assert, that the whole
Soul is in the whole Body, and is all of it penetrated of the Soul by her
Essence, and therefore seem willingly to acknowledge a certain essential
amplitude of the Soul; in this, I say, they come near to us, who contend there
is a certain Metaphysical and Essential Extension in all Spirits, but such as
is (...), devoid of bulk or parts, as Aristotle defines of his separate
substances: For there is no magnitude or bulk which may not be physically
divided, nor any parts properly where there is no such division. Whence the
Metaphysical Extension of Spirits, is rightly understood not to be capable of
either bulk or parts. And in that sense it has no parts, it cannot justly be
said to be a Whole. In that therefore we plainly agree with the Holenmerians,
that a Soul or Spirit may be said by its Essence to penetrate and possess the
whole Body C, D, E; but in this again we differ from them, that we dare not
affirm that the whole Spirit or whole Soul does penetrate and possess the said
Body, because that which has not parts cannot properly be called a Whole;
though I will not over-stiffly contend, but that we may use that word for a
more easy explication of our mind, according to that old trite Proverb, (...),
Speak a little more unlearnedly that thou may speak more intelligibly or
plainly. But then we are to remember that we do not speak properly, though more
accommodately to the vulgar apprehension, but improperly.

But now when the Holenmerians add further, That the whole Soul is in every
part or Physical point of the Body D, C, E, in the point A and B, and all the Sea Figure 2. Sect. 11.
rest of the points of which the Body D, C, E, does consist, that seems an
harsh expression to me, and such as may justly be deemed next door to an open
Repugnancy and Contradiction: For when they say the whole Soul is in the whole
Body D, C, E, if they understand the Essence of the Soul to be commensurate,
and as it were equal to the Body D, C, E, and yet at the same time, the whole
Soul to be contained within the point A or B, it is manifest that they make one
and the same thing many thousand times greater or less than itself at the same
time; which is impossible. But if they will affirm, that the essential
Amplitude of the Soul is no bigger than what is contained within the Physical
point A, or B; but that the Essential Presence of the Soul is diffused through
the whole Body D, C, E, the thing will succeed not a jot the better. For while
they plainly profess that the whole Soul is in the point A, it is manifest that
there remains nothing of the Soul which may be in the point B, which is distant
from A: For it is as if one should say, that there is nothing of the Soul which
is not included within A; and yet in the same moment of time, that not only
something of the Soul, (which perhaps might be a more gentle Repugnancy) but
that the whole Soul is in B, as if the whole Soul were totally and entirely out
of itself; which surely is impossible in any singular or individual thing. And
as for Universals, they are not Things, but Notions we use in contemplating
them.

Again, if the Essential Amplitude of the Soul is no greater than what may be
contained within the limits of a Physical point, it cannot extend or exhibit
its Essential Presence through the whole Body, unless we imagine in it a
stupendous velocity, such as it may be carried with in one moment into all the
parts of the Body, and so be present to them: Which when it is so hard to
conceive in this scant compages of an humane Body, and in the Soul occupying in
one moment every part thereof, What an outrageous thing is it, and utterly
impossible to apprehend touching that Spirit which perpetually exhibits his
Essential Presence to the whole world, and whatever is beyond the world?

To which lastly, you may add that this Hypothesis of the Holenmerians, does
necessarily make all Spirits the most minute things that can be conceived: For
if the whole Spirit be in every Physical point, it is plain that the Essential
Amplitude itself of the Spirit (which the two former Objections supposed) is
not bigger than that Physical point in which it is, (which you may call, if you
will, a Physical Monad) than which nothing is or can be smaller in universal
Nature: Which if you refer to any created Spirit, it cannot but seem very
ridiculous; but if to the Majesty and Amplitude of the divine Numen,
intolerable, that I may not say plainly reproachful and blasphemous.

SECT. XIII.
A Confutation of the first Reason of the Holenmerians.

BUt now for the Reasons for which the Holenmerians adhere to so absurd an
Opinion; verily they are such as can no ways compensate those huge difficulties
and repugnancies the Opinion itself labors under. For, for the first, which so
solicitously provides for the Indivisibility of Spirits, it seems to me to
undertake a charge either Superfluous or Ineffectual. Superfluous, if Extension
can be without Divisibility, as it is clearly demonstrated it can, in that
infinite immovable Extension distinct from the movable Matter, Enchirid.
Metaphys. cap. 6, 7, 8. But Ineffectual, if all Extension be divisible, and the
Essential Presence of a Spirit which pervades and is extended through the whole
Body C, D, E, may for that very reason be divided; for so the whole Essence
which occupies the whole Body C, D, E, will be divided into parts. No by no
means, will you say, forasmuch as it is wholly in every part of the Body.

Therefore it will be divided, if I may so speak, into so many Totalities. But
what Logical ear can bear a saying so absurd and abhorrent from all reason,
that a Whole should not be divided into parts but into Wholes? But you will say
at least we shall have this granted us, that an Essential Presence may be
distributed or divided according to so many distinctly cited Totalities which
occupy at once the whole Body C, D, E, Yes verily, this shall be granted you,
after you have demonstrated that a Spirit not bigger than a Physical Monad can
occupy in the same instant all the parts of the Body C, D, E; but upon this
condition, that you acknowledge not sundry Totalities, but one only total
Essence; though the least that can be imagined, can occupy that whole space,
and when there is need, occupy, in an instant, an infinite one: Which the
Holenmerians must of necessity hold touching the Divine Essence, because
according to their Opinion taken in the second sense, (which pinches the whole
Essence of a Spirit into the smallest point) the Divine Essence itself is not
bigger than any Physical Monad. From whence it is apparent the three Objections
which we brought in the beginning do again recur here, and utterly overwhelm
the first reason of the Holenmerians: So that the remedy is far more
intolerable than the disease.

SECT. XIV.
A Confutation of the second Reason of the Holenmerians.

ANd truly the other reason which from this Holenmerism of Spirits pretends a
more easy way of conceiving Fig. 2.
how it comes to pass that the Soul, suppose in A, can perceive what happens to
it in C, or B, and altogether in the same circumstances as if itself were
perfectly and entirely in C, or B, when yet it is in A; although at first show
this seems very plausible, yet if we look thoroughly into it, we shall find it
far enough from performing what it so fairly promises. For besides that nothing
is more difficult or rather impossible to conceive, than that an Essence not
bigger than a Physical point should occupy and possess the whole Body of a man
at the same instant, this Hypothesis is moreover plainly contrary and repugnant
to the very Laws of the Souls Perceptions: For Physicians and Anatomists with
one consent profess, that they have found by very solid experiments, that the
Soul perceives only within the Head, and that without the Head there is no
perception: Which could by no means be, if the Soul herself were wholly in the
point A, and the very self-same Soul again wholly in the point B, and C, nor
any where as to Essential Amplitude bigger than a Physical Monad: For hence it
would follow, that one and the same thing would both perceive and not perceive
at once; That it would perceive this or that Object, and yet perceive nothing
at all; which is a perfect contradiction.

And from hence the falsity of that common saying is detected, That if the Eye
was in the Foot, the Soul would see in the Foot; whenas it does not so much as
see in those Eyes which it already has, but somewhere within the Brain. Nor
would the Soul by an Eye in the Foot see, unless by fitting Nerves, not unlike
the Optic ones, continued from the Foot to the Head and Brain, where the Soul
so far as perceptive, inhabiteth. In the other parts of the Body the Functions
thereof are only vital.

Again, such is the nature of some perceptions of the Soul, that they are
fitted for the moving of the Body; so that it is manifest that the very
self-same thing which perceives, has the power of moving and guiding of it;
Which seems impossible to be done by this Soul, which, according to the Opinion
of the Holenmerians, exceeds not the amplitude of a small Physical point, as it
may appear at first sight to any one whose reason is not blinded with prejudice.

And lastly, If it be lawful for the Mind of man to give her conjectures
touching the Immortal Genii, (whether they be in Vehicles, or destitute of
Vehicles) and touching their Perceptions and Essential Presences whether
invisible or those in which they are said sometimes to appear to mortal men,
there is none surely that can admit that any of these things are competible to
such a Spirit as the Holenmerians describe. For how can a Metaphysical Monad,
that is to say, a Spiritual substance not exceeding a Physical Monad in
Amplitude, fill out an Essential Presence bigger than a Physical Monad, unless
it be by a very swist vibration of itself toward all parts; as Boys by a very
swift moving of a Fire-stick, make a fiery Circle in the air by that quick
motion. But that Spirits, destitute of Vehicles, should have no greater
Essential Presence than what is occupied of a naked and unmoved Metaphysical
Monad, or exhibited thereby, seems so absonous and ridiculous a spectacle to
the Mind of man, that unless he be deprived of all sagacity and sensibility of
spirit, he cannot but abhor so idle an Opinion.

And as for those Essential Presences, according to which they sometimes appear
to men, at least equalizing humane stature, how can a solitary Metaphysical
Monad form so great a part of Air or Ether into humane shape, or govern it
being so formed? Or how can it porceive any external Object in this swift
motion of itself, and quick vibration, whereby this Metaphysical Monad is
understood of the Holenmerians, to be present in all the parts of its Vehicle
at once? For there can be no perception of the external Object, unless the
Object that is to be perceived act with some stay upon that which perceives.
Nor if it could be perceived by this Metaphysical Monad thus swistly moved and
vibrated toward all parts at once, would it be seen in one place, but in many
places at once, and those, as it may happen, very distant.

SECT. XV.
The egregious falsity of the Opinions of the Holenmerians and Nullibists, as
also their uselesness for any Philosophical ends.

BUt verily, I am ashamed to waste so much time in refuting such mere trifles
and dotages which indeed are such, (that I mean of the Nullibists, as well as
this other of the Holenmerians) that we may very well wonder how such distorted
and strained conceits could ever enter into the minds of men, or by what
artifice they have so spread themselves in the World; but that the prejudices
and enchantments of Superstition and stupid admiration of men's Persons are so
strong, that they may utterly blind the minds of men, and charm them into
dotage. But if any one, all prejudice and parts-taking being laid aside, will
attentively consider the thing as it is, he shall clearly perceive and
acknowledge, unless all belief is to be denied to the humane faculties, that
the Opinions of the Nullibists and Holenmerians, touching Incorporeal Beings,
are miserably false; and not that only, but as to any Philosophical purpose
altogether useless. Forasmuch as out of neither Hypothesis there does appear
any greater facility of conceiving how the Mind of man, or any other Spirit,
performs those Functions of Perception and of Moving of Bodies, from their
being supposed nowhere, than from their being supposed somewhere; or from
supposing them wholly in every part of a Body, than from supposing them only,
to occupy the whole Body by an Essential or Metaphysical Extension; but on the
contrary, that both the Hypotheses do entangle and involve the Doctrine of
Incorporeal Beings with greater Difficulties and Repugnancies.

Wherefore, there being neither Truth nor Usefulness in the Opinions of the
Holenmerians and Nullibists, I hope it will o^end no man if we send them quite
packing from our Philosophations touching an Incorporeal Being or Spirit, in
our delivering the true Idea or Notion thereof.

SECT. XVI.
That those that contend that the Notion of a Spirit is so difficult and
imperscrutable, do not this because they are of a more sharp and piercing
Judgment than others, but of a Genius more rude and plebeian.

NOw I have so successfully removed and dissipated those two vast Mounds of
Night and Mistiness, that lay upon the nature of Incorporeal Beings, and
obscured it with such gross darkness; it remains that we open and illustrate
the true and genuine nature of them in general, and propose such a definition
of a Spirit, as will exhibit no difficulty to a mind rightly prepared and freed
from prejudice: For the nature of a Spirit is very easily understood, provided
one rightly and skilfully show the way to the Learner, and form to him true
Notions of the thing. Insomuch that I have often wondered at the superstitious
consternation of mind in those men, (or the profaneness of their tempers and
innate aversation from the contemplation of Divine things) who if by chance
they hear any one professing that he can with sufficient clearness and
distinctness conceive the nature of a Spirit, and communicate the Notion to
others, they are presently astartled and amazed at the saying, and straightway
accuse the man of intolerable levity or arrogance, as thinking him to assume so
much to himself, and to promise to others, as no humane Wit, furnished with
never so much knowledge, can ever perform. And this I understand even of such
men who yet readily acknowledge the Existence of Spirits.

But as for those that deny their Existence, whoever professes this skill to
them, verily he cannot but appear a man above all measure vain and doting. But
I hope that I shall so bring it about, that no man shall appear more stupid and
doting, no man more unskilful and ignorant, than he that esteems the clear
Notion of a Spirit so hopeless and desperate an attempt; and that I shall
plainly detect, that this big and boastful profession of their ignorance in
these things does not proceed from hence, that they have any thing more a sharp
or discerning Judgment than other mortals, but that they have more gross and
weak parts, and a shallower Wit, and such as comes nearest to the superstition
and stupidity of the rude vulgar, who easilier fall into admiration and
astonishment, than pierce into the reasons and notices of any difficult matter.

SECT. XVII.
The Definition of Body in general, with so clear an Explication thereof, that
even they that complain of the obscurity of a Spirit, cannot but confess they
perfectly understand the nature of Body.

BUt now for those that do thus despair of any true knowledge of the nature of
a Spirit, I would entreat them to try the abilities of their wit in recognizing
and thoroughly considering the nature of Body in general. And let them
ingenuously tell me whether they cannot but acknowledge this to be a clear and
perspicuous definition thereof, viz. That Body is Substance Material, of itself
altogether destitute of all Perception, Life, and Motion. Or thus: Body is a
Substance Material coalescent or accruing together into one, by virtue of some
other thing, from whence that one by coalition, has or may have Life also,
Perception and Motion.

I doubt not but they will readily answer, that they understand all this (as to
the terms) clearly and perfectly; nor would they doubt of the truth thereof,
but that we deprive Body of all Metion from itself, as also of Union, Life, and
Perception. But that it is Substance, that is, a Being subsistent by itself,
not a mode of some Being, they cannot but very willingly admit, and that also
it is a material Substance compounded of physical Monads, or at least of most
minute particles of Matter, into which it is divisible; and because of their
Impenetrability, impenetrable by any other Body. So that the Essential and
Positive difference of a Body is, that it be impenetrable, and Physically
divisible into parts: But that it is extended, that immediately belongs to it
as it is a Being. Nor is there any reason why they should doubt of the other
part of the Differentia, whenas it is solidly and fully proved in Philosophy,
That Matter of its own nature, or in itself, is endued with no Perception,
Life, nor Motion. And besides, we are to remember that we here do not treat of
the Existence of things, but of their intelligible Notion and Essence.

SECT. XVIII.
The perfect Definition of a Spirit, with a full Explication of its Nature
through all Degrees.

ANd if the Notion or Essence is so easily understood in nature Corporeal or
Body, I do not see but in the Species immediately opposite to Body, viz.
Spirit, there may be found the same facility of being understood. Let us try
therefore, and from the Law of Opposites let us define a Spirit, an Immaterial
Substance intrinsecally endued with Life and the faculty of Motion. This
slender and brief Desinition that thus easily slows without any noise, does
comprehend in general the whole nature of a Spirit; Which lest by reason of its
exility and brevity it may prove less perceptible to the Understanding, as a
Spirit is to the sight, I will subjoyn a more full Explication, that it may
appear to all, that this Definition of a Spirit is nothing inferior to the
Definition of a Body as to clearness and perspicuity. And that by this method
which we now fall upon, a full and perfect knowledge and understanding of the
nature of a Spirit may be attained to.

Go to therefore, let us take notice through all the degrees of the Definitum,
or Thing defined, what precise and immediate properties each of them contain,
from whence at length a most distinct and perfect knowledge of the whole
Definitum will discover itself. Let us begin then from the top of all, and
first let us take notice that a Spirit is Ens, or a Being, and from this very
same that it is a Being; that it is also One, that it is True, and that it is
Good; which are the three acknowledged Properties of Ens in Metaphysics, that
it exists sometime, and somewhere, and is in some sort extended, as is shown
Enchirid. Metaphys. cap. 2. sect. 10. which three latter terms are plain of
themselves. And as for the three former, that One signifies undistinguished or
undivided in and from itself, but divided or distinguished from all other, and
that True denotes the answerableness of the thing to its own proper Idea, and
implies right Matter and Form duly conjoined, and that lastly Good respects
the fitness for the end in a large sense, so that it will take in that saying
of Theologers, That God is his own End, are things vulgarly known to L^gicians
and Metaphysicians. That these Six are the immediate affections of Being, as
Being is made apparent in the above cited Enchiridion Metaphysicum; nor is it
requisite to repeat the same things here. Now every Being is either Substance,
or the Mode of Substance, which some call Accident: But that a Spirit is not an
Accident or Mode of Substance, all in a manner profess; and it is demonstrable
from manifold Arguments, that there are Spirits which are no such Accidents or
Modes; Which is made good in the said Enchiridion and other Treatifes of Dr. H.
M.

Wherefore the second Essential degree of a Spirit is, that it is Substance.
From whence it is understood to subsist by itself, nor to want any other thing
as a Subject (in which it may inhere, or of which it may be the Mode or
Accident) for its subsisting or existing.

The third and last Essential degree is, that it is Immaterial, according to
which it immediately belongs to it, that it be a Being not only One, but one
by itself, or of its own intimate nature, and not by another; that is, That,
though as it is a Being it is in some sort extended, yet it is utte^ly
Indivisible and Indiscerpible into real Physical parts. And moreover, That it
can penetrate the Matter, and (which the Matter cannot do) penetrate things of
its own kind; that is, pass through Spiritual Substances. In which two
Essential Attributes (as it ought to be in every perfect and legitimate
Distribution of any Genius) it is fully and accurately contrary to its opposite
Species, namely, to Body. As also in those immediate Properties whereby it is
understood to have Life intrinsecally in itself, and the saculty of moving;
which in some sense is true in all Spirits whatsoever, for-asmuch as Life is
either Vegetative, Sensitive, or Intellectual. One whereof at least every
Spiritual Substance has: as also the faculty of moving; insomuch that every
Spirit either moves itself by itself, or the Matter, or both, or at least the
Matter either mediately or immediately; or lasty, both ways. For so all things
moved are moved by God, he being the Fountain of all Life and Motion.

SECT. XIX.
That from hence that the Definition of a Body is perspicuous, the Definition
of a Spirit is also necessarily perspicuous.

WHerefore I dare here appeal to the Judgment and Conscience of any one that is
not altogether illiterate and of a dull and obtuse Wit, whether this Notion or
Definition of a Spirit in general, is not as intelligible and perspicuous, is
not as clear and every way distinct as the Idea or Notion of a Body, or of any
thing else whatsoever which the mind of man can contemplate in the whole
compass of Nature. And whether he cannot as easily or rather with the same
pains apprehend the nature of a Spirit as of Body, forasmuch as they both agree
in the immediate Genus to them, to wit Substance. And the Differentiae do
illustrate one another by their mutual opposition; insomuch that it is
impossible that one should understand what is Material Substance, but he must
therewith presently understand what Immaterial Substance is, or what it is not
to have Life and Motion of itself, but he must straitway perceive what it is to
have both in itself, or to be able to communicate them to others.

SECT. XX.
Four Objections which from the perspicuity of the terms of the Definition of a
SPIRIT infer the Repugnancy of them one to another.

NOr can I divine what may be here opposed, unless happily they may allege such
things as these, That although they cannot deny but that all the terms of the
Definition and Explication of them, are sufficiently intelligible, if they be
considered single, yet if they be compared one with another they will mutually
destroy one another. For this Extension which is mingled with, or inserted into
the nature of a Spirit, seems to take away the Penetrability and Indivisibility
thereof, as also its faculty of thinking, as its Penetrability likewise takes
away its power of moving any Bodies.

I. First, Extension takes away Penetrability; because if one Extension
penetrate another, of necessity either one of them is destroyed, or two equal
Amplitudes entirely penetrating one another, are no bigger than either one of
them taken single, because they are closed within the same limits.

II. Secondly, It takes away Indivisibility; because whatsoever is extended has
parts extra parts, one part out of another, and therefore is Divisible: For
neither would it have parts, unless it could be divided into them. To which you
may further add, that forasmuch as the parts are substantial, nor depend one of
another, it is clearly manifest that at least by the Divine Power they may be
separate, and subsist separate one from another.

III. Thirdly, Extension deprives a Spirit of the faculty of thinking, as
depressing it down into the same order that Bodies are. And that there is no
reason why an extended Spirit should be more capable of Perception than Matter
that is extended.

IV. Lastly, Penetrability renders a Spirit unable to move Matter; because,
whenas by reason of this Penetrability it so easily slides through the Matter,
it cannot conveniently be united with the Matter whereby it may move the same:
For without some union or inherency (a Spirit being destitute of all
Impenetrability) it is impossible it should protrude the Matter toward any
place.

The sum of which Four difficulties tends to this, that we may understand, that
though this Idea or Notion of a Spirit which we have exhibited be sufficiently
plain and explicate, and may be easily understood; yet from the very
perspicuity of the thing itself, it abundantly appears, that it is not the Idea
of any possible thing, and much less of a thing really existing, whenas the
parts thereof are so manifestly repugnant one to another.

SECT. XXI.
An Answer to the first of the Four Objections.

I. BUt against as well the Nullibists as the Hobbians, who both of them
contend that Extension and Matter is one and the same thing, we will prove that
the Notion or Idea of a Spirit which we have produced, is a Notion of a thing
possible. And as for the Nullibists, who think we so much indulge to corporeal
Imagination in this our Opinion of the Extension of Spirits, I hope on the
contrary, that I shall show that it is only from hence, that the Hobbians and
Nullibists have taken all Amplitude from Spirits, because their Imagination is
not sufficiently defecated and depurated from the filth and unclean tinctures
of Corporeity, or rather that they have their Mind overmuch addicted and
enslaved to Material things, and so disordered, that she knows not how to
expedite herself from gross Corporeal Phantasms.

From which Fountain have sprung all those difficulties whereby they endeavor
to overwhelm this our Notion of a Spirit; as we shall manifestly demonstrate by
going through them all, and carefully perpending each of them. For it is to be
imputed to their gross Imagination, That from hence that two equal Amplitudes
penetrate one another throughout, they conclude that either one of them must
therewith perish, or that they being both conjoined together, are no bigger
than either one of them taken single. For this comes from hence that their mind
is so illaqueated or limetwigged, as it were, with the Idea's and Properties of
corporeal things, that they cannot but infect those things also which have
nothing corporeal in them with this material Tincture and Contagion, and so
altogether confound this Metaphysical Extension with that Extension which is
Physical. I say, from this disease it is that the sight of their mind is become
so dull and obtuse, that they are not able to divide that common Attribute of a
Being, I mean Extension Metaphysical from special. Extension and Material, and
assign to Spirits their proper Extension, and leave to Matter hers. Nor
according to that known method, whether Logical or Metaphysical, by
intellectual Abstraction prescind the Generical nature of Extension from the
abovesaid Species or kinds thereof. Nor lastly, (which is another sign of their
obtuseness and dullness) is their mind able to penetrate with that Spiritual
Extension into the Extension Material; but like a stupid Beast stands lowing
without, as if the mind itself were become wholly corporeal; and if any thing
enter they believe it perishes rather and is annihilated, than that two things
can at the same time coexist together in the same Ubi. Which are Symptoms of a
mind desperately sick of this Corporeal Malady of Imagination, and not
sufficiently accustomed or exercised in the free Operations of the Intellectual
Powers.

And that also proceeds from the same source, That supposing two Extensions
penetrating one another, and adequately occupying the same Ubi, they thus
conjoined are conceived not to be greater than either one of them taken by
itself. For the reason of this mistake is, that the Mind incrassated and swayed
down by the Imagination, cannot together with the Spiritual Extension penetrate
into the Material, and follow it throughout, but only places itself hard by,
and stands without like a gross stupid thing, and altogether Corporeal. For if
she could but, with the Spiritual Extension, insinuate herself into the
Material, and so conceive them both together as two really distinct Extensions,
it is impossible but that she should therewith conceive them so conjoined into
one Ubi, to be notwithstanding not a jot less than when they are separated and
occupy an Ubi as big again: For the Extension in neither of them is diminished,
but their Situation only changed. As it also sometimes comes to pass in one
and the same Extension of some particular Spirits which can dilate and contract
their Amplitude into a greater or lesser Ubi without any Augmentation or
Diminution of their Extension, but only by the expansion and retraction of it
into ano there site.

SECT. XXII.
That besides those THREE Dimensions which belong to all extended things, a
FOURTH also is to be admitted, which belongs properly to SPIRITS.

ANd that I may not dissemble or conceal any thing, Although all Material
things, considered in themselves, have three Dimensions only; yet there must
be admitted in Nature a Fourth, which fitly enough, I think, may be called
Essential Spissitude; Which, though it most properly appertains to those
Spirits which can contract their Extension into a less Ubi; yet by an easy
Analogy it may be referred also to Spirits penetrating as well the Matter as
mutually one another: So that wherever there are more Essences than one, or
more of the same Essence in the same Ubi than is adequate to the Amplitude
thereof, there this Fourth Dimension is to be acknowledged, which we call
Essential Spissitude.

Which assuredly involves no greater repugnancy than what may seem at first
view, to him that considers the thing less attentively, to be in the other
three Dimensions. Namely, unless one would conceive that a piece of Wax
stretched out, suppose, to the length of an Eln, and afterward rolled together
into the form of a Globe, loses something of its former Extension, by this its
conglobation, he must confess that a Spirit, neither by the contraction of
itself into a less space has lost any thing of its Extension or Essence, but as
in the abovesaid Wax the diminution of its Longitude is compensated with the
augmentation of its Latitude and Profundity; so in a Spirit contracting itself,
that in like manner its Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity being lessened, are
compensated by Essential Spissitude, which the Spirit acquires by this
contraction of itself.

And in both cases we are to remember that the Site is only changed, but that
the Essence and Extension are not at all impaired.

Verily these things by me are so perfectly every way perceived, so certain and
tried, that I dare appeal to the mind of any one which is free from the morbid
prejudices of Imagination, and challenge him to try the strength of his
Intellectuals, whether he does not clearly perceive the thing to be so as I
have defined, and that two equal Extensions, adequately occupying the very same
Ubi, be not twice as great as either of them alone, and that they are not
closed with the same terms as the Imagination falsely suggests, but only with
equal.

Nor is there any need to heap up more words for the solving this first
difficulty; whenas what has been briefly said already abundantly suffices for
the penetrating their understanding who are prepossest with no prejudice: But
for the piercing of theirs who are blinded with prejudices, infinite will not
suffice.

SECT. XXIII.
An Answer to the second Objection, where the fundamental Error of the
Nullibists, viz. That whatsoever is extended is the Object of Imagination, is
taken notice of.

II. LEt us try now if we can dispatch the second difficulty with like success,
and see if it be not wholly to be ascribed to Imagination, that an
Indiscerpible Extension seems to involve in it any contradiction. As if there
could be no Extension which has not parts real and properly so called into
which it may be actually divided. viz. for this reason, that that only is
extended which has parts extra parts, which being substantial, may be
separated one from another, and thus separate subsist. This is the summary
account of this difficulty, which nothing but corrupt imagination supporteth.

Now the first source or Fountain of this error of the Nullibists, is this;
That they make every thing that is extended the Object of the Imagination, and
every Object of the Imagination Corporeal. The latter whereof undoubtedly is
true, if it be taken in a right sense; namely, if they understand such a
perception as is either simply and adequately drawn from external Objects; or
by increasing, diminishing, transposing, or transforming of parts (as in
Chimaera's and Hippocentaurs) is composed of the same. I acknowledge all these
Idea's, as they were sometime some way Objects of Sensation, so to be the
genuine Objects of Imagination, and the perception of these to be ^ghtly termed
the operation of Fancy, and that all these things that are thus represented,
necessarily are to be looked upon as corporeal, and consequently as actually
divisible.

But that all perception of Extension is such Imagination, that I confidently
deny. Forasmuch as there is an Idea of infinite Extension drawn or taken in
from no external sense, but is natural and Essential to the very faculty of
perceiving; Which the mind can by no means pluck out of herself, nor cast it
away from her; but if she will rouse herself up, and by earnest and attentive
thinking, fix her animadversion thereon, she will be constrained, whether she
will or no, to acknowledge, that although the whole matter of the world were
exterminated out of the Universe, there would notwithstanding remain a certain
subtle and immaterial Extension which has no agreement with that other
Material one, in any thing, saving that it is extended, as being such that it
neither falls under sense, nor is impenetrable, nor can be moved, nor discerped
into parts; and that this Idea is not only possible, but necessary, and such
as we do not at our pleasure seign and invent, but do find it to be so innate
and ingrafted in our mind, that we cannot by any force or artifice remove it
thence. Which is a most certain demonstration that all Perception of Extension
is not Imagination properly so called.

Which in my Opinion ought to be esteemed one of the chiefest and most
fundamental Errors of the Nullibists, and to which especially this difficulty
is to be referred touching an Indiscerpible Extension. For we see they consess
their own guilt, namely, that their Mind is so corrupted by their Imagination,
and so immersed into it, that they can use no other saculty in the
contemplation of any extended thing. And therefore when they make use of their
Imagination instead of their Intellect in contemplating of it, they necessarily
look upon it as an Object of Imagination; that is, as a corporeal thing, and
discerpible into parts. For, as I noted above, the sight of their mind by
reason of this Morbus (...), this materious Disease, if I may so speak, is made
so heavy and dull, that it cannot distinguish any Extension from that of
Matter* as allowing it to appertain to another kind, nor by Logical or
Metaphysical Abstraction prescind it from either.

SECT. XXIV.
That Extension as such includes in it neither Divisibility nor
Impenetrability, neither Indivisibility nor Penetrability, but is indifferent
to either two of those properties.

ANd from hence it is that because a thing is extended they presently imagine
that it has parts extra parts, and is not Ens unum per se and non per aliud,
a Being one by itself, and not by virtue of another, but so framed from the
juxtaposition of parts. Whenas the Idea of Extension precisely considered in
itself includes no such thing, but only a trinal Distance or solid Amplitude,
that is to say, not linear only and superficiary, (if we may here use those
terms which properly belong to magnitude Mathematical) but every way running
out and reaching toward every part. This Amplitude surely, and nothing beside,
does this bare and simple Extension include, not Penetrability nor
Impenetrability, not Divisibility nor yet Indivisibility, but to either
affections or properties, or if you will Essential Differences, namely, to
Divisibility and Impenetrability, or to Penetrability and Indivisibility, if
considered in itself, is it altogether indifferent, and may be determined to
either two of them.

Wherefore, whereas we acknowledge that there is a certain Extension namely
Material, which is endued with so stout and invincible an (...) or
Impenetrability, that it necessarily and by an insuperable Renitencie expels
and excludes all other Matter that occurs and attempts to penetrate it, nor
suffers it at all to enter, although in the simple Idea of Extension, this
mavelous virtue of it is not con tained, but plainly omitted, as not at all
belonging thereto immediately and of itself; why may we not as easily conceive
that another Extension, namely, an Immaterial one, though Extension in itself
include no such thing, is of such a nature, that it cannot by any other thing
whether Material or Immaterial be discerped into parts; but by an indissoluble
necessary and essential Tie be so united and held together with itself, that
although it can penetrate all things and be penetrated by all things, yet
nothing can so insinuate itself into it as to disjoyn any thing of its Essence
any where, or perforate it or make any hole or Pore in it? that is, that I may
speak briefly, What hinders but there may be a Being that is immediately One of
its own nature, and not held together into one by virtue of some other, either
Quality or Substance? although every Being as a Being is extended, because
Extension in its precise Notion does not include any Physical Division, but the
Mind infected with corporeal Imagination, does falsely and unskilfully feign it
to be necessarily there.

SECT. XXV.
That every thing that is extended has not parts Physically discerpible, though
Logically or Intellectually divisible.

FOr it is nothing which the Nullibists here allege, while they say, That all
Extension infers parts, and all parts Division. For besides that the first
is false, forasmuch as Ens unum per se, a Being one of itself or of its own
immediate nature, although extended yet includes no parts in its Idea, but is
conceived according to its proper Essence as a thing as simple as may be, and
therefore compounded of no parts: We answer moreover, that it is not at all
prejudicial to our cause though we should grant that this Metaphysical
Extension of Spirits is also divisible, but Logically only, not Physically;
that is to say, is not discerpible. But that one should adjoyn a Physical
divisibility to such an Extension, surely that must necessarily proceed from
the impotencie of his Imagination, which his Mind cannot curb, nor separate
herself from the dreggs and corporeal foulnesses thereof; and hence it is that
she tinctures and infects this pure and Spiritual Extension with Corporeal
Properties. But that an extended thing may be divided Logically or
Intellectually, when in the mean time it can by no means be discerped, it
sufficiently appears from hence, That a Physical Monad which has some
Amplitude, though the least that possible can be, is conceived thus to be
divided in a Line consisting of any uneven number of Monads, which
notwithstanding the Intellect divides into two equal parts. And verily in a
Metaphysical Monad, such as the Holenmerians conceit the Mind of man to be, and
to possess in the mean time and occupy the whole Body, there may be here again
made a Logical Distribution, suppose, e subjectis, as they call it, so far
forth as this Metaphysical Monad, or Soul of the Holenmerians is conceived to
possess the Head, or Trunk, or Limbs of the Body. And yet no man is so delirant
as to think that it follows from thence, that such a Soul may be discerped into
so many parts, and that the parts so discerped may subsist by themselves.

SECT. XXVI.
An Answer to the latter part of the Second Objection, which infers the
separabilitie of the parts of a Substantial Extensum, from the said parts being
Substantial and independent one of another.

FRom which a sufficiently fit and accommodate Answer may be fetched to the
latter part of this difficulty, namely, to that, which because the parts of
Substance are Substantial and independent one of another, and subsisting by
themselves (as being Substances) would infer that they can be discerped, at
least by the Divine Power, and disjoined, and being so disjoined, subsist by
themselves. Which I confess to be the chief edge or sting of the whole
difficulty, and yet such as I hope I shall with ease file off or blunt. For
first, I deny that in a thing that is absolutely One and Simple as a Spirit is,
there are any Physical parts, or parts properly so called, but that they are
only falsely seigned and fancied in it, by the impure Imagination. But that the
Mind it self being susficiently defecated and purged from the impure dreggs of
Fancy, although from some extrinsecal respect she may consider a Spirit as
having parts, yet at the very same time does she in herself, with close
attention, observe and note, that such an Extension of itself has none. And
therefore whenas it has no parts it is plain it has no substantial parts, nor
independent one of another, nor subsistent of themselves.

And then as much as concerns those parts which the stupid and impotent
Imagination fancieth in a Spirit, it does not follow from thence, because they
are Substantial, that they may subsist separate by themselves. For a thing to
subsist by itself, only signifies so to subsist, that it wants not the Prop of
some other Subject in which it may inhere as Accidents do. So that the parts of
a Spirit may be said to subsist by themselves though they cannot subsist
separate, and so be substance still.

SECT. XXVII.
That the mutual Independencie of the parts of an extended Substance may be
understood in a twofold sense; with an Answer thereto, taken in the first sense
thereof.

BUt what they mean by that mutual Independencie of parts I do not fully
understand: But I sufficiently conceive that one of these two things must be
hinted thereby, viz. Either that they are not mutual and effectual causes to
one another of their Existing, or that their Existence is understood to be
connected by no necessary condition at all.

And as for the former sense, I willingly confess those parts which they fancy
in a Spirit are not mutual causes of one another Existence; but so, that in
the mean time I do most firmly deny, that it will thence follow that they may
be discerped, and thus discerpt, be separately conserved, no more than the
Intelligible parts of a Physical Monad which is divided into two by our Reason
or Intellect; which surely are no mutual causes of one another Existence: or
the Members of the Distribution of a Metaphysical Monad according to the
Doctrine of the Holenmerians (viz. The Soul totally being in every part of the
Body) which no man in his wits can ever hope that they may be discerped,
although the said Members of the division are not the mutual causes of one
another Existence: For they are but one and the same Soul which is not the
cause of itself, but was wholly and entirely caused by God.

But you will say that there is here manifestly a reason extant and apparent
why these Members of the Distribution cannot be discerped, and discerpt
separately conserved, because one and the same indivisible Monad occurs in
every Member of the Distribution, which therefore since it is a single one, it
is impossible it should be discerped from itself. To which I on the other side
answer, That it is as manifestly extant and apparent how frivolously therefore
and ineptly Arguments are drawn from Logical or Intellectual Divisions, for the
concluding a real separability of parts. And I add further, That as that
fictitious Metaphysical Monad cannot be discerped or plucked in pieces from
itself, no more can any real Spirit, because it is a thing most simple and most
absolutely One, and which a pure Mind darkened and possessed with no prejudices
of Imagination does acknowledge no real parts at all to be in. For so it would
ipso facto be a compound Thing.

SECT. XXVIII.
An Answer to the Independency of parts taken in the second sense.

FRom whence an easy entrance is made to the answering this difficulty
understood in the second sense of the mutual Independency of the parts of a
Spirit, whereby their coexistence and union are understood to be connected by
no necessary Law or Condition. For that this is false, I do most constantly
affirm without all demur: For the coexistences of the parts, as they call them,
of a Spirit, are connected by a Law or Condition absolutely necessary and
plainly essential; Forasmuch as a Spirit is a most simple Being, or a Being
unum per se and non per aliud; that is, one of itself or of its own nature
immediately so, and not by another either Substance or Quality. For none of
those parts, as the Nullibists call them, can exist but upon this condition,
that all jointly and unitedly exist together; which Condition or Law is
contained in the very Idea or nature of every Spirit. Whence it cannot be
created or any way produced unless upon this condition, that all its parts be
inseparably and indiscerpibly one; as neither a Rectangle Triangle, unless upon
this condition, that the powers of the Cathetus and Basis, be equal to the
power of the Hypotenusa. Whence the Indiscerpibility of a Spirit cannot be
removed from it, no not virtute Divina, as the Schoolmen speak, no more than
the abovesaid Property be disjoined from a Rectangle Triangle. Out of all
which I hope it is at length abundantly clear, that the Extension of a Spirit
does not at all hinder the Indiscerpibility thereof.

SECT. XXIX.
An Answer to the third Objection touching the Imperceptivity of an extended
Substance, viz. That whatever is, is extended, and that the NULLIBISTS and
HOLENMERIANS themselves cannot give a Reason of the perceptive Faculty in
Spirits, from their Hypotheses.

III. NOr is it any let (which is the third thing) to the faculty of
Perceiving and Thinking in Spirits: For we do not thrust down a Spirit by
attributing Extension to it, into the rank of Corporeal Beings, forasmuch as
there is nothing in all Nature which is not in some sense extended. For
whatever of Essence there is in any thing, it either is or may be actually
present to some part of the matter, and therefore it must either be extended or
be contracted to the narrowness of a point, and be a mere nothing. For, as for
the Nullibists and Holenmerians, the Opinions of them both are above utterly
routed by me, and quite subverted and overturned from the very root, that no
man may seek subterfuges and lurking holes there. Wherefore there is a
necessity that something that is extended have Cogitation and Perception in it,
or else there will be nothing lest that has.

But for that which this Objection further urges, that there occurrs no reason
why an extended Spirit should be more capable of Perception than extended
Matter, it is verily, in my judgment, a very unlearned and unskilful
argutation. For we do not take all this pains in demonstrating the Extension of
a Spirit, that thence we might fetch out a reason or account of its faculty of
perceiving; but that it may be conceived to be some real Being and true
Substance, and not a vain Figment, such as is every thing that has no Amplitude
and is in no sort extended.

But those that so stickle and sweat for the proving their Opinion, that a
Spirit is nowhere, or is totally in every part of that Ubi it occupies, they
are plainly engaged of all right, clearly and distinctly to render a reason out
of their Hypothesis of the Perceptive faculty that is acknowledged in Spirits,
Namely that they plainly and precisely deduce from hence, because a thing is
nowhere or totally in every part of the Ubi it occupies, that it is necessarily
endued with a faculty of perceiving and thinking; so that the reason of the
conjunction of properties with the Subject, may be clearly thence understood.

Which notwithstanding I am very confident, they can never perform; And that
Perception and Cogitation are the immediate Attributes of some Substance; and
that therefore, as that Rule of Prudence, Enchirid. Ethic. lib. 3. cap. 4.
sect. 3. declares, no Physical reason thereof ought to be required, nor can be
given, why they are in the Subject wherein they are found.

SECT. XXX.
That from the Generical nature of any Species, no reason is to be fetched of
the conjunction of the Essential Difference with it, it being immediate.

BUt so we are to conclude, that as Substance is immediately divided into
Material and Immaterial, or into Body and Spirit, where no reason can be
rendered from the Substance in Spirit, as it is Substance, why it should be
Spirit rather than Body; nor from Substance in a Body, as it is Substance, why
it should be Body rather than Spirit; But these Essential Differences are
immediately in the Subject in which they are found: So the case stands in the
subdivision of Spirit into merely Plastical and Perceptive, supposing there are
Spirits that are merely Plastical; and then of a Perceptive Spirit into merely
Sensitive and Intellectual. For there can be no reason rendered touching a
Spirit as a Spirit in a Spirit merely Plastical, why it is a Spirit merely
Plastical rather than Perceptive: Nor in a Perceptive Spirit, why it is a
Perceptive Spirit rather than merely Plastical. And lastly, in a Perceptive
Spirit Intellectual, why it is Intellectual rather than merely Sensitive; and
in the merely Sensitive Spirit, why it is such rather than Intellectual. But
these Essential Differences are immediately in the Subjects in which they are
found, and any Physical and intrinsecal reason ought not to be asked, nor can
be given why they are in those Subjects, as I noted a little above out of the
said Enchiridion Ethicum.

SECT. XXXI.
That although the Holenmerians and Nullibists can give no reason, why that
which perceives should be TOTALLY in every part, or should be NOWHERE rather
than be in any sort extended or somewere, yet there are reasons obvious enough,
why an extended Spirit, rather should perceive than extended Matter.

BUt however, though we cannot render a reason why this or that Substance as
Substance, be a Spirit rather than Body; or why this or that Spirit be
Perceptive rather than merely Plastical; yet as the reason is sufficiently
plain, why Matter or Body is a Substance rather than Accident, so it is
manifest enough why that which Perceives, or is Plastical, should be a Spirit
rather than Matter or Body; which surely is much more than either the
Holenmerians or Nullibists can vaunt of. For they can offer no reason why that
which perceives should rather be nowhere than somewhere; or totally in each
part of the Ubi it does occupy, than otherwise, as may be understood from what
we have said above.

But now since the Matter or Body which is discerpible and Impenetrable is
destitute of itself of all Life and Motion, certainly it is consonant to
reason, that the Species opposite to Body, and which is conceived to be
Penetrable and Indiscerpible, should be intrinsecally endued with Life in
general and Motion. And whenas Matter is nothing else than a certain stupid and
loose congeries of Physical Monads, that the first and most immediate opposite
degree in this indiscerpible and penetrable Substance, which is called Spirit,
should be the faculty of Union, Motion, and Life, in which all the Sympathies
and Synenergies which are found in the world may be conceived to consist. From
whence it ought not at all to seem strange, that that which is Plastical should
be a Spirit.

And now as for Perception itself, undoubtedly all Mortals have either a
certain consused presage, or more precise and determinate Notion, that as that,
whatever it is in which the abovesaid Sympathies and Synenergies immediately
are, so more especially that to which belongs the faculty of Perceiving and
Thinking is a thing of all things the most subtle and most One that may be.

Wherefore I appeal here to the Mind and judgment of any one, whether he can
truly conceive any thing more Subtle or more One than the Essence or Notion of
a Spirit as it is immediately distinguished from Matter, and opposed thereto.
For can there be any thing more One than what has no parts, into which it may
be discerped? or more Subtle than what does not only penetrate Matter, but
itself, or at least other Substances of its own kind? For a Spirit can
penetrate a Spirit, though Matter cannot penetrate Matter.

There is therefore in the very Essence of a Spirit, although it be
Metaphysically extended, no obscure reason why all the Sympathies and
Synenergies, why all Perceptions and all manner of Cogitations should be
referred rather to it, by reason of the Unity and Subtilty of its nature, than
to Matter, which is so crass, that it is impenetrable; and is so far from unity
of Essence, that it consists of juxtaposited parts. But I hope by this I have
abundantly satisfied this third difficulty.

SECT. XXXII.
An Answer to the fourth Objection as much as respects the HOLENMERIANS and
NULLIBISTS, and all those that acknowledge that the Matter is created of God.

IV. LEt us go on therefore to the Fourth and last, which from the
Penetrability of a Spirit concludes its unsitness for moving of Matter. For it
cannot move Matter, but by impelling it; nor can it impel it, because it does
so easily, without all resistance, penetrate it. Here therefore again,
Imagination plays her tricks, and measures the nature of a Spirit by the Laws
of Matter, fancying a Spirit like some Body passing through an over-large or
wide hole, where it cannot stick by reason of the laxness of the passage.

But in the mean time, it is to be noted, that neither the Holenmerians nor
Nullibists can of right object this difficulty to us, whenas it is much more
incredible that either a Metaphysical Monad, or any Essence that is nowhere,
should be more fit for the moving Matter, than that which has some Amplitude,
and is present also to the Matter that is to be moved. Wherefore we have now
only to do with such Philosophers as contend that the whole Universe consists
of Bodies only: For as for those that acknowledge there is a God, and that
Matter was created by him, it is not hard for them to conceive, that there may
be a certain faculty in the Soul, which in some manner, though very
shadowishly, answers to that Power in God of creating Matter; Namely, that as
God, though the most pure of all Spirits, yet creates Matter the most gross of
all things; so created Spirits themselves may emit a certain Material Virtue,
either spontaneously or naturally, by which they may intimately inhere in the
Subject Matter, and be sufficiently close united therewith. Which faculty of
Spirits in the Appendix to the Antidote against Atheism, is called (...), the
Hylopathy of Spirits, or a Power of affecting or being affected by the Matter.
But I confess that Answer is less fitly used when we have to do with those who
deny the Creation of Matter, and much more when with those that deny there is a
God.

SECT. XXXIII.
An Answer to those that think there is nothing in the Universe but Matter or
Body.

WHerefore, whenas we have to do with such infense Adversaries, and so much
estranged from all knowledge and acknowledgement of Incorporeal Things, verily
we ought to behave ourselves very cautiously and circumspectly, and something
more precisely to consider the Title of the Question, which is not, Whether we
can accurately discern and declare the mode or way that a Spirit moves Matter,
but whether its Penetrability is repugnant with this faculty of moving Matter.
But now it is manifest, if a Spirit could be united and as it were cohere with
the Matter, that it might easily move Matter; forasmuch as if there be at all
any such thing as a Spirit, it is according to the common Opinion of all men to
be acknowledged the true Principle and Fountain of all Life and Motion.
Wherefore the hinge of the whole controversy turns upon this one pin, Whether
it be repugnant that any Spirit should be united and as it were cohere with
Matter, or by whatever firmness or sastening (whether permanent or
momentaneous) be joined therewith.

Now that it is not repugnant, I hope I shall clearly demonstrate from hence,
that the unition of Spirit with Matter, is as intelligible as the unition of
one part of Matter with another. For that ought in reason to be held an Axiom
firm and sure, That that is possible to be, in which there is found no greater
(not to say less) dissiculty of so being, than in that which we really find to
be. But we see one part of Matter really and actually united with another, and
that in some Bodies with a firmness almost invincible, as in some Stones and
Metals, which are held to be the hardest of all Bodies. But we will for the
more fully understanding the business, suppose a Body absolutely and perfectly
hard, constituted of no particles, but the very Physical Monads themselves, and
without all pores.

I ask therefore here, By what virtue, or by what manner of way do the parts of
so perfect a Solid cohere? Undoubtedly they can allege nothing here besides
immediate contact and rest: For if they fly to any other affections which are
allied to Life and Sense, they are more rightly and more easily understood to
be in a Spirit than in Matter; and we will presently pronounce that a Spirit
may adhere to Matter by the same virtues.

But that the parts of Matter cohere by bare though immediate contact, seems as
difficult, if not more difficult, than that a Spirit penetrating Matter should
cleave together into one with it: For the contact of the parts of Matter is
every where only superficial, but one and the same indiscerpible Spirit
penetrates and possesses the whole Matter at once.

Nor need we fear at all, that it will not inhere because it can so easily
slide in, and therefore as it may seem, slide through, and pass away. For in a
Body perfectly solid, suppose A, in which we will conceive some particular
Superficies, suppose E, A, C; this Superficies E, A, C, is assuredly so glib
and smooth, that there can be nothing imagined more smooth and glib: Wherefore
why does not the upper part of this solid Cube C, D, E, by any the slightest
impulse slide upon the inferior part of the Cube E, F, C, especially if the
inferior part E, F, C, be held fast, while the superior is impelled or thrust
forward? Surely this easiness of the sliding of Bodies perfectly smooth and
glib, which touch immediately one another, their easiness, I say, of sliding
one upon another, does seem at least as necessary to our Imagination, as the
proclivity of the passing of a Spirit through the Bodies it penetrates.
Wherefore if two parts of Matter, suppose E, D, C, and E, F, C, which our
Imagination does most urgently suggest to us that they will always with the
least impulse slide one upon another, do yet notwithstanding adhere to one
another with a most firm and almost invincible union, why may not then a
Spirit, which our Imagination suspects will so easily pass through any Body, be
united to a Body with equal firmness? whenas this is not more difficult than
the other, yea rather much more easy if one would consider the thing as it is,
laying aside all prejudice. But now since the Penetrability of a Spirit is not
repugnant with its union with Matter, it is manifest that its faculty of moving
Body is not at all repugnant with its Penetrability. Which is the thing that
was to be demonstrated.

But it half repents me that I have with so great preparation and pomp attacked
so small a difficulty, and have striven so long with mere Elusions and
prestigious Juggles of the Imagination, (which casts such a Mist of fictitious
Repugnancies on the true Idea of a Spirit) as with so many Phantomes and
Specter of an unquiet Night. But in the mean time I have made it abundantly
manifest that there are no other Contradictions or Repugnancies in this our
Notion of a Spirit, than what the minds of our Adversaries, polluted with the
impure dregs of Imagination, and unable to abstract Metaphysical Extension from
Corporeal affections, do foully and slovenly clart upon it, and that this Idea
looked upon in itself does clearly appear to be a Notion at least of a thing
Possible; which is all that we drive at in this place.

SECT. XXXIV.
How far the Notion of a Spirit here defended is countenanced and confirmed by
the common suffrage of all Adversaries.

ANd that it may appear more plausible, we will not omit in the last place to
take notice, how far it is countenanced and confirmed by the common suffrage of
our Adversaries: For the Hobbians, and whatever other Philosophers else of the
same stamp, do plainly assent to us in this, That whatsoever really is, is of
necessity extended. But that they hence infer that there is nothing in Nature
but what is Corporeal, that truly they do very unskilfully and inconsequently
collect, they by some weakness or morbidness of mind tumbling into so foul an
error. For it is impossible that the mind of man, unless it were laden and
polluted with the dregs and dross of Corporeal Imagination, should suffer
itself to sink into such a gross and dirty Opinion.

But that every thing that is, is extended, the Nullibists also themselves seem
to me to be near the very point of acknowledging it for true and certain. For
they do not dissemble it, but that if a Spirit be somewhere, it necessarily
follows that it is also extended. And they moreover grant, that by its
Operation it is present to or in the Matter, and that the Essence of a Spirit
is not separated from its Operations.

But that a thing should be, and yet not be any where in the whole Universe, is
so wild and mad a vote, and so absonous and abhorrent from all reason, that it
cannot be said by any man in his wits, unless by way of sport or some slim
jest, as I have intimated above; Whence their case is the more to be pitied,
who captivated and blinded with admiration of the chief Author of so absurd an
Opinion, do solemnly and seriously embrace, and diligently endeavor to polish
the same.

And lastly, as for the Holenmerians, those of them who are more cautious and
considerate, do so explain their Opinion, that it scarce seems to differ an
hairs breadth from ours. For though they affirm that the Soul is in every part,
yet they say they understand it not of the Quantity or Extension of the Soul,
whereby it occupies the whole Body, but of the perfection of its Essence and
Virtue: Which however true it may be of the Soul, it is undoubtedly most true
of the Divine Numen, whose Life and Essence is most perfect and most full every
where, as being such as every where contains infinite Goodness, Wisdom, and
Power.

Thus we see that this Idea or Notion of a Spirit which is here exhibited to
the world, is not only possible in itself, but very plausible and
unexceptionable, and such as all parties, if they be rightly understood, will
be found whether they will or no to contribute to the discovery of the truth
and solidity thereof. And therefore is such as will not unusefully nor
unseasonably conclude this First Part of ^ducismus Triumphatus, which treats of
the ^ossibility of Apparitions and Witchcraft, but ^ake the way more easy to
the acknowledgement of the force of the Arguments of the Second Part, viz. The
many Relations that are produced to prove the Actual Existence of Spirits and
Apparitions.

Saducismus Triumphatus. Part the Second


Saducismus Triumphatus, Or Full and Plain EVIDENCE CONCERNING Witches and
Apparitions.

The Second Part.

PROVING Partly by Holy Scripture, partly by a choice Collection of Modern
Relations, The real EXISTENCE of APPARITIONS, SPIRITS and WITCHES.

By Jos. Glanvil, late Chaplain to His Majesty, and Fellow of the Royal Society.

LONDON, Printed for J. Collins, and S. Lowdns. 1681.

THE PREFACE.
I Know it is matter of very little Credit to be a Relator of Stories, and I of
all Men living, have the least reason to be fond of the Employment. For I never
had any faculty in telling of a Story, and have always had a particular
indisposition and backwardness to the writing any such. But of all Relations of
Fact, there are none like to give a Man such trouble and disreputation, as
those that relate to Witchcraft and Apparitions, which so great a party of Men
(in this Age especially) do so railly and laugh at, and without more ado, are
resolved to explode and despise, as mere Winter Tales, and Old Wives Fables.
Such they will call and account them, be their Truth and Evidence what it will.
For, they have unalterably fixed and determined the point, that Witches and
Apparitions are things ridiculous, incredible, foppish, impossible; and
therefore all Relations that assert them are Lies, Cheats and Delusions, and
those that afford any credit to them, are credulous Gulls and silly easy
Believers.

Which things, if they should not be so, it would spoil many a jest, and those
who thought themselves great Wits, must have the discomfort of finding they are
mistaken. They must fall back into common and vulgar Belief, and lose the
pretense to extraordinary Sagacity, on which they valued themselves so much,
and be brought to be afraid of another World, and be subjected to the common
terrors which they despised before, as the juggles and contrivances of Priests
and Politicians, and so must see themselves under a necessity of altering their
lives, or of being undone. These are very hard and grievous things, and
therefore the Stories of Witches and Apparitions must be exploded and run down,
or all is lost.

This is the case with multitudes of brisk confident Men in our days, so that
to meddle on this Subject, is to affront them greatly, to provoke their rage
and contempt, and to raise the Devil of their Wit and Buffoonry. All which
considered, it must be confessed to be a very bold and adventurous thing to
undertake the Province in which I have engaged. And besides the provocation
which it must needs give to the Huffers and Witlings, there is another sort
whose good Opinion I greatly value; some sober and ingenious Spirits, who upon
other grounds doubt of the Existence of Witches, who may be apt to judge me
guilty of Credulity, for the pains I take in this matter. This also has been
some trouble and discouragement.

And upon the whole, I am assured beforehand, that no Evidence of Fact
possible is sufficient to remove the obstinate prejudices of diverse resolved
Men, and therefore* I know I must fall under their heavy censures; of which I
have considered the worst, and am I hope pretty well prepared to bear the
severest of them. But no Man would expose himself to all this for nothing, nor
have I. There were reasons for this engagement, and they were briefly these
that follow.

Having been at Mr. Mompessons house in the time of the disturbance, seen, and
heard somewhat my self, and received an account from Mr. Mompesson, and other
credible Persons of the whole trouble; I was persuaded to Publish, and to Annex
the full account of it to the Second or Third Edition of my Considerations
concerning Witchcraft, to which the Story had near Relation. 'This I did, and
they passed Two or Three Editions together, without much further trouble to me.
But of late, I have heard from all parts, and am amazed at it, that that so
strongly attested Relation is run down in most places as a Delusion and
Imposture, and that Mr. Mompesson and my self, have confessed all to be a cheat
and contrivance.

Concerning this, I have been asked a thousand times, till I have been weary of
answering, and the Questionists would scarce believe I was in earnest when I
denied it. I have received Letters about it from known friends and strangers
out of many parts of the Three Kingdoms, so that I have been haunted almost as
bad as Mr. Mompesson s house. Most of them have declared that it was most
confidently reported, and believed in all the respective Parts, that the
business was a cheat, that Mr. Mompesson had confessed so much, and I the same:
So that I was quite tired with denying and answering Letters about it. And to
free my self from the trouble, I at last resolved to re-print the Story by it
self with my Confutation of the Invention that concerned me, and a Letter I
received from Mr. Mompesson (now Printed in this Book) which cleared the matter
as to him.

This accordingly I committed to my Booksellers hands some years since to be
Printed. But it being not done, I was continually importuned by new
Solicitations and Questions, and at length out comes Mr. Websters confident
Book, in which he says, That my Story of the Drummer, and the other of
Witchcraft, are as odd and silly, as any can be told or read, and as
fictitious, incredible, ludicrous and ridiculous as any can be, p 11. And
again, p. 278. Must not all Persons that are of sound understanding, judge and
believe that all those strange tricks related by Mr. Glanvil of his Drummer at
Mr. Mompessons house, which he calls the Demon of Tedworth, were abominable
Cheats and Impostures, as I am informed by Persons of good Quality, they were
discovered to be.

But neither did this Confidence, nor his Book (I confess) much move me; for I
was very loath to be troubled any more in this matter. But at last diverse
Eminent Men, and Learned friends of mine having taken notice of it, and being
troubled to see so considerable an evidence against Saducism, as Mr. Mompesson
s Story is, so impudently run down by purposely contrived lies, they urged me
very much to re-print the Relation, with my Considerations about Witchcraft;
and so give some check to the Insultation and Confidence of Mr. Webster.

To this I stood long dis-inclined, but being pressed by the consideration that
such a Re-enforcement might be a very considerable and seasonable service to
Religion, against the stupid Saducisme and Infidelity of the Age, I was
persuaded: And having signified my being now inclined to the design, I received
great encouragement from some of the greatest Spirits of our Age and Nation,
who earnestly animated me to it. Having resolved, I bethought me of making a
small Collection of the most credible and best attested Stories of this kind
that were near and modern, to accompany the Second I had Printed, and to
confirm and prove the main Subject.

ADVERTISEMENT.
This is the whole of the Preface, that was found amongst Mr. Glanvil's Papers,
saving five or six words, which being superfluous to the sense of this last
Clause, and beginning something else not perfected, I thought better left out.
But as for Mr. Mompesson's Letter to Mr. Glanvil, which is mentioned in this
Preface, and designed to be Printed in this intended Edition; it is out of the
Original Copy as follows.

Mr. Mompesson's LETTER to Mr. Glanvil, Dated Nov. 8. Anno 1672.
Worthy Sir,
MEeting with Dr. Pierce accidentally at Sir Robert Buttons, he acquainted me
of something that passed between my Lord of R -- and your self about my
troubles, etc. To which (having but little leisure) I do give you this account,
that I have been very often of late asked the Question, whether I have not
confessed to His Majesty or any other, a cheat discovered about that affair. To
which I gave, and shall to my Dying day give the same answer, That I must belly
my self, and perjure my self also to acknowledge a cheat in a thing where I am
sure there was nor could be any, as I, the Minister of the ^lace, and two other
Honest Gentlemen deposed at the Assizes, upon my Impleading the Drummer. If the
world will not believe it, it shall be indifferent to me, praying God to keep
me from the same, or the like affliction. And although I am sure this most
damnable lie does pass for current amongst one sort of people in the World,
invented only, I think, to suppress the Belief of the Being either of God or
Devil; yet I question not but the Thing obtains credit enough amongst those,
whom I principally desire should retain a more charitable Opinion of me, than
to be any way a devisor of it, only to be talked of in the World, to my own
disadvantage and reproach; of which sort I reckon you one, and rest in have,

SIR, Your Obliged Servant, Jo. Mompesson.
Nov. 8. 72.
ADVERTISEMENT.
Concerning the Attestation of Mr. Mompesson and others upon Oath at the
Assizes, the same is mentioned also, and their Names expressed in a Letter to
Mr. James Collins, which Letter from the Original Copy is as follows.

Mr. Mompesson's LETTER to Mr. Collins, Dated Aug. 8. Anno 1674.
Sir,
I Received yours, and had given you an earlier answer, had I not been
prevented by some journeys. I now give you this; That as to any additional part
of the Story, I shall not trouble you with at present, not knowing what is
either already published or omitted, in regard I have not any of Mr. Glanvi's
Books by me. I never had but one, which was the last year borrowed of me for
the use of the Lord Hollis, and is not yet returned. But as to the business of
the Assizes (which is likely to work most on the Incredulous, because the
Evidence was given on Oath) I shall here enlarge it to you.

When the Drummer was escaped from his Exile, which he was Sentenced to at
Glou^ester for a Felony, I took him up, and procured his Committment to
Salisbury Gaol, where I Indicted him as a Felon', for this supposed Witchcraft
about my House. When the fellow saw me in earnest, he sent to me from the
Prifon, that he was sorry for my affliction, and if I would procure him leave
to come to my House in the nature of an Harvest-man, he did not question but he
should do me good as to that affair. To which I sent answer, I knew he could do
me no good in any honest way, and therefore rejected it. The Assizes came on,
where I Indicted him on the Statute Primo Jacobi cap. 12. where you may find,
that to feed, employ, or reward any evil spirit is Felony. And the Indictment
against him was, that he did quendam malum Spiritum negotiare, the Grand Jury
found the Bill upon the Evidence, but the Petty Jury acquitted him, but not
without some difficulty.

The Evidence upon Oath were my self, one Mr. William Maton, one Mr. Walter
Dowse, all yet living, and I think of as good Repute, as any this Country has
in it, and one Mr. Jo, Cragg, then Minister of the Place, but since dead. We
all deposed several things that we conceived impossible to be done by any
natural Agents, as the motion of Chairs, Stools and Bedstaves, no body being
near them, the Beating of Drumms in the Air over the House in clear nights, and
nothing visible; the shaking of the Floor and strongest parts of the House in
still and calm nights, with several other things of the like nature: And that
by other Evidence it was applied to him.

For some going out of these parts to Gloucester whilst he was there in Prison,
and visiting him, he ask't them what News in Wilts. To which they replied, they
knew none. No, says the Drummer, did you not hear of a Gentleman's House that
was troubled with the Beating of Drums? They told him again, if that were News,
they heard enough of that. Ay, says the Drummer, it was because he took my Drum
from me; if he had not taken away my Drum, that trouble had never befallen him,
and he shall never have his quiet again, till I have my Drum, or satisfaction
from him.

This was deposed by one Thomas Avis Servant to one Mr. Thomas Sadler of
North-Wilts, and these words had like to have cost the Drummer his Life. For
else, although the things were never so true, it could not have been rightly
applied to him more than to another. I should only add, that the before
mentioned Witnesses were Neighbors, and deposed, that they heard and saw these
things almost every day or night for many Months together. As to the Sculpture
you intend, you best understand the advantage, I think it needless. And those
Words [you shall have Drumming enough] is more than I heard him speak: I rest

Your Loving Friend, Jo. Mompesson.
Tedworth Aug. 8. 1674.
An Introduction to the Proof of the Existence of Apparitions, Spirits and
Witches.
SECT. I.
The great usefulness and seasonableness of the present Argument, touching
Witches and Apparitions, in subservieney to Religion.

THe Question, whether there are witches or not, is not matter of vain
Speculation, or of indifferent Moment; but an Inquiry of very great and weighty
Importance. For, on the resolution of it, depends the Authority and just
Execution of some of our Laws; and which is more, our Religion in its main
Doctrines is nearly concerned. There is no one, that is not very much a
stranger to the World but knows how Atheism and Infidelity have advanced in
our days, and how openly they now dare to show themselves in Asserting and
Disputing their vile Cause. Particularly the distinction of the Soul from the
Body, the Being of Spirits, and a Future Life are Assertions extremely despised
and opposed by the Men of this sort, and if we lose those Articles, all
Religion comes to nothing. They are clearly and fully Asserted in the Sacred
Oracles, but those Wits have laid aside these Divine Writings. They are proved
by the best Philosophy and highest Reason; but the Unbelievers, diverse of them
are too shallow to be capable of such proofs, and the more subtle are ready to
Scepticize away those grounds.

But there is one Head of Arguments that troubles them much, and that is, the
Topic of Witches and Apparitions. If such there are, it is a sensible proof of
Spirits and another Life, an Argument of more direct force than any
Speculations, or Abstract reasonings, and such an one as meets with all the
sorts of Infidels. On which account they labor with all their might to
persuade themselves and others, that Witches and Apparitions are but
Melancholic Dreams, or crafty Impostures; and here it is generally, that they
begin with the young men, whose understandings they design to Debauch.

They expose and deride all Relations of Spirits and Witchcraft, and furnish
them with some little Arguments, or rather Colors against their Existence. And
youth is very ready to entertain such Opinions as will help them to fancy,
they are wiser than the generality of Men. And when they have once swallowed
this Opinion, and are sure there are no Witches nor Apparitions, they are
prepared for the denial of Spirits, a Life to come, and all the other
Principles of Religion. So that I think it will be a considerable and very
seasonable service to it, fully to debate and settle this matter, which I shall
endeavor in the following sheets, and I hope so, as not to impose upon my self
or others, by empty Rhetorications, fabulous Relations, or Sophistical
Reasonings, but treat on the Question with that freedom and plainness, that
becomes one that is neither fond, fanciful nor credulous.

SECT. II.
The true stating of the Question by defining what a Witch and Witchcraft is.

I Know that a great part of the Labor in most Controversies, uses to be
bestowed on things impertinent to the main business, and by them the Minds of
both sides are so confounded, that they wander widely from the point in
difference, and at last lose it quite. It would quickly be thus in the Question
of Witchcraft, and usually is so, without previous care to avoid it. But I
shall take the best I can, that my pains on this Subject be not so
mis-bestowed, but closely applied to the purpose: And in order thereunto shall
briefly define the terms of the Question, and then set down what I grant to
mine Adversaries, and what I demand from them. And when these Preliminaries are
well adjusted, we shall proceed with more distinctness, and still see
whereabout we are, and know how far what is affirmed or proved, reaches the
main matter in debate.

The Question is, whether there are Witches or not. Mr. Webster accuses the
Writers on the Subject of defect, in not laying down a perfect Description of a
Witch or Witchcraft, or explaining what they mean, p. 20. What his perfect
Description is, I do not know; but I think I have described a Witch or
Witchcraft in my Considerations, sufficiently to be understood, and the
Conception which I, and, I think, most Men have is, That a Witch is one, who
can do or seems to do strange things, beyond the known Power of Art and
ordinary Nature, by virtue of a Confederacy with Evil Spirits.] Strange Things,
not Miracles; these are the extraordinary Effects of Divine Power, known and
distinguished by their circumstances, as I shall show in due place. The strange
things are really performed, and are not all Impostures and Delusions. The
Witch occasions, but is not the Principal Efficient, she seems to do it, but
the Spirit performs the wonder, sometimes immediately, as in Transportations
and Possessions, sometimes by applying other Natural Causes, as in raising
Storms, and inflicting Diseases, sometimes using the Witch as an Instrument,
and either by the Eyes or Touch, conveying Malign Influences: And these things
are done by virtue of a Covenant, or Compact betwixt the Witch and an Evil
Spirit. A Spirit, viz. an Intelligent Creature of the Invisible World, whether
one of the Evil Angels called Devils, or an Inferior Demon or Spirit, or a
wicked Soul departed; but one that is able and ready for mischief, and whether
altogether Incorporeal or not, appertains not to this Question.

SECT. III.
That neither the Notation of the Name that signifies indifferently, nor the
false Additions of others to the Notion of a Witch can any way dissettle the
Authors definition.

THis I take to be a plain Description of what we mean by a Witch and
Witchcraft: What Mr. Webster and other Advocates for Witches, talk concerning
the words whereby these are expressed, that they are improper and Metaphorical,
signifying this, and signifying that, is altogether idle and impertinent. The
word Witch signifies originally a Wise Man, or rather a Wise Woman. The same
does Saga in the Latin, and plainly so does Wizzard in English signify a Wise
Man, and they are vulgarly called cunning Men or Women. An Art, Knowledge,
Cunning they have that is extraordinary; but it is far from true Wisdom, and
the word is degenerated into an ill sense, as Magia is.

So then they are called, and we need look no further, it is enough, that by
the Word, we mean the Thing and Person I have described, which is the common
meaning; and Mr. Webster and the rest prevaricate when they make it signify an
ordinary Cheat, a Couzener, a Poysoner, Seducer, and I know not what. Words
signify as they are used, and in common use, Witch and Witchcraft, do indeed
imply these, but they emply more, viz. Deluding, Cheating and Hurting by the
Power of an Evil Spirit in Covenant with a wicked Man or Woman: This is our
Notion of a Witch.

Mr. Webster I know will not have it to be a perfect Description. He adds to
the Notion of the Witch he opposes, carnal Copulation with the Devil, and real
Transformation into an Hare, Cat, Dog, Wolf; the same does Mr. Wagstaffe. Which
is, as if a Man should define an Angel to be a Creature in the shape of a Boy
with Wings, and then prove there is no such Being. Of all Men I would not have
Mr. Webster to make my Definitions for me; we our selves are to have the leave
to tell what it is that we affirm and defend. And I have described the Witch
and Witchcraft, that sober Men believe and assert. Thus briefly for Defining.

SECT. IV.
What things the Author concedes in this controversy about Witches and
Witchcraft.

I Shall let the Patrons of Witches know what I allow and grant to them;

First, I grant, That there are some Witty and Ingenious Men of the opposite
Belief to me in the Question. Yea, it is accounted a piece of Wit to laugh at
the Belief of Witches as silly Credulity. And some Men value themselves upon
it, and pride them in their supposed Sagacity of seeing the Cheat that imposes
on so great a part of Believing Mankind. And the Stories of Witches and
Apparitions afford a great deal of Subject for Wit, which it is pity that a
witty Man should lose.

Secondly, I own that some of those who deny Witches have no design against,
nor a disinclination to Religion, but believe Spirits, and a Life to come, as
other sober Christians do, and so are neither Atheists, Sadducees, nor Hobbists.

Thirdly, I allow that the great Body of Mankind is very credulous, and in this
matter so, that they do believe vain impossible things in relation to it. That
carnal Copulation with the Devil, and real Transmutation of Men and Women into
other Creatures are such. That people are apt to impute the extraordinaries of
Art, or Nature to Witchcraft, and that their Credulity is often abused by
subtle and designing Knaves through these. That there are Ten thousand silly
lying Stories of Witchcraft and Apparitions among the vulgar. That infinite
such have been occasioned by Cheats and Popish Superstitions, and many invented
and contrived by the Knavery of Popish Priests.

Fourthly, I grant that Melancholy and Imagination have very great force, and
can beget strange persuasions. And that many Stories of Witchcraft and
Apparitions have been but Melancholy fancies.

Fifthly, I know and yield, that there are many strange natural Diseases that
have odd Symptoms, and produce wonderful and astonishing effects beyond the
usual course of Nature, and that such are sometimes falsely ascribed to
Witchcraft.

Sixthly, I own, the Popish Inquisitours, and other Witch-finders have done
much wrong, that they have destroyed innocent persons for Witches, and that
Watching and Torture have extorted extraordinary Confessions from some that
were not guilty.

Seventhly and Lastly, I grant that the Transactions of Spirits with Witches,
which we affirm to be true and certain, are many of them very strange and
uncouth, and that we can scarce give any account of the reasons of them, or
well reconcile many of those passages to the commonly received Notion of
Spirits, and the State of the next World.

If these Concessions will do mine Adversaries in this Question any good, they
have them freely. And by them I have already almost spoiled all Mr. Webster's
and Mr. Wagstaffe's, and the other Witch-Advocates Books, which prove little
else, than what I have here granted. And having been so free in Concessions, I
may expect that something should be granted me from the other party.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Those that are mentioned in the second Concession, though they are not
Atheists, Sadducees nor Hobbists; yet if they deny Witches, it is plain they
are Antiscripturists, the Scripture so plainly attesting the contrary.

SECT. V.
The Postulata which the Author demands of his Adversaries as his just right.

THe demands that I make are; First, That whether Witches are or are not, is a
question of Fact: For it is in effect, whether any Men or Women have been, or
are in Convenant with Evil Spirits, and whether they by the Spirits help, or he
on their account performs such or such things.

Secondly, That matter of Fact can only be proved by immediate Sense, or the
Testimony of others, Divine or Humane. To endeavor to demonstrate Fact by
abstract reasoning and speculation, is, as if a Man should prove that Julius
Caesar founded the Empire of Rome, by Algebra or Metaphysics. So that what Mr.
Webster says, p. 43. That the true and proper mediums to prove the actions of
Witches by, are Scripture and sound Reason, and not the improper way of
Testimony (which we use in the opposition that Testimony stands to Scripture
and sound Reason) is very Nonsense.

Thirdly, That the History of the Scripture is not all Allegory, but generally
has a plain literal and obvious meaning.

Fourthly, That some Humane Testimonies are credible and certain, viz. They may
be so circumstantiated as to leave no reason of doubt. For our Senses sometimes
report truth, and all Mankind are not Liars, Cheats and Knaves, at least they
are not all Liars, when they have no Interest to be so.

Fifthly, That which is sufficiently and undeniably proved, ought not to be
denied, because we know not how it can be, that is, because there are
difficulties in the conceiving of it. Otherwise Sense and Knowledge is gone as
well as Faith. For the Modus of most things is unknown, and the most obvious in
Nature have inextricable difficulties in the Speculation of them, as I have
shown in my Scepsis Scientifica.

Sixthly and lastly, we are much in the dark, as to the Nature and Kinds of
Spirits, and the particular condition of the other World. The Angels, Devils
and Souls happiness and misery we know, but what kinds are under these
generals, and what actions, circumstances and ways of Life under those States
we little understand. These are my Postulata or demands, which I suppose will
be thought reasonable, and such as need no more proof.

Proof of Apparitions, Spirits, and Witches from Holy-Scripture.
SECT. I.
The Authors purpose of proving Apparitions and Witchcraft, to such as believe
Scripture, as first from the Apparition of Angels.

ANd having thus prepared my way, I come to prove that there are Witches
against both the sorts that deny their Existence, viz. Those that believe the
Scriptures, and the Wits or Witlings that will not admit their Testimony. To
the first I shall prove the being of Witches by plain Evidence taken from the
Divine Oracles, and to the other, and indeed to both, I shall evince the same
by as full and clear Testimonies, as matter of fact is capable of, and then
answer the opposite Objections, and those particularly of the three late
confident Exploders of Witchcraft; * Mr. Webster, Mr. Wagstaffe, and the
Author of the Doctrine of Devils.

The Proof I intend shall be of these two things, viz. That Spirits have
sensibly transacted with Men, and that some have been in such Leagues with
them, as to be enabled thereby to do wonders.

These sensible Transactions of Spirits with Men, are evident from Apparitions
and Possessions. The Apparition of Angels, their discourses and predictions,
sensible converses with Men and Women are frequently recorded in the Scripture.
An Angel appeared to Hagar, Genesis 16. Three Angels in the shape of Men appeared
to Abraham, Genesis 18. Two to Lot in the same likeness, Genesis 19. An Angel called
to Hagar, Genesis 21. 17. and so did one to Abraham, Genesis 22. An Angel spoke to
and conversed with Jacob in a Dream, Genesis 31. One of the same appeared to Moses
in the Bush, Exodus 3. An Angel went before the Camp of Israel, Exodus 14. An
Angel met Balaam in the way, Numb. 22. An Angel spoke to all the People of
Israel, Judges 2. An Angel appeared to Gideon, Judges 6. and to the Wife of
Manoah, Judges 13. An Angel destroyed the People, 2 Samuel 24. An Angel appeared
to Eliab, 1 Kings 19. An Angel smote in the Camp of the Assyrians 184000. 2
Kings 35. An Angel stood by the Threshing-floor of Ornan, 1 Chronicles. 21. 15. An
Angel talked with Zachariah the Prophet, Zach. 1.

An Angel appeared to the two Mary's at our Lords Sepulcher, Matthew. 28. An
Angel foretold the Birth of John Baptist to Zachariah the Priest, Luke 1.
Gabriel was sent to the Holy Virgin, Luke 1. 26. An Angel appeared to the
Shepherds, Luke 2. An Angel opened the Prison Door to Peter and the rest, Acts
5. I might accumulate many more instances, but these are enough. And many
circumstances of sensible Converse belong to most of them, which may be read at
large in the respective Chapters. And since the Intercourses of Angels were so
frequent in former days, why should we be averse to the belief that Spirits
sometimes transact with Men now?

ADVERTISEMENT.
* I find amongst Mr. Glanvil 's Papers, the first Lineaments or Strokes of an
Answer to Mr. Wagstaffe, and to the Author of the Doctrine of Devils, but more
fully to Mr. Webster, at least Seventeen Sheets where he answers solidly and
substantially where I can read his Hand, but it reaches but to the Sixth
Chapter. And in truth he has laid about him so well in these Sheets that are
published, that those may well seem the less necessary.

SECT. II.
The Evasions his Adversaries use to escape the force of these Proofs of
Scripture from the Apparition of Angels, with the Authors Answer.

THere are several Evasions, by which some endeavor to escape these Texts; as,
First the Sadducees of old, and Familists of later days, who hold, to wit,
these, that the Angels we read of, were but Divine Graces, the other that they
were Divine Phantasmes created to serve a present occasion, which ceased to be
as soon as they disappeared. One would think that none that ever had read the
Scriptures, should entertain such a conceit as this, that is so contrary to the
account they every where give of those celestial Creatures. But there is
nothing so absurd, but some Men will embrace to support their Opinions.

Let us consider a little how differently from this vain Fancy the Scripture
describes them. They are called Spirits, an Attribute given to God himself the
prime Subsistence, who is by way of eminence called the Father of Spirits, not
of Phantasmes. And Spirit imports as much Substance as Body, though without
gross bulk. We read of Elect Angels, and the Angels that stand before the
Throne of God continually, and that always behold the Face of God. Of the Fallen
Angels that kept not their first Station, that are held in the Chains of
Darkness; and of everlasting Fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels against
the Judgment of the great Day. Both had their Order of Superiority and
Inseriority, Michael and his Angels, the Dragon and his Angels. We are made
little lower than the Angels. In Heaven we shall be as the Angels of God. Of
the Day of Judgment knows no Man, no not the Angels. Let all the Angels of
God Worship him.

Which Descriptions of the Nature, Order, Condition, Attributes of Angels, and
infinite more such up and down the Scriptures, are not applicable to Phantasms,
but demonstratively prove that the Angels of whose Apparitions we hear so
frequently there, were real permanent subsistences, and not mere Phantasms and
Shadows.

SECT. III.
That the Angels that are said to have appeared in Scripture were not
Men-Messengers, but Inhabitants of the Invisible World; And whether they ate
and drank or no.

BUt were not those Angels that so appeared, special Prophets, Divine
Messengers, sometimes in Scripture confessedly called Angels? They did eat and
drink with Abraham, and with Lot, by which it should seem that they were real
Men. But whoever shall look over the Instances alleged of the Apparition of
Angels, and read them in all the Circumstances of the Text, will plainly see
that they could not be Men.

Such could not be the Angel that spoke to Abraham and Hagar out of Heaven,
that conversed with Jacob in a Dream, that appeared to Moses in the Burning
Bush, that appeared to Manoah, and ascended, in his and his Wife's presence, in
the slame of the Sacrifice, that went before the Camp of Israel, that stood
before Balaam in the way unseen by him, that smote the Army of the Assyrians,
that appeared to Zacharias in the Temple, and to the Mary's at the Sepulcher.
These must be a sort of Beings superior to Mankind, Angels in the proper
sense, who are sometimes in Scripture called Men, because they appear in our
likeness.

But whether these do receive refection or sustinence in their own World and
State or not, I will not dispute. It is most probable, and it has been the
Doctrine both of Fathers and Philosophers, that they are vitally united to
AEtherial and Heavenly Bodies, which possibly may need recruits some such way,
and so Angels Food may be more than a Metaphor. But certainly they cannot eat
after our manner, nor feed on our gross Diet, except in appearance only. They
may make show of doing it (as the Angel Raphael told Tobit that he did, Tob.
12. 19. All these days I did appear unto you, but I did neither eat nor drink,
but you did see a Vision) but really they do it not. So that when Abraham's and
Lot's Angels are said to eat and drink with them, the Scripture speaks as to
them it seemed. And so the Jerusalem Targum reads, and they seemed as if they
did eat and drink. And we may suppose that Men's Conceptions of Angels were not
very refined in those days, nor could they have borne their sensible and free
Converses, if they had looked on them as Creatures of a Nature so distant from
their own.

And therefore afterward, when they were better understood, those to whom they
appeared were struck with great dread and amazement, and thought that they
should presently dye. Nor do we, as I remember, read any more of the Angels
eating or drinking after what seemed to Abraham and Lot. Indeed Manoah invited
the Angel to eat, Judge. 13. 15. but it was before he knew he was an Angel, and
it is set down in excuse of the offer, v. 16. For Manoah knew not that he was
an Angel of the Lord, implying that the invitation had been absurd if he had
known it.

I have said this in answer to the objection, though the main cause is not
concerned. For though I should grant that Abraham's and Lot's Angels were Men,
yet the other instances in which that could not be said or supposed, are more
than enough to carry my point, That real Angels, Inhabitants of the Invisible
World, did sometimes sensibly appear.

SECT. IV.
That Angels are still Ministering Spirits, as well as of old.

BUt it will be said, when they did appear, it was upon Divine Errands, and God
sent them to serve the ends of his Government and Providence; which I grant.
And God Almighty has the same ends to serve still, he governs the World now,
and his Providence is as watchful as ever, and the Angels are the chief
Ministers of that Providence, and Ministering Spirits for our good. The Gospel
was ushered in by the Apparition of Angels, and many things done by them in the
carrying of it on. And why we should think they may not be sent, and should not
appear on occasion now, I do not see. But this is more than I need say yet,
being for the first step only to show, that Spirits have transacted with Men.

SECT. V.
Proofs from the Apparitions of Evil Spirits, recorded in Scripture.

THose I have mentioned hitherto, have been good and benign Spirits, but evil
Spirits have also appeared, and sensibly had to do with Mankind. My first
instance of this is one of the first businesses that was in the World, the
Temptation of Eve by the Devil in the Serpent. An Argument which those that
adhere to the Letter of those three first Chapters cannot avoid. Evil Angels
were sent among the Egyptians, Psalm 78. 49. and those passed through and
smote the Land. But the Destroyers, viz. the Evil Angels were not permitted to
come into the Israelites Houses, Exodus 12. 23. When God asked Satan whence he
came, Job 1. 7. he answered, from going to and fro in the Earth. By Divine
permission he raised the great Wind that blew down the House upon Jobs
Children, v. 19. and smote his Body all over with Boyls, Job 2. 7. He tempted
our Savior in an external sensible way, carrying him from place to place, and
urging the Son of God to worship him, Matthew. 4. But more of this will appear by
considering the second head proposed, viz. Possession of Evil Spirits.

SECT. VI.
Proofs from Possession of Evil Spirits, and that they were not Diseases, as
the Witch-Advocates would have them.

THat such Possessions have been, we find frequently and plainly delivered in
the History of the Gospel, and so often, that I shall not need to recite
particulars. The Evasion that the Witch-Advocates have for this, is, that the
Devils and unclean Spirits spoken of in those places, which our Savior is said
to have cast out, were strange and uncommon Diseases, which the Jews thought to
be Devils, and Christ who came not to teach Men Philosophy, complied with their
deceived apprehension, and the Evangelists speak according to their conceit in
this matter. But if this Answer must pass, then in the first place,

Farewell all Scripture, it may be made to say what we please; and if when the
Scripture speaks in a plain History of un^lean Spirits and Devils, we may
understand Diseases by it, then what we read of good Angels may be Graces and
Virtues, and what we read of Christ himself, may all be interpreted of the
Christ within, and so all the Scripture, and all Religion shall signify what
any Man thinks fit.

Secondly, The cure of Diseases is mentioned in many of the Texts, distinctly
from the casting out of Devils. Thus Matthew. 10. 1. He gave the Disciples Power
against unclean Spirits to cast them out, and to heal all manner of sicknesses,
and all manner of Diseases. This was a different Power from the former, and all
manner of Sicknesses and Diseases implies the uncommon and extraordinary, which
our Sadducees would have the Devils to be, viz. Diseases, as well as the
ordinary and usual ones are. So Luke 6. 18. He healed them of their Diseases,
and those that were vexed with unclean Spirits, were brought to him, and he
healed them likewise. And most plainly, Matthew. 4. 24. And they brought unto him
all sick people, that were taken with diverse Diseases and Torments, and those
that were possessed with Devils, and those that were Lunatic, and those that
had the Palsy, and he healed them. The Madmen, and those that had the
Falling Sickness, the Distempers which the Witch-Advocates make Devils of, are
here mentioned apart, and as distinct from those Devils our Savior cast out.

Thirdly, Many things are attributed to those Devils that were cast out, which
are not applicable to Diseases. The Devils in the Possessed among the
Gergasens, Matthew. 8. 16. besought Christ, saying, If thou cast us out, sufser
us to go away into the Herd of Swine, and he gave them leave. Mark 5. 8. Sure
the Diseases did not beseech him; But perhaps the Men did. Had they a mind to
go into the Swine? and did they enter into them? A sort of Possession this,
that was never heard of, a Beast possessed with a Man. But St. Luke tells us,
they were the Devils that went out of the Men, and entered into the Swine, Luke
8. 33. The Men did not go out of themselves, and therefore, if what went out
was not the Disease, it was really the D^vil or unclean Spirit.

So Luke 4. 33. In the Synagogue there was a Man that had a Spirit of an
unclean Devil, and cried out with a loud Voice, saying, Let us alone, etc.
Well, but might not this be the Man himself that cried out so? Therefore read a
little on, v. 35. And Jesus rebuked him, viz. him that spoke, saying to the
same still, Hold thy peace and come out of him. Which must be another Person
distinct srom the Man himself, and who was that? It follows, And when the Devil
had thrown him in the midst, he came cut of him, the same Devil that spoke;
that our Savior rebuked, and commanded to come out, which could be no other
than a real Evil Spirit.

And that those ejected Devils were not Diseases appears further, Matthew. 12. v.
22. There was brought unto him, one possessed with a Devil, blind and dumb, and
he healed him, insomuch (to wit, the consequence of the ejecting the Devil was)
that the blind and dumb both spoke and saw. The Pharisees, v. 24. impute this
casting out Devils to a confederacy with Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils;
our Savior there argues, that then Satan should be divided against himself:
namely, Beelzebub the chief against the Inferior Devils that he cast out; who
are of his Kingdom, and doing the work of it: For there it follows, that his
Kingdom could not stand, v. 26. These things will be hardly applied to
Diseases. And,

Fourthly and lastly, If the Evangelist should call Diseases Devils, and
unclean Spirits, and speak of casting out Devils in an History, with all the
plainness and expresness of Words, and Phrase, and Circumstance, that such an
action could be described by, and yet mean nothing of it, what would this
suggest, but that they falsely ascribed to Christ wonders that he never did, and
consequently that they were Liars and Deceivers, and vain Impostours? For clear
it is, that whoever shall read those passages in the Gospel without a
prepossest Opinion, will be led into this belief by them, that our Savior did
really cast Devils out of Persons possessed. And if there be really no such thing
as Possession by evil Spirits, but only Diseases by the ignorant and credulous
people taken for such, then the History imposes on us, and leads Men into a
persuasion of things done by the Power of Christ that never were. And what
execution this will do upon the truth, and credit of the whole History, is very
easy to understand.

SECT. VII.
That the Witch-Advocates cannot elude Scripture-Testimony of Possession by
Evil Spirits, by saying it speaks according to the received Opinions of Men.

I But the Scripture does, we know, speak often according to the received
Opinions of Men, though they are errors, which it is not concerned to rectify,
when they concern no Morality or Religion.

But first, The Doctrine of Spirits and Devils was not the received Opinion of
all the Jews: The Sadducees a considerable Sect were of another mind. So that
the Stories of ejecting such, must look to them as Impostures. And the
Scriptures were not written only for the Jews, and for that particular time
alone, but for all Places and all Ages. Most of which have no such use of
calling Diseases Devils, and among them the History must either convey a false
Opinion, or lose the Reputation of its Truth.

Secondly, Though the Scripture does not vary from the common forms of Speech,
where they are grounded upon harmless and lesser mistakes, yet when such are
great and dangerous, prejudicial to the Glory of God, and Interest of Religion,
it is then much concerned to reform and rectify such errors. And according to
the Belief of the Witch-Advocates, the Doctrine of Possessions is highly such.
For it leads to the Opinion of Witchcraft, which they make such a Dismal and
Tragical Error, Blasphemy, an abominably Idolatrous, yea an Atheistical
Doctrine, the grand Apostasy, the greatest that ever was or can be, that which
cuts off Christ's Head, and Un-Gods him, renounceth Christ and God, and owns the
Devil, and makes him equal to them, etc. As the Author of the Grand Apostasy
raves.

And Mr. Webster says little less of this Opinion in his Preface, viz. That it
tends to advance Superstition and Popery, is derogatory to the Wisdom, Justice
and Providence of the Almighty, tending to cry up the Power of the Kingdom of
darkness, to question the verity of the principal Articles of the Christian
Faith, concerning the Resurrection of Christ, and generally tends to the
obstructing of Godliness and Piety.

And Mr. Wagstaffe loads it with as dreadful imputations in his Preface; As
that it does necessarily infer plurality of Gods by attributing Omnipotent
effects to more than one, and that it supposes many Omnipotents, and many
Omniscients. If any thing of this be so, certainly our Saviors inspired
Historians would not have connived at, much less would they have spoken in the
Phrase, that supposes and encourages a common Error, that leads to such an
horrid Opinion.

SECT. VIII.
An Answer to an Objection from Christ's n^ mentioning his casting out Devils to
John's Disciples, amongst other Miracles.

BUt says the Author of the Grand Apestasie, p. 34. our Savior himself in
his Answer to the Disciples of John the Baptist, Luke 7. does not pretend to
the casting out Devils, but only the cure of Diseases, and raising the Dead. To
which I say, First, we may not argue negatively from Scripture in such matters,
and certainly we ought not to argue from silence in one place, against plain
assirmations in many.

Secondly, Our Savior answers in reference to the things he was then doing,
when the Disciples of John came to him, v. 21. And in that same hour he cured
many of their Infirmities and Plagues. Evil Spirits, it must be confessed, are
also mentioned. Some of those Diseases it is like were occasioned by Evil
Spirits, as (Ma^th. 12. 22.) the blindness and dumbness of the possessed person
there was. And then the ^jection of the Evil Spirit is employed, when the
Disease is said to be Cured.

Thirdly, The business of John's Disciples was to enquire whether he was the
Messiah, and it was fit our Savior in his Answer should give such proofs of
his being so, as were plain and palpable. Go your way, says he, and tell John
what things ye have seen and heard, Luke 7. 22. They had heard him Preach the
Gospel it is like, and had seen him Cure Diseases. These things were plain and
sensible, and could admit of no dispute or doubt. But whether the Distempers
Christ then healed, were inflicted by Evil Spirits, and whether those were cast
out in the Cure, did not plainly appear at that time. Our Savior therefore did
not bid them mention that Instance to their Master John, because they could not
testify it on their own knowledge, as they could the things themselves saw and
heard.

SECT. IX.
An Answer to two more Objections; the one, that St. John mentions no casting
out Devils in his Gospel; the other, that to have a Devil, and to be mad are
Synonyma's.

BUt the passionate Witch-Advocate goes on. St. John the Evangelist, who
especially sets himself upon the proof of the Godhead of Christ, hints nothing
of his ejecting Devils. Which one would think should be no proof, since the
other three do; and St. John chiesly supplied what they omitted. And since this
Evangelist so particularly sets himself upon the proof of Christ's Divinity, he
mentions no Miracles, which were the proof, but such as were sensible and
indisputable. And our Author himself after p. 41. says, That the cure of
Diseases was more for Christ's Honor, and the proof of his Godhead, than the
casting out Devils could have been. For possibly, says he, in that, there
might have been some probable grounds of the Pharisees Blasphemy, that he cast
out Devils by Beclzebub.

So that he answers and contradicts himself at once: For p. 34. he says, It
had been a great oversight in St. John to neglect such an Argument. If such a
thing had ever been, this would have proved him to have been God indeed, and
his Power paramount above all Principalities and Powers, etc. p. 35. And yet
now curing Diseases proves it better, and the casting out Devils will scarce do
it at all, since it might, adds he, be in some sort credible, that he did it by
favor, connivance, compliance, complotment, which is upon the Borders of the
highest Blasphemy.

Again it is alleged by this Writer, that to have a Devil, and to be mad, seem
to be Synonyma's in Scripture, p. 35. I answer, Possession begot a certain
(...) furor, and madness; and therefore when any were extravagant, the Jews
said in common Speech, that they had a Devil, as we do, The Devil is in you,
that is, you act unreasonably and madly. But as we do not mean by this
Metaphorical Possession to exclude the belief of a real, so neither did they.
Yea, the very Phrase, he has a Devil, or the Devil is in him, applied to those
that act furiously and unadvisedly, does imply that there is such a real thing
as Diabolical Possession, to which madness and extreme folly are resembled.

See then how the Patrons of Witches argue, The Jews sometimes used the having
a Devil Metaphorically; therefore there are no other Possessions, or therefore
all those passages of Scripture, in which they are literally and plainly
related, intend no other. Indeed, if we argued from mere words and expressions
of having Devils, and casting out Devils, there would be somewhat of more
color in our Adversaries reasoning. But since we infer chiefly from plain
circumstances of History and Fact, there is no force at all in it.

SECT. X.
The Ignorance of the Author of The Grand Apostasy, in his interpreting the
Word (...).

BUt what does this Writer mean, when he tells us (...) can scarce signify any
thing else properly, but an unusual affliction from God, such as madness; when
all Men and Boys know that Substantively it is the same with (...) Demon,
taken already in Scripture in an ill sense for an impure Spirit. Adjectively it
signifies sometimes Divinum quid, but so it is not understood in the places we
dispute about, Luke 4. 35. When the Devil had thrown him, the possessed Man, in
the midst, he came out of him, the word is, (...). The same v. 33. is called
(...). By which and the latter circumstances of the History, it plainly appears
that (...), is to be understood Substantively for a Person, viz. an Evil
Spirit. So in the Story of the Devils entering into the Herd of Swine, Luke 8.
33. the word we Translate Devils is (...), called v. 29. (...), and the same
Matthew. 8. 29. (...). Besides the force of which words, I have shown that the
Story also determines them to a Substantive and Personal meaning.

But the Author says, That (...) can hardly with propriety signify any thing
else but an extraordinary affliction from God, because of its derivation from
(...), p. 37. One would wonder at the confidence of these Men, especially in
their pretended Criticisms, by which they would impose what sense upon words
they please. (...) it is notoriously known signifies Demon, taken often in the
ill sense, and so particularly in the place newly mentioned, deriving from
(...) scio, which degenerates here, as in Saga, Witch, Wizzard and the like,
and what then should this Author by this mean?

SECT. XI.
Whether there were no feats performed by the Demoniacks in the Gospels, but
what Madmen might perform.

IT is further Objected by this W^iter, that there are no Feats Recorded of
those supposed Demoniacks, but what Madmen could perform and often do. In
which, he considered not the Spirits in the Possessed, in the Country of the
Gergasens, Matthew. 8. 29. St. Mark and St. Luke write Ga^arens, the Countries
lie near together. Jos^phus reckons Gadara among the Gre^ian Cities which
Pompey took from the Jews, and according to him the people were mostly Syrians.

In this Country where our Savior had not been before, nor after, that we
read, two possessed with Devils, who had lived among the Tombs, out of the
Conversation of Mankind met him, and presently cried out; What have we to do
with thee, Jesus, thou Son of God, art thou come to torment us before the time?
Was there nothing now beyond the rate of ordinary Madmen in this? How did
they, who lived in such a dismal solitude among the Tombs, in a place where no
Man passed, come to know this was Jesus, who never had been thereabout before,
as far as we can hear? Or how came those Madmen to know, and utter such a
great truth, which our Savior did not presently publish, That he was the Son
of God? Did any come near to whisper this in their Ear? or was this a raving
fancy only? St. Mark writes (who speaks but of a single Demoniack) that when he
saw Jesus afar off, he came and worshipped him. He knew him presently, and
understood his true condition before most of the Jews about him; and even some
of his own Disciples did. Could a mere Madman have done so? But further they
expected torment and from him, in the time to come, though they looked not for
it so soon. Art thou come to torment us before the time? How applicable is this
to the condition of Evil Spirits and their expectations?

We have a like acknowledgement of our Savior from another unclean Spirit,
Mark 1. 24. I know thee who thou art, the Holy One of God. And our Savior in
what he says, in answer plainly, implies it wa^ the Evil Spirit, not the
Madman that spoke, or at least caused the confession. Hold thy peace, and come
out of him, v. 25. And that the Demoniacks did things beyond the force of mere
Madmen is further sufficiently declared in the History, Mark 5. No Man could
bind him, no not with Chains; because he had been often bound with Fetters and
Chains, and the Chains had been plucked in sunder by him. I would fain know,
whether this be not beyond the force of mere natural madness?

ADVERTISEMENT.
Hitherto the Paper was the same, and the Hand the same, and so far of the Copy
transcribed. Afterward the Hand alters, and is Mr. Glanvil' s own Hand, but
with an Hiatus of above half a Sheet of unwrit Paper between, but the Number of
the Pages is continued. Something there was to intervene, to make a more full
Connection; but yet what follows, is of the same suit, and produced to prove out
of Scripture the Negotiation of Evil Spirits with their Clients.

SECT. XII.
Further proof of the Negotiation of Evil Spirits with their Clients from the
History of the Magicians of Egypt; Mr. Wagstaffe, Mr. Webster, and the Author
of The Doctrine of Devils, their Evasions proposed and answered.

IN the General, they all say the same thing; viz. That the Magicians were
Jugglers, who by their Tricks and Legerdemain, imposed upon Pharaoh and the
Egyptians. Mr. Wagstaffe is so modest, as not to describe the manner of the
performance. But Mr. Webster thus; The Magicians holding a Rod in their hands,
and seeming to throw it down upon the ground, how soon might they throw down an
Artificial Serpent in its stead, and immediately and unperceivably make
conveighance of the Rod, p. 154. This is his feat: and for the changing Water
into Blood, and the producing of Frogs, he says, they were so easy to be done
after the same manner, that they need not any particular explication, p. 155.
This is the main answer, after a great deal of Impertinence, and Mr. Webster
has done his business.

But the Author of The Doctrine of Devils, has devised a more particular way
for this Juggle. It Is probable, he says, that these Men having the Art or
Knack of Making, Graving, or Carving the Pictures of Men, Beasts, Serpents,
Reptiles, etc. had the Feat also of Coloring, Painting and Fucussing of them
also, and so might easily, especially in the dark, or by their Juggling-Feats,
as the Text intimates, make a Rod look like a Serpent, etc. p. 114. But besides
these Knavish Painters, the Man has found other Jugglers to help on the
Deceit; Subtle and politic Orators, who with fallacious Arguments, cunning
pretenses, and plausible Rhetoric could so disguise Truth, and flourish upon
Knavery and falsehood, that falsehood should seem Truth, and Truth falsehood, p.
115.

Whatever the Magicians of Pharaoh were, any one that considers these Answers,
would take the Framers of them for Colourers, Changers, Perverters of the Face
of things, as this Author speaks, cunning Orators, Jugglers, Hocus-Pocus,
Hiccius-Doccius, whip the Serpents, Blood and Frogs are gone. But let us look a
little nearer to the business, and to these subtle men, Witches of Orators,
and examine what they tell us in the light of the Text and impartial Reason.

The Text says, Aaron cast down his Rod before Pharaoh, and before his
Servants, and it became a Serpent, V. 10. And V. 11, 12. The Magicians of
Egypt, they also did in like manner with their enchantments. For they cast
down every Man his Rod, and they became Serpents, but Aaron' s Rod swallowed up
their Rods. Now, say the Witch-Advocates, the Magicians were Jugglers; they did
not in like manner, they did not cast down their Rods, but made conveighance of
them, they were not Serpents but Pictures. Which are plain contradictions to
the Text, arbitrary Figments, that have no ground. And if Men may seign what
they will, and put what borrowed sense they please upon plain Relations of
Fact, all History will be a Nose of Wax, and be eafily shaped as the
Interpreter has a mind to have it.

Secondly, If this were so, and the Serpents were but Artificial Pictures; it is
strange, that neither Pharaoh, nor his Servants should perceive the difference
between the Carved or Painted Serpents and the real ones; except they suppose
also that Pharaoh contrived the business in a dark Room on purpose, as the
Author of The Doctrine of Devils seems to intimate. And it is stranger yet,
that neither Moses nor Aaron that were concerned to detect the Imposture that
was so gross and thick, should not discern it, or if they did, it is as strange,
that they should keep the Jugglers counsel, and say nothing of it.

Thirdly, Aarons Serpents are said to have swallowed up those of the Magicians.
What, did they swallow the Wiars and Pictures? It seems they were very
artificially done indeed, that the true Serpents mistook them for real ones, as
the Birds once did the Painted Grapes. But it would be more wonderful yet, if
all were but the Oratory of the Magicians, for then the Serpents ate their
Words and Rhetoric.

Fourthly, Moses and Aaron turned the Rivers into Blood, V. 20. and the
Magicians of Egypt did so with their enchantments, V. 22. They caused Frogs to
come up, and to cover the land, Chapter 8. V. 6. and the Magicians did so, and
brought up Frogs on the Land of Egypt, V. 7. Now, how did the Jugglers do
this, with Painting and Fucussing; or how, by Legerdemain and Slight of Hand
were the Waters made Blood, and the Frogs brought up out of the Rivers on the
Land? To turn a little Water into the appearance of Blood, was not the thing
that was like to what Moses and Aaron did, and to show an Artificial Frog, Two
or Three was not bringing up of Frogs on the Land of Egypt, which implies,
multitudes that covered the ground. So that the Hocus-Pocus Tricks, and
Juggling and Painting will not color this part of the Story. And I should
wonder at Mr. Webster, if he did not afford so many occasions of wondering at
him, when he passed this so slightly over, saying, p. 155. As to the changing
Water into Blood, and the producing of Frogs, they were so easy to be done
after the same manner, viz. by Wiers and Juggling, that they need not any
particular explication, for by this the manner of their performance may most
easily be understood. How shall one deal with these Men, and what will not
their confidence affirm?

Fifthly, It Is very strange also how those Jugglers should know what signs
Moses and Aaron would show, and accordingly furnish themselves with counterfeit
Serpents, Blood and Frogs against the time; or had they those always in their
Pockets? If not, it was great luck for them that Moses and Aaron should show
those very Miracles first, that they were provided to imitate.

Sixthly and Lastly, If the Magicians did all this by Tricks and Juggling, may
not one fear what Opinion these Men have of the same things done by Moses and
Aaron? These indeed out-did the others in diverse following Instances, but may
not they say, that that was by their having more Cunning and Dexterity in the
Art of Juggling? If they or their Proselytes have a mind to say thus, they may
by their Principles, which will serve them to elude the History, in reference
to Moses and Aaron, as well as it does in relation to the Magicians. They may
with as much modesty turn all into Allegory and Metaphor.

I think by all this it appears, that this shift of the Witch-Advocates is very
vain, and that what the Magicians did, was not mere Juggling, much less only
Politic Oratory and Rhetoric. As if those Magicians by their Eloquence could
persuade Pharaoh and his Servants against their Senses, as these Patrons of
Witches endeavor to do by us, they being the greatest Witches in their own
sense that are extant, and some of them are belyed, if they are not so in other
senses.

SECT. XIII.
That what the Magicians of Egypt did perform, was at least by an Implicit
Confederacy with Evil Spirits.

Well! If there be any truth in the History, the Magicians were not only
Couzeners and Hocus-Pocus Men; there was something done that was extraordinary
beyond Man's Art and Contrivance, or the effects of ordinary Nature. And
therefore must have either God, or some Spirit or Demon, one or more for the
Author. The former no one says, the Hand of God in this was only permissive.
Therefore it is plain the Magicians did this by Spirits, Creatures of the
Invisible World. The Text says, by their enchantments, per arcana, the vulgar
Latin reads. Which because it is a general word, Mr. Wagstaffe takes hold of
it, and determines it to secret and sly Tricks, those of Legerdemain and
Couzenage, when as it is as applicable to any kind of secret (and so to the
Diabolical Art and Confederacy) as to his sense. And that it is so to be
understood here, is plain from the matter of the History. By those arcana
(others read, incantationes, veneficia) they did those strange things, viz. by
secret Confederacy with Spirits, they obliged them to perform the wonders.

But what did the Spirits do, were the Serpents, Blood and Frogs real or
apparent only? I am not obliged to say, who is of one Opinion, and who of
another in this, it matters not. The reality of the performance is most easy,
and most suitable to the Sacred Story, and there is no difficulty in conceiving
that Spirits might suddenly conveigh Serpents, with which Egypt abounded into
the place of the Rods, which they might unperceivably snatch away after they
were thrown down; This they could do, though the Magicians of themselves could
not. And they might be provided for the performances by knowing the Command God
had given Moses and Aaron, concerning the things he would have them do; which
the Magicians could not know, at least not but by them.

And for the Blood and the Frogs, they might by Infusion, or a Thousand ways
that we cannot tell, make the Water to all appearance Bloody, or perhaps really
transmute some (we know not the extent of their powers.) And to bring up the
Frogs from the Lakes and Rivers, was no hard thing for them to effect, though
impossible for the Magicians to do by Tricks of Juggling. We see the sense of
the History is plain, and easy in our way, but forced, harsh, contradictious,
and most absurd in the Interpretation of the Hag-Advocates.

To make the Inference from these Magicians to my point, yet more plain and
demonstrative, I shall surther take notice, that if we do not suppose a
confederacy, and formal compact between them and the Spirits they act by, it
must at least be granted that those Magicians had a way to oblige them to act,
either by Words or Ceremonies, which they have bound themselves to attend in
order to further familiarity with the persons that so employ them, and at last
to explicit Compacts: And even this is sufficient for what I would infer.

I have thus dispatched a great Argument briefly, and yet I hope fully; Mr.
Webster is after his manner very voluminous about it. But all he has said* in
Five or Six Leaves in Folio to the purpose, is in those few Lines I have
recited. All the rest is senseless, rambling Impertinence, amusing his Readers
with Actives and Passives, Mecassaphims, Hartummims, Talesmans, wonderful
Cures, and the virtues of Plants, telling Stories, and citing scraps from this
Man, and from that, all which serve only for Ostentation, and the Deception of
the injudicious, but signify nothing to any purpose of Reasoning.

SECT. XIV.
The other grand Instance of Confederacy with Evil Spirits, in the Witch of
Endor, whom Saul consulted. A brief and plain Narration of the Story.

I Come to another grand Instance, viz. that of the Witch of Endor. The Story
of her is related, 1 Samuel 28. and is briefly thus. Samuel was dead, v. 3. and
the Philistines gathered themselves against Saul, and pitched in Gilboa, v. 4.
Saul on this was much afraid, v. 5. and enquired of the Lord, but had no answer
from him, v. 6. Upon this he bid his Servants find him out a Woman that had a
Familiar Spirit, that he might enquire of her. They told him of one at Endor,
v. 7. He disguised himself, and with two Men by night went to her, desired her
to divine unto him by her Familiar Spirit, and to bring up him whom he should
name, v. 8. The Woman first excused her self, minding him how dangerous such a
business might be to her, since Saul had cut off those that had Familiar
Spirits, and the Wizzards out of the Land. So that she was afraid that this
Proposition of his was a snare for her Life, v. 9. But Saul assured her by
swearing, that no harm should come to her for this thing, v. 10.

She then asked him whom she should bring up, and he said Bring me up Samuel, v.
11. Samuel accordingly begins to appear, and when the Woman saw him, she cried
with a loud voice, being much surprised, it seems, to see Samuel in good
earnest, whom she probably expected not, but some Familiar in his likeness. By
this she knew Saul, v. 12. He heartens her again, and asks whom she saw. She
answers, she saw Gods Ascending out of the Earth, an usual Hebraism, the Plural
for the Singular Number, Gods, to wit, a Spirit, v. 13. Saul asks what Form he
was of, she answered, an Old Man comes up, and he is covered with a Mantle.
Then Saul perceived it was Samuel, and he bowed himself to him to the ground,
v. 14.

Samuel ask't why he had disquieted him to bring him up? He declares the
distress he was in, and his desire to know what he was to do, v. 15. Samuel
reproves him, and declares his Fate, viz. That the Lord had rent the Kingdom
from him, and given it to David, v. 17. That the Israelites should be delivered
into the hands of the Philistines, and that Saul and his Sons should to morrow
be with him, viz. in the state of the Dead, as eventually it was, v. 19. This
is the History, and one would think it speaks very plainly, but nothing is
plain to prejudice. The Patrons of Witches labor hard to avoid this evidence,
and I shall propose and consider their shifts and slights of answering.

SECT. XV.
The Evasion of Mr. Reginald Scot, concerning the Witches Closet, proposed and
confuted.

MR. Reginald Scot, the father of the modern Witch-Advocates, orders the matter
thus. When Saul, says he, had told her that he would have Samuel brought up to
him, she departed from his presence into her Closet, where doubtless she had
her Familiar, to wit, some lewd crafty Priest, and made Saul stand at the door
like a Fool (as it were with his Finger in a hole) to hear the Couzening
Answers, but not to see the Couzening handling thereof, and the conterseiting
of the matter. And so goes she to work, using ordinary words of Conjuration,
etc. So belike after many such words spoken, she says to her self; Lo! now the
matter is brought to pass. I see wonderful things. So as Saul hearing these
words longed to know all, and asked her what she saw. Whereby you know that
Saul saw nothing, but stood without like a Mome, whilst she played her part in
her Closet, as may most evidently appear by the Twenty first Verse of this
Chapter, where it is said, Then the Woman came out to Saul, etc. Scot, p. 108.

Now this is not interpreting a Story, but making one. For we read nothing of
her Closet, or her going from Saul into it, nothing of the crafty Priest she
had there, or of Saul's standing at the door like a Fool, like a drowned Puppy
Mr. Webster has it (very respectful Language for a Prince in distress!) nothing
of the words of Conjuration, or of the Woman's talk to her self, but all this is
Whimsey and Fiction.

And according to this way of interpreting, a Man may make what he will of all
the Histories in the Bible, yea in the World. If one may supply, and put in
what he pleases, any thing may be made any thing.

But Mr. Scot says, it evidently appears that Saul saw nothing, but stayed
without like a Mome, whilst she played her part in her Closet. It evidently
appears by the Twenty first Verse of this Chapter, where it is said, Then the
Woman came out unto Saul. Is it not evident from hence, that she had a Closet,
how else should she come out? But the mischief of it is, there is nothing of
coming out in the Text, or any Version of it. Our Translation is, And the Woman
came unto Saul. The vulgar Latin, Ingressa est, she came in, which implies
that she went out of doors rather, than into her Closet. The Septuagint read
(...), being the same sense with the vulgar Latin. The Chaldee Paraphrase
simply she came. So the Syriack and the Arabic: But we find nothing of coming
out any where but in the Discoverer. So that here is a Text made too, as well
as many a groundless Comment.

But whether she only came to Saul, or in or out to him, it matters not much,
for it implies only that she withdrew, while Saul Communed with Samuel, out of
respect, and after the Communication, she returned and found the King in great
disorder, and what is this to a Closet?

SECT. XVI.
Two of Mr. Websters Arguments for the Witches Closet proposed and answered.

BUt Mr. Webster pursues the business in the behalf of the Discoverer; First,
If they were in the same Room, and Samuel a visible Object, how comes it to
pass that Saul saw him not? Mr. Glanvil, says he, must pump to find it out, p.
169. But does not Mr. Webster know, that it is usual in Apparitions (and he
owns there are such) for the Spirit to appear to one, when it is not visible to
another, though in the same Room, and every ways capable of seeing? In the
Famous Story of Walker and Sharp, recited by him, p. 299, 300. which he
confesses to be of undoubted verity, he says, it was reported that the
Apparition did appear in Court to the Judge, or Foreman of the Jury (and I
have from other hands very credible attestation that it was so) but the rest
saw nothing. Many other well attested Relations of this kind speak of the like,
and there are Innumerable Stories of people that have their second sight as
they call it, to wit, a faculty of seeing Specter when others cannot discern
them. In which there is nothing, either impossible, or unlikely. And why then
should there be need of so much pumping to answer this Objection?

Samuel it seems appeared to the Woman a little before Saul saw him, showing
himself so, it may be, to prepare Saul for the terrible sight by degrees, lest
the suddenness of it might have affrighted him into an incapacity of hearing
what he had to say to him. Or it may be the Body of the Woman, or some other
thing in the Room might interpose between Saul, and the first appearance of
Samuel, or he might be at an unfit distance, or out of due light to see
presently as she did. So that there is no need of supposing them to be in two
Rooms on this account.

But Secondly, He argues further for the Closet or another Room; The Woman
cried out with a loud Voice when she saw Samuel; What need of that, says he,
if they were in one Room, might not an ordinary tone make him to have heard
her? It Is like it might, but that was not the cause of her crying out, but her
surprise to see Samuel (if it were the real Samuel) when she expected only her
Familiar, appearing in some resemblance of him. And it is like there were
circumstances in this Apparition, which she had never seen before, that might
on the sudden affright and amaze her. And if it were Samuel indeed, which is
very probable, the sight of him assored her that the Inquirer was Saul. For
though she might not conclude it presently from his requiring her to raise
Samuel, yet when he really and unexpectedly appeared, it was plain that he was
come upon some great Errand, and with whom could he probably have such business
as with Saul? So that she seeing him, the importance of his appearance, and the
Relation he had to Saul, brought the King presently to her mind, and with him
her fears, and that this was one cause of her crying out, is plainly intimated
in the next words. And the ^oman spoke to Saul, saying, Why have thou decerved
me, for thou art Saul, v. 12. And that she was affrighted at that knowledge, is
implied in Saul's assuring her again, against her fears in his immediate answer.
And the King said unto her, ^Be not afraid, v. 13.

Besides this, there is another thing that may be collected from the Text,
which might occasion her astonishment and crying out. For as soon as Saul had
said, Bring me up Samuel, v. 11. it immediately follows, v. 12. And when the
Woman saw Samuel, she cried with a loud voice. It seems he appeared before she
had performed her usual Conjurations (so little ground is there for what Mr.
Scot talks of her words of Conjuration, and those she spoke to her self) and
upon that she was surprised and affrighted.

SECT. XVII.
Other Arguments of Mr. Webster for a Room distinct from that Saul was in,
proposed and answered.

MR. Websters third Argument to prove a Closet, is that it had been incongruous
for Saul to have asked what saw thou, if they had been in one Room. But what
is the incongruity, or what the wonder, if one in his condition should speak
incongruously?

His Fourth and Fifth Arguments, are to prove that Saul had yet seen nothing,
when he asked the Woman upon her Outcry, what she had seen. They prove that she
saw the Apparition first, which is granted, but her being in another Room,
cannot thence be inferred, as I have shown, though that be the thing he should
make out, or all is impertinent.

The Sixth Argument is, that after all, Samuel was but coming up. An Old Man
comes up, which proves nothing for Mr. Webster but against him; For now, she
shows him to Saul. She saw the first beginning of his appearing, which Saul did
not. When he was risen higher out of the Earth, she shows him to the King, who,
it is said, perceived then it was Samuel, and bowed himself, v. 14. which is
very easy and congruous, applied to one and the same Room. And what then makes
Mr. Webster insult in the Conclusion of this Argument in these words; Now let
Mr. Glanvil consider, and answer whether it be not only intimated, but clearly
holden forth in the Text, that either they were in two Rooms, or that nothing
visible did appear before Saul, p. 171. His seeing nothing at first I grant,
but the Two Rooms there is no ground for, and he does not prove it. Whether he
did not see Samuel after, I shall now inquire. Hitherto I have nothing to do,
but with the conceit of the Closet, or the other Room, which Mr. Scot made for
the Woman, and Mr. Webster endeavors to uphold, with much good will, but
little success.

SECT. XVIII.
Convincing Argmuments brought to prove that Saul saw Samuel, which frustrates
the Figment of two Rooms.

AFter all, if he really saw the Apparition, the Figment of the two Rooms is
gone, or at least signifies nothing to their purpose. This the Text intimates
plainly. She said, An Old Man comes up, and he is covered with a Mantle, and
it follows, And Saul perceived that it was Samuel, and he stooped with his face
to the ground, and bowed himself, v. 14.

He perceived it was Samuel, he perceived it, says Mr. Webster, by the
Description of the Woman. But she had only said, An Old Man comes up covered
with a Mantle; This is but a very General Description, and why must that needs
notify Samuel? Could the Devil represent no other Old Man in a Mantle, or could
none of the dead appear so but Samuel only? By these words alone Saul could not
certainly perceive that it was he. But he perceived this so, that he could not
but know and acknowledge it as the Hebrew word seems to imply. I say this word
[perceived] implies more than bare seeing. It Is that and somewhat else, viz.
that he saw him so, as to be convinced that it was he indeed, the judgment was
added to the sense. So that Mr. Webster's Objection, that the word was not he
[saw] it was Samuel, is of no weight, he [perceived] implies that he saw it so
as to be assured. If the saying of the Woman had been all, the assurance had
been none at all, and Saul could not have perceived or understood any certainty
of the thing from it.

But secondly, it appears yet further, that his perceiving did imply seeing;
For he stooped with his Face to the ground, and bowed himself. Now, what did
Saul make this respectful reverence to, if he saw nothing? Was it to a Samuel
in his fancy? Mr. Webster says, Surely in rational consequence it could be
nothing else, p. 171. This is something an unusual courtesy to bare Idea's and
Imaginations. But Mr. Webster gives a reason: All that the Woman had done and
said, being undeniably lies and cheats, this also in just and right reason must
be judged to be so also. Which is assuming the thing to be proved.

SECT. XIX.
That it was a real Apparition, not a confederate Knave, as Mr. Webster
fancies, that Saul saw and did obeisance to.

BUt did she not turn out her confederate Knave to act the part of Samuel? and
was not this he to whom Saul bowed? This Mr. Webster offers as part of his
answer. The Woman v. 14. describes Samuel in the form of an Old Man covered
with a Mantle. Such a shape she must have put the confederate Knave into. It
may be it was an Old fellow, or she made him look Old, but let that pass. But
where got she the Mantle? A Sacerdotal Habiliment it was, according to
Josephus. Had the Woman a Wardrobe of all Habits for all purposes? or was it
some short Cloak of her own, that she threw on him? We will suppose either that
will serve Mr. Websters turn best. But how did the fellow himself, or the Old
Queen for him change his Visage into the likeness of Samuel, or how alter his
voice so, as to make Saul, who so well knew Samuel, to believe it was even he?
These are hard Questions.

But if we should so far gratify Mr. Scot, Mr. Webster and the rest, as not to
press with such untoward Queries; yet one cannot choose but ask how the
confederate Knave came to foretell truly such contingent things, as that the
Israelites should be vanquished by the Philistines, and Saul and his Sons slain
on the morrow, as v. 19. How could the Cheat, or the Woman in another Room tell
this? Why! says Mr. Wagstasse, he spoke it at a venture, and He or the Witch
gave a shrewd guess to the sequel, says Mr. Scot. But what ground was there
for conjecture? and since there was none, the Confederate might as well have
chose to have told Saul, that he and his Sons should live and be victorious;
and this, if he were so cunning a fellow, as these cunning Men make him, he
would have done. For the Witches business and his, was to get by their
practice, and the likelier way to a good reward, had been to have Prophesied
grateful and pleasant things to the troubled King; and if the Prophesier knew
nothing of the event, he might as well have chosen the good, as the evil side.
Which as it had been for his Interest, it had been also for the better saving
of the credit of his predictions. For if he had foretold the Kings good success
and victory, the Woman and He, the Confederate, in consequence had been sure of
reputation and favor, and further rewards, if it had happened so; but no evil
could have befaln them from the contrary success. For if Saul were killed, the
falsehood of the prediction would be buried with him (for we read not that the
two Servants were at this Communication, which in all likelihood was private)
and no other evil like to ensue.

So that if it were a Confederate Knave, as the Witch-Advocates have contrived
that made the answers, he was not so cunning as Mr. Scot, Mr. Webster and the
rest pretend, but indeed a very silly Juggler. He speaks very severe and
disobliging things, and such as were not like to redound to his advantage, and
indeed such things they were, as do not at all look as if they proceeded from a
confederate Couzener. They have that Gravity, Majesty, Religion and Virtue in
them that became the true Samuel, and are very unlike the words of a vicious
cheating Knave.

To which may be added, that this Woman, though otherwise an ill one, seems to
have been of a kind and benign nature, by the courteous entertainment she gave
the afflicted Prince, and Josephus extolls her much for her good Nature. So
that it is very improbable, that she would by her self or her Confederate, lay
such an heavy Load of Trouble and Desperation upon the King, that was in such
distress before. I think all these things put together, are abundantly
sufficient to disprove, and shame the ungrounded fancy of the Witch-Advocates,
that all was done by a Confederate. And consequently it was a real Apparition
that Saul saw, and did civil obeisance to.

SECT. XX.
That it was not the Witch her self that acted all (as Scot and Webster for
another shift would suppose) putting her self into a Trance, and delading Saul
by Ventriloquy.

BUt was it not the Witch her self that acted all? Mr. Scot says, that if the
Exposition of the Confederate like us not, he can easily frame himself to the
Opinion, That this Pythoness being a Ventriloque, that is, speaking as it were
from the bottom of her Belly, did cast her self into a Trance, and so abused
Saul, answering to Saul in Samuel's name in her counterfeit hollow Voice, p.
111. To the same purpose Mr. Webster also supposes, That what she did or
pretended to do, was only by Ventriloquy, or casting her self into a feigned
Trance, lay grovelling on the Earth with her face downwards, and so changing her
Voice, did mutter and murmur, and peep, and chirp like a Bird coming forth of
the shell, or that she spoke in some hollow Cave or Vault through some Pipe, or
in a Bottle, and so amused and deceived poor timorous and despairing Saul, p.
165, 166.

What stuff is this? and how shall one deal with such Men, as set their Wits
upon the rack to invent evasions, and are ready to assert any Nonsense or
Absurdity to pervert the sense of a plain and simple History? What I have
already spoke against the Dream of a Confederate, viz. Readiness perceiving it was
Samuel, his bowing himself upon it; his taking the Voice for the Prophet's, the
suitableness and gravity of the words, and the contrivance of the prediction,
and the truth of it, are as strong against this Whim, as against the other idle
fancy, and in some particulars of ^re force, as will appear to any one that
considers the matter duly.

For Ventriloquy, or speaking from the bottom of the Belly, it is a thing I
think as strange and difficult to be conceived as any thing in Witchcraft, nor
can it, I believe, be performed in any distinctness of articulate sounds,
without such assistance of the Spirits, that spoke out of the Daemoniacks. I
would fain have any of the Witch-Advocates show how it is naturally possible.
So that this that they suppose, will infer the thing they would avoid. It
cannot certainly in any reason be thought, that the Woman could by a natural
knack, speak such a Discourse as is related from Samuel, much less that she
could from her Belly imitate his Voice, so as to deceive one that knew him as
Saul did.

As for Mr. Websters peeping, chirping and muttering, they are nothing to the
purpose, and his hollow Cave, Pipe and Vault, are as arbitrary Figments as the
Closet, and fall under the same confutations that disprove the rest of the
Chimaera' s.

SECT. XXI.
That it was Samuel himself that appeared, not the Devil, nor a Confederate
Knave.

BUt the Witch-Advocates have another Argument to prove an Imposture in this
business. For, say they, the person denouncing the fate of Saul could not be
the true Samuel, nor the Devil in his likeness; therefore it must be either the
Woman, or some cheating Confederate. Which conclusion follows not, for it is
possible it might be a good Spirit personating Samuel. These the Scripture
assures us, are often employed in Errands and Ministeries here below, and on
those occasions they cloth themselves in humane shape and appearance. So that
it is not absurd to think it might be thus here; but this I affirm not. Who
actually it was has been great matter of debate among Interpreters, and
considerable Authors have been on either side. My cause does not require that
I should positively determine who the appearing person was, it might be one of
them though I cannot tell which.

I confess it seems to me most probable, that it was the true Samuel, for the
Scripture calls the Apparition so Five times, that is, as often as he is
mentioned. And when the Woman saw Samuel, v. 12. And Saul perceived that it was
Samuel, v. 14. And Samuel said to Saul, v. 15. Then said Samuel, v. 16. Then
Saul was fore afraid because of the words of Samuel, v. 20. Which expressions
are neither from Saul, nor the Woman, but from that Spirit that endited the
Holy Scriptures. And if after all this, Samuel was a K^e, or the Witch, or the
Devil, what assurance can we have in interpreting of Scripture? I know that it
speaks sometimes agreeably to the deceived apprehensions of Men; but when it is
so, there is something in the Context or Nature of the thing that leads us to
make this Judgment. And if we rashly suppose whenever we have a mind to it,
that the Scripture speaks according to deceived Opinion; we may by this Rule
make it say any thing. The plain Letter, and most obvious Sense is always to be
followed, where there is no cogent reason to the contrary, and I shall show by
and by, that there is none to decline it here.

According to the obvious plain sense, the words are interpreted,
Ecclesiastic. 46. 20. And after his death (speaking of Samuel) he Pr^ied and
showed the King his end. And the circumstances of the Story which I have
already considered, seem to me very plainly to determine the sense this way.
Thus does the surprise of the Woman, who cried out with astonishment upon the
sight of the Prophet, whom she was affrighted to see. Her knowing it was Saul
by the Apparition, which she could not have done by the Devil's appearing in
his likeness. The Expression that Saul perceived that it was Samuel, he did not
only fancy or think so. The Divine and Majestic words he spoke, so becoming
the true Samuel, and so unlike the words of an Evil Spirit. And the prediction
of events so coatingent as the loss of the Battle, and the Death of the King
and his Sons*

SECT. XXII.
The needlesness and impertinency of M. Websters Confutation of Samuel's
appearing with his Body out of the Grave.

NOw there are several evasions, whereby some endeavor to shift off this
evidence. But if we will deal plainly and sincerely, we must, I think,
acknowledge the force of the Arguments, which I have briefly and nakedly
proposed.

But all this Mr. Webster pretends to confute thus. It was not Samuel's Body
with his Soul joined, nor his Soul that appeared in his wonted shape and habit,
p. 172, 173.

The first he proves by these reasons. First, His Body had lain too long in the
Grave, so that it must have been disfigured. Secondly, It must have stunk.
Thirdly, There was no Tailor in the Grave to make him a Mantle. Fourthly, It
must have been an Omnipotent Power to have done this. Fifthly, A Syllogism is
brought to prove this contrary to the Scripture, which says, That those that
dye in the Lord rest from their labors.

Now the Four first Arguments he may take again, we have no concern with them.
For it is senseless to think, that the gross Body came out of the Grave; and if
he means the resting of the Terrestrial Body by the Fifth, he may take that
back too. And indeed as applied to the Body without the Soul, the disturbing of
it is Nonsense. Its corruption in the Grave is continual motion, and more
disturbance than the raising it entirely would be, if it were any at all. But
properly it is none, no more than is the taking of a Stone out of a Quarry.
Therefore if there be any Argument in this, it falls under the next Query.

The Sixth Argument is a Question, viz. Who joined the Soul and Body again? Not
the Witch nor the Devil. The Opinion is erroneous, impious and blasphemous. And
for me let him call it what he pleases. His strength is in hard words, which
here like the stones thrown sometimes by Witchcraft light like Wool, and here
Far also from the Mark.

SECT. XXIII.
That it was the Soul of Samuel that appeared, without his Terrestrial Body,
and that it is an indifferent Op^, in which are d^ided as well Papists as
P^stants.

BUt there is a second Opinion yet to be consut^d, viz. That it was Samuel's
Soul in his wonted shape and habit, p. 173. He must m^an his Soul without the
Body, or else it is the same again; and if he means without any body, I am none
of those that mean with him. It is most ^ully and plainly proved by those
excellent Men, Dr. C -- and Dr. M --, that Souls departed are embodyed in
AErial or AEtherial Vehicles; and they have largely shown that this was the
Doctrine of the greatest Philosophers, and most Ancient and Learned Fathers.
And agreeable it is to the Holy Scripture and highest Reason and Philosophy, as
I may have another occasion to show. Now Samuel appeared here to Saul in this
his more pure AErial or AEtherial Body, which he could form into such an
appearance and habit as he had in the Terrestrial.

Against the Opinion of Samuel's Soul appearing, Mr. Webster urges cogent
Arguments, as still he calls his; they are all manifest, cogent,
irrefragable, unanswerable, even then when they are scarce sense. He prefaceth
to them, by an intimation, that the Doctrine is Popish; maintained, he says,
it is by the Popish party. His hard words use to be his strongest Arguments.
But this is only to raise odium and prejudice to the opinion. For there are
Papists and Protestants on both sides of this Question. As also Rabbis and
Fathers have divided upon it. Some of the last sort, and those perhaps of the
greatest and most c^nsiderable having been for it, as R. Eleazer, R. Saadias,
The Writers of the Midrash, Josephus also, Justin, Origin, Augustine, Basil,
Ambrose, etc. as some others have been against it. So that, I suppose, a Man
may freely and without offense declare his Judgment, though it happen to be
different from Mr. Websters.

SECT. XXIV.
Three Arguments of Mr. Webster against the appearing of the Soul of Samuel
proposed and answered.

Wherefore to his Arguments, First he could not, says he, come whether God
would or no. Right! Secondly, He would not run on an Errand without Gods
consent. No doubt. Thirdly, That God did not command him, he says, is most
certain. Here I must stop. How does that appear to be so certain? Why! they
never were employed in Ministries here below, because never created sor any
such end or purpose, p. 173. They were never employed in Ministries here below!
What thinks he of the Souls of Moses and Elias, at the transfiguration on the
Mount? were not they then employed in a Ministry here below, or were they only
Phantasms? or their glorified Bodies without their Souls? and how then did they
talk and converse with our Lord? But these he will say were sent on an
extraordinary occasion. Be it so, they are sometimes then employed in such, and
so Mr. Webster must eat his words. And if blessed Souls are, or have been
employed at any time, how is he so certain the real Samuel was not sent here?

Thus briefly to his bold Assertion. But he pretends a reason. They were never
created for this purpose. If that were so, what then? The Stars were never made
to fight against Sisera, nor any one. Nor the waters to drown the World. Nor
the Ravens to feed Prophets or other Men. May not they therefore be used in
those Services? Again, No sensitive Being was made primarily for another, but
to enjoy it self, and to partake of the goodness of its Maker. May it not
therefore minister to others? and does not every Creature so? All things serve
him. Thirdly, The Angels are Ministering Spirits, he says, ordained to be such.
Does he think they were made for that purpose only to serve us? Fourthly,
Reasonable humane Creatures are for one another. Non nobis solum, etc. Souls
are most proper to serve such, not here only, but in the next World. They are
(...), like unto Angels, and they are as proper at least for the service of
Men. They have the same nature and affections. They feel our infirmities, and
consider us more than abstract Spirits do. Which is the reason given why our
Savior took not upon him the nature of Angels, but of Men. Fifthly, Souls
departed have Life and Sense and Motion, capacity of being employed, and no
doubt inclination to it; and whither more properly may they be sent, than to
those of their own nature, whom they affect, are allied to, and so lately came
from? Sixthly, The Angels are not confined to their celestial habitation, but
are sent often to this nether World, as Mr. Webster and the rest confess, and
why then should we think that the Souls of the Just are so limited and
restrained?

And Lastly, It is supposed both by Jews and Christians, that the Soul of the
Messiah appeared to the Patriarchs, and was the Angel of the Covenant; and we
know he was pleased to appear to St. Stephen at his Martyrdom, though then in
Glory. And in the various Apparitions of Angels recorded in the Scripture, we
have reason to think that some were humane Souls, called Angels from their
Office.

So that on the whole, we see we have no cause to rely on Mr. Websters
certainty, that Samuel's Soul came not on a Divine Command.

SECT. XXV.
Other Arguments of Mr. Webster against the appearing of the Soul of Samuel,
proposed and answered.

BUt Mr. Webster goes on: Fourthly, says he, Mr. Glanvil has only affirmed,
not proved it. Which is not so, I allege the same reasons I have mentioned
here, in my Philosophical Considerations about Witchcraft, Sect. 16. And the
srequent assirmations of the Sacred T^xt, were sufficient ground for the
Assertion, though no other reasons were added to them.

He argues, Fifthly, Miracles are wrought to confirm truth, but this would have
confirmed Saul and the Witch in their wicked ways, p. 174. I answer, Miracles
are not always wrought to confirm truth, but sometimes to declare it. And these
sort are often for that purpose. Such was this, to pronounce the final Sentence
and Doom on Saul, as to the concerns of this World. And the Prophet's appearing
so contrary to the Woman's expectation, and before she had performed her spells,
struck her into dread and amazement, and so she could draw no encouragement
thence, to countenance her trade of Witchcraft.

Sixthly, He says it is not credible, but that Samuel would have reproved the
Sorceress. But that was not his business, and it is like she being one of that
vile and Diabolical profession was forsaken of God and good Spirits, and given
up to those evil ones that were her Agents and Familiars. Such derelictions we
sometimes read of. And certainly if any course of sinning occasions and brings
such a judgment (as some no doubt do) this of Witchcraft and Confederacy with
evil Spirits, is one that most justly may.

Seventhly, But God had refused to answer Saul by any living Prophet, and
Eighthly would not vouchsafe him his Spirit in the ordinary way, and therefore
it is not probable he would do it by sending a Prophet from the dead. Which
arguings can only discover our ignorance in the Reasons of the Divine Counsels
and Actions. But yet it may be said, God had indeed withdrawn all comfortable
and directive Communications from him, but this was of another sort, a further
instance of the Divine Displeasure, and Declarative of the forsaken Kings Doom.
Which was no favor, but indeed a judgment to which the Divine Justice was
probably further provoked by this his sin of dealing with the Sorceress.

But Ninthly, Abraham would not send Lazarus upon the Rich Man's desire to his
surviving Brethren, p. 175. Nor can any one think it follows that, because one
came from the dead to an extraordinary person, and upon an occasion that was
such; that therefore Prophets, or other Souls shall be sent from thence,
ordinarily to warn those that have other sufficient means of conviction and
amendment. The Tenth is to fill up tale. Where does Mr. Glanvil, says he, find
it in Scripture, or Orthodoxal Divines, that ever any Blessed Soul was sent on
a Divine Errand to any here below? Which he objected, and I answered before.

SECT. XXVI.
That the Soul of Samuel might come of it self, as well as be sent by Divine
Command, either Opinion desensible.

I Have briefly recited, and I hope cleared Mr. Webster's Objections, which he
runs out into great length and numerous impertinencies. And indeed his
Arguments are often such confident Nothings, that it is really a shame to go
about to answer them. But I shall never pass by any thing of his strength.

But though I have defended the Opinion, that Samuel's Soul was sent on a
Divine Errand to Saul, against Mr. Websters contrary pretenses; yet is there
another thing supposable, which is as probable, viz. That Samuel came without
any direct command, being barely permitted, and that the earnest and
importunate desire of Saul to have some Communication with him in his distress,
invited and inclined him to it. Thus it might be, and there is no cause to
think, but that blessed Souls have sometimes such liberty allowed them; which
of these it was, I shall not presume to determine, both are defensible, and
either sufficient for my purpose.

SECT. XXVII.
Several other Objections against the appearing of the Soul os Samuel answered.

BUt there are other Objections besides Mr. Websters, against the Tenent that
it was the Soul of Samuel; I shall not conceal any one that has any force in
it.

First it is urged, That Witches and Magicians have no power over the Spirits
of the Just, and therefore this Pythoness could not raise Samuel. Nor do we say
she did. He appeared (as it is probable from the Text) before she had made her
Conjurations. Which might be one reason of her crying out. He came either sent
from God, or of his own inclination. The Devil nor Witch had nothing to do in
it.

But Secondly, would God send Samuel at such a time, when he was seeking
satisfaction from enchantment? And why not as well that, as appoint the Prophet
to meet the Messengers of Ahaziah when he sent to Beelzebub, 2 Kings 1? That
King sent to the Idol of E^ron to inquire his Fate, and God acquainted him with
it by his Prophet Elijah. Thus also when Balak had required Balaam to curse the
Israelites, God put a Prophecy into his Mouth, and made him bless them, Numb.
32. etc.

Thirdly, The Woman said, she saw Gods arising, a company of evil Spirits (so
some interpret) and what did Samuel among them? But I saw Gods is more probably
rendered by others a God, a Divine Personage, the plural Number for the
singular to express honor. And that it is so to be understood is signified
plainly by the singular Relative that follows; Of what form is he, v. 14. Or if
more be meant, why might they not be good Genii that accompanied Samuel, a
great and Divine Personage, eminent no doubt in the other World as he was in
this?

Fourthly, some argue from the Question of the Apparition, v. 15. Why have thou
disquieted me? Samuel, say they, whether sent by God, or coming of his own
accord, could not be disquieted by appearing. Nor was there any real
disturbance in it, but the Spirit of the Prophet speaks our Language, who are
apt to fancy the dead to rest in their Graves, and to be disturbed of their
repose, when upon any occasion they appear among the living.

Fifthly, But he says, that Saul and his Sons should be with him, viz. in
Thalamo justorum, which some think not unlikely, believing that Saul was
reprobate only in Type. But more probably the meaning is, that he should be in
the State of the dead in another World, as he the Prophet was.

Sixthly and Lastly, The Spectre said, that to morrow he should be with him,
which was not true, for several days intervened before the Battle. But the word
to morrow need not be taken in strictness, but in a Latitude of interpretation
for a short time. He was to dye in or upon the Fight, and the enemies were now
ready sor it, and so the event was to be within a very little while. The
prediction of which, was a Prophecy of a thing very contingent, and shows that
the Predictor was the real Samuel.

SECT. XXVIII.
An Answer to that Objection, That if it was Samuel s Soul that appeared, it
makes nothing to Witchcraft.

BUt if it were the real Samuel, will they say, this Story will then make
nothing for the Opinion of Witchcraft. For Samuel was not raised by
enchantment, but came either of his own accord, or on a Divine Errand. To which
Objection, I say,

First, Here is at least proof of an Apparition of a Man after Death.

Secondly, Saul's going to this Pythoness upon such an Inquiry, and she
undertaking to bring the person up, whom he should name (at least the
appearance of him) intimated v. 11. are good proof that this had been her
practice, though at this time over ruled, and that she acted by an Evil Spirit.
For certainly when Saul entreats her to Divine to him by her Familiar Spirit,
he did not mean that she should deceive, and delude him by a Confederate Knave.
The senslesness of which Figment I have already sufficiently disproved. That
the Woman was used to such practices, will appear fully when I come to prove
Witchcraft from * express Texts.

ADVERTISEMENT.
* The express Texts that he means, I suppose are such as these, Exodus 22. 18,
2 Chronicles. 33. 6. Gal. 5. 20. Micah 5. 12. Acts 13. 6. 8. and Chap. 8. 9. and
more especially Deuteronomy. 18. 10. Where almost all the Names of Witches are
enumerated, namely, of all those that are inveigled by Covenant with Evil
Spirits, either explicitly, or by submitting to their Ceremonies. See Dr. H --
M -- his Postscript.

SECT. XXIX.
They that hold it was an Evil Spirit that appeared to Saul, that their opinion
may be true for ought Mr. Webster brings against it.

AS to the Opinion of diverse Divines, that the appearing Samuel was indeed an
Evil Spirit in his likeness, though I judge it not so probable as the other of
the real Samuel, yet the interpretation is not absurd nor impossible. And
because I do not absolutely determine either way, I shall defend it against Mr.
Websters contrary Arguments, which whether it be so or not so, prove nothing.
He says,

First, That this beggs two false suppositions, p. 175. as First, That the
Devils are simply incorporeal Spirits. By which if he means Incorporeal in
their Intrinsic Essential Constitution, such no doubt they are, as every
Intellectual Being is. But if he mean by simply Incorporeal, disunited from all
Matter and Body, so perhaps (and most likely) they are not. But neither the
one, or the other of these, is supposed by the Opinion Mr. Webster impugnes.
The second false supposition is, That Devils can assume Bodies. That they can
appear in diverse Shapes and Figures, like humane and other Bodies, we affirm,
and it is plain from the Scripture as to Angels, and I shall make the same
good, in reference to other Spirits in due place. So that we may suppose it
still, till Mr. Webster has evinced the contrary, as he promises. How he
performs I shall consider in due place.

His Second Argument is, That he is not of their Opinion, that the Devils move,
and rove up and down in this Elementary World at pleasure. Which no one I know
says. They go to and fro, and compass the Earth, but still within the bounds
of the Divine permission, the Laws of the Angelical World, and those of their
own Kingdom; which prevent the Troubles and Disturbances in the World from
them, which he says would ensue.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Thus far runs the Proof of the Existence of Apparitions and Witchcraft, from
Holy Scripture, entire. The three or four Lines that follow in the M S. and are
left out, break off abruptly. But what is said, sufficiently subverts the force
of Mr. Webster' s Arguments against their Opinion, that say it was the Devil
that appeared to Saul. I will only here take notice, that this part which
reaches hitherto, though it be not fully finished, yet it abundantly affords
Proof for the Conclusion, namely, for the Existence of Spirits, Apparitions and
Witches, from Testimony of Holy Scripture, to as many as yield to the Authority
thereof. But the following Collection is a Confirmation of the same things, as
well to the Anti-Scripturists, as to them that believe Scripture.

And the leading Story of the Demon of Tedworth, I hope now will prove
irrefragable and unexceptionable, if the Reader retain in his mind, Mr.
Glanvil' s Preface to this second Part of his Saducismus Triumphatus, and Mr.
Mompesson' s Letters, the one to Mr. Glanvil, the other to Mr. Collins, which
cannot but abundantly undeceive the World. So that it is needless to record how
Mr. Glanvil wrote to Mr. William Claget of Bury, and professed, He had not the
least ground to think he was imposed on in what he related, and that he had
great cause from what he saw himself, to say, it was impossible there should be
any Imposture in that business.

To the same purpose he wrote to Mr. Gilbert Clark in Northamptonshire, as
also to my self, and undoubtedly to many more, as he has intimated in his
Preface. Besides that, to the Parties above named, he sent a Copy of that
Letter of Mr. Mompesson, which was wrote to himself.

So that that groundless Rumor being thus fully silenced, we may now
seasonably relate, and that with confidence, that assured and unexceptionably
attested Story of the Demon of Tedworth. Which is as follows.

Proof of Apparitions, Spirits and Witches, from a choice Collection of modern
Relations.
RELATION I.
Which is the enlarged Narrative of the Demon of Tedworth, or of the
Disturbances at Mr. Mompesson s House, caused by Witchcraft, and the villainy of
the Drummer.

MR. John Mompesson of Tedworth, in the County of Wilts, being about the middle
of March, in the Year 1661. at a Neighboring Town called Ludgarshal, and
hearing a Drum beat there, he inquired of the Bailiff of the Town, at whose
House he then was, what it meant. The Bailiff told him, that they had for some
days been troubled with an idle Drummer, who demanded money of the Constable by
virtue of a pretended Pass, which he thought was counterfeit. Upon this Mr.
Mompesson sent for the Fellow, and asked him by what authority he went up and
down the Country in that manner with his Drum. The Drummer answered, he had
good authority, and produced his Pass, with a Warrant, under the Hands of Sir
William Cawly, and Colonel Ayliff of Gretenham. Mr. Mompesson knowing these
Gentlemen's Hands, discovered that the Pass and Warrant were counterfeit, and
thereupon commanded the Vagrant to put off his Drum, and charged the Constable
to carry him before the next Justice of the Peace, to be further examined and
punished. The Fellow then confessed the cheat, and begged earnestly to have his
Drum. Mr. Mompesson told him, that if he understood from Colonel Ayliff, whose
Drummer he said he was, that he had been an honest Man, he should have it
again, but in the mean time he would secure it. So he left the Drum with the
Bailiff, and the Drummer in the Constables hands, who it seems was prevailed on
by the Fellows entreaties to let him go.

About the midst of April following, when Mr. Mompesson was preparing for a
Journey to London, the Bailiff sent the Drum to his House. When he was returned
from that Journey, his Wife told him, that they had been much affrighted in the
Night by Thleves, and that the House had been like to have been broken up. And
he had not been at home above three Nights, when the same noise was heard that
had disturbed his Family in his absence. It was a very great knocking at his
Doors, and the outsides of his House. Hereupon he got up, and went about the
House with a brace of Pistols in his Hands. He opened the Door where the great
knocking was, and then he heard the noise at another Door. He opened that also,
and went out round his House, but could discover nothing, only he still heard a
strange noise and hollow sound. When he was got back to bed, the noise was a
Thumping and Drumming on the top of his House, which continued a good space,
and then by degrees went off into the Air.

After this, the noise of Thumping and Drumming was very frequent, usually five
nights together, and then it would intermit three. It was on the outsides of
the House, which is most of it of Board. It constantly came as they were going
to sleep, whether early or late. After a Months disturbance without, it came
into the Room where the Drum lay, four or five nights in seven, within half an
hour after they were in bed, continuing almost two. The sign of it just before
it came, was, they still heard an hurling in the Air over the House, and at its
going off, the beating of a Drum like that at the breaking up of a Guard. It
continued in this Room for the space of two Months, which time Mr. Mompesson
himself lay there to observe it. In the fore part of the night, it used to be
very troublesome, but after two hours all would be quiet.

Mrs. Mompesson being brought to bed, there was but little noise the night she
was in Travail, nor any for three weeks after, till she had recovered strength.
But after this civil cessation, it returned in a ruder manner than before, and
followed and vexed the youngest Children, beating their Bedsteds with that
violence, that all present expected when they would fall in pieces. In laying
Hands on them, one should feel no blows, but might perceive them to shake
exceedingly. For an hour together it would beat, Roundheads and Cuckolds, the
Tat-too, and several other points of War, as well as any Drummer. After this,
they should hear a scratching under the Childrens Bed, as if by something that
had Iron Tallons. It would lift the Children up in their Beds, follow them from
one Room to another, and for a while haunted none particularly but them.

There was a Cock-loft in the House which had not been observed to be troubled,
thither they removed the Children, putting them to Bed while it was fair day,
where they were no sooner laid, but their troubler was with them as before.

On the Fifth of November. 1662. it kept a mighty noise, and a servant observing
two Boards in the Childrens Room seeming to move, he bid it give him one of
them. Upon which the Board came (nothing moving it that he saw) within a yard
of him. The Man added, Nay let me have it in my Hand; upon which it was should
quite home to him. He thrust it back, and it was driven to him again, and so up
and down, to and fro, at least twenty times together, till Mr. Mompesson forbad
his Servant such familiarities. This was in the daytime, and seen by a whole
Room full of People. That morning it left a sulphurous smell behind it, which
was very offensive. At night the Minister one Mr. Cragg, and diverse of the
Neighbors came to the House on a visit. The Minister went to Prayers with
them, Kneeling at the Childrens Bedside, where it was then very troublesome
and loud. During Prayertime it withdrew into the Cock-loft, but returned as
soon as Prayers were done, and then in sight of the Company, the Chairs walked
about the Room of themselves, the Childrens shoes were hurled over their
Heads, and every loose thing moved about the Chamber. At the same time a
Bedstaff was thrown at the Minister, which hit him on the Leg, but so
favorably that a Lock of Wool could not have fallen more softly, and it was
observed, that it stopped just where it lighted, without rolling or moving from
the place.

Mr. Momp^sson perceiving, that it so much persecuted the little Children, he
lodged them out at a Neighbors House, taking his Eldest Daughter, who was
about Ten years of age into his own Chamber, where it had not been a Month
before. As soon as she was in Bed, the disturbance begun there again,
continuing three Weeks Drumming, and making other noises, and it was observed,
that it would exactly answer in Drumming any thing that was beaten or called
for. After this, the House where the Children were Lodged out, happening to be
full of strangers, they were taken home, and no disturbance having been known
in the Parlour, they were lodged there, where also their persecutour found
them, but then only plucked them by the Hair and Night-cloaths without any other
disturbance.

It was noted, that when the noise was loudest, and came with the most sudden
and surprising violence, no Dog about the House would move, though the knocking
was often so boisterous and rude, that it has been heard at a considerable
distance in the Fields, and awakened the Neighbors in the Village, none of
which live very near this House. The Servants sometimes were lift up with their
Beds, and then let gently down again without hurt, at other times it would lie
like a great weight upon their Feet.

About the latter end of December. 1662. the Drummings were less frequent, and
then they heard a noise like the gingling of Money, occasioned, as it was
thought, by somewhat Mr. Mompesson's Mother had spoken the day before to a
Neighbor, who talked of Fayries leaving Money, viz. That she should like it
well, if it would leave them some to make amends for their trouble. The night
after the speaking of which, there was a great chinking of Money over all the
House.

After this it desisted from the ruder noises, and employed it self in little
Apish and less troublesome Tricks. On Christmas Eve a little before day, one of
the little Boys arising out of his Bed, was hit on a sore place upon his Heel,
with the Latch of the Door, the Pin that it was fastened with, was so small
that it was a difficult matter to pick it out. The night after Christmas day,
it threw the Old Gentlewomans clothes about the Room, and hid her Bible in the
Ashes. In such silly tricks it was frequent.

After this, it was very troublesome to a Servant of Mr. Mompesson's, who was a
stout Fellow, and of sober Conversation. This Man lay within, during the
greatest disturbance, and for several nights something would endeavor to pluck
his clothes off the Bed, so that he was fain to tug hard to keep them on, and
sometimes they would be plucked from him by main force, and his shoes thrown at
his head. And now and then he should find himself forcibly held, as it were
bound Hand and Foot, but he found that whenever he could make use of his Sword,
and struck with it, the Spirit quitted its hold.

A little after these contests, a Son of Sir Thomas Bennet, whose Workman the
Drummer had sometimes been, came to the House, and told Mr. Mompesson some
words that he had spoken, which it seems was not well taken. For as soon as
they were in Bed, the Drum was beat up very violently and loudly, the Gentleman
arose and called his Man to him, who lay with Mr. Mompesson's Servant just now
spoken of, whose name was John. As soon as Mr. Bennet's Man was gone, John
heard a rusling noise in his Chamber, and something came to his Bedside, as if
it had been one in silk. The Man presently reaches after his Sword, which he
found held from him, and 'twas with difficulty and much tugging that he got it
into his power, which as soon as he had done, the Spectre left him, and it was
always observed that it still avoided a Sword.

About the beginning of January 1662. they were wont to hear a Singing in the
Chimney before it came down. And one Night about this time, lights were seen in
the House. One of them came into Mr. Mompesson's Chamber which seemed blue and
glimmering, and caused great stiffness in the Eyes of those that saw it. After
the light something was heard coming up the Stairs, as if it had been one
without Shoes. The light was seen also four or five times in the Childrens
Chamber; and the Maids confidently affirm that the Doors were at least ten
times opened and shut in their sight, and when they were opened they heard a
noise as if half a dozen had entered together. After which some were heard to
walk about the Room, and one rusled as if it* had been in silk. The like Mr.
Mompesson himself once heard.

During the time of the knocking, when many were present, a Gentleman of the
Company said, Satan, if the Drummer set thee to work, give three knocks and no
more, which it did very distinctly and stopped. Then the Gentleman knocked, to see
if it would answer him as it was wont, but it did not. For further trial, he
bid it for confirmation, if it were the Drummer, to give five knocks and no
more that night, which it did, and left the House quiet all the night after.
This was done in the presence of Sir Thomas Chamberlain of Oxfordshire, and
diverse others.

On Saturday Morning, an hour before day, Jan. 10. a Drum was heard beat upon
the outsides of Mr. Mompesson's Chamber, from whence it went to the other end
of the House, where some Gentlemen strangers lay, playing at their door and
without, four or five several Tunes, and so went off into the air.

The next night, a Smith in the Village lying with John the Man, they heard a
noise in the room, as if one had been shoeing of an Horse, and somewhat came,
as it were with a pair of Pincers, snipping at the Smiths Nose most part of the
Night.

One Morning Mr. Mompesson rising early to go a journey, heard a great noise
below, where the Children lay, and running down with a Pistol in his hand, he
heard a voice, crying a Witch, a Witch, as they had also heard it once before.
Upon his entrance all was quiet.

Having one Night played some little tricks at Mr. Mompesson's Beds feet, it
went into another Bed, where one of his Daughters lay; There it passed from
side to side, lifting her up as it passed under. At that time there were three
kinds of noises in the Bed. They endeavored to thrust at it with a Sword, but
it still shifted and carefully avoided the thrust, still getting under the
Child when they offered at it. The Night after it came panting like a Dog out
of breath. Upon which one took a Bedstaff to knock, which was caught out of her
hand, and thrown away, and company coming up, the room was presently filled
with a bloomy noisome smell, and was very hot, though without fire, in a very
sharp and severe Winter. It continued in the Bed panting and scratching an hour
and half, and then went into the next Chamber, where it knocked a little, and
seemed to rattle a Chain; thus it did for two or three nights together.

After this, the old Gentlewomans Bible was found in the Ashes, the Paper side
being downwards. Mr. Mompesson took it up, and observed that it lay open at the
Third Chapter of St. Mark, where there is mention of the unclean Spirits
falling down before our Savior, and of his giving power to the Twelve to cast
out Devils, and of the Scribes Opinion, that he cast them out through
Beelzebub. The next night they strewed Ashes over the Chamber, to see what
impressions it would leave. In the morning they found in one place, the
resemblance of a great Claw, in another of a lesser, some Letters in another,
which they could make nothing of, besides many Circles and Scratches in the
Ashes.

About this time I went to the House, on purpose to inquire the truth of those
passages, of which there was so loud a report. It had ceased from its Drumming
and ruder noises before I came thither, but most of the more remarkable
circumstances before related, were confirmed to me there, by several of the
neighbors together, who had been present at them. At this time it used to
haunt the Children, and that as soon as they were laid. They went to Bed that
night I was there, about Eight of the Clock, when a Maidservant coming down
from them, told us it was come. The neighbors that were there, and two
Ministers who had seen and heard diverse times went away, but Mr. Mompesson and
I, and a Gentleman that came with me went up. I heard a strange scratching as I
went up the Stairs, and when we came into the Room, I perceived it was just
behind the Bolster of the Childrens Bed, and seemed to be against the Tick. It
was as loud a scratching, as one with long Nails could make upon a Bolster.
There were two little modest Girls in the Bed, between Seven and Eleven years
old as I guest. I saw their hands out over the Clothes, and they could not
contribute to the noise that was behind their heads. They had been used to it,
and had still some body or other in the Chamber with them, and therefore seemed
not to be much affrighted. I standing at the Beds-head, thrust my hand behind
the Bolster, directing it to the place whence the noise seemed to come.
Whereupon the noise ceased there, and was heard in another part of the Bed. But
when I had taken out my Hand it returned, and was heard in the same place as
before. I had been told that it would imitate noises, and made trial by
scratching several times upon the Sheet, as 5, and 7, and 10, which it followed
and still stopped at my number. I searched under and behind the Bed, turned up the
Clothes to the Bed-cords, graspt the Bolster, sounded the Wall behind, and made
all the search that possible I could to find if there were any trick,
contrivance, or common cause of it; the like did my friend, but we could
discover nothing. So that I was then verily persuaded, and am so still, that
the noise was made by some Demon or Spirit. After it had scratcht about half
an hour or more, it went into the midst of the Bed under the Children, and
there seemed to pant like a Dog out of Breath very loudly. I put my hand upon
the place, and felt the Bed bearing up against it, as if something within had
thrust it up. I graspt the Feathers to feel if any living thing were in it. I
looked under and every where about, to see if there were any Dog or Cat, or any
such Creature in the Room, and so we all did, but found nothing. The motion it
caused by this panting was so strong, that it shook the Room and Windows very
sensibly. It continued thus, more than half an hour, while my friend and I
stayed in the Room, and as long after, as we were told. During the panting, I
chanced to see as it had been something (which I thought was a Rat or Mouse)
moving in a Linen Bag, that hung up against another Bed that was in the Room.
I stepped and caught it by the upper end with one Hand, with which I held it, and
drew it through the other, but found nothing at all in it. There was no body
near to shake the Bag, or if there had, no one could have made such a motion,
which seemed to be from within, as if a Living Creature had moved in it. This
passage I mention not in the former Editions, because it depended upon my
single Testimony, and might be subject to more Evasions than the other I
related; but having told it to diverse Learned and Inquisitive Men, who thought
it not altogether inconsiderable, I have now added it here. It will I know be
said by some, that my friend and I were under some affright, and so fancied
noises and sights that were not. This is the Eternal Evasion. But if it be
possible to know how a Man is affected, when in fear, and when unconcerned, I
certainly know for mine own part, that during the whole time of my being in the
Room, and in the House, I was under no more affrightment than I am, while I
write this Relation. And if I know that I am now awake, and that I see the
Objects that are before me, I know that I heard and saw the particulars I have
told. There is, I am sensible, no great matter for story in them, but there is
so much as convineeth me, that there was somewhat extraordinary, and what we
usually call preternatural in the business. There were other passages at my
being at Tedworth, which I published not, because they are not such plain and
unexceptionable Proofs. I shall now briefly mention them, valiant quantum
valere possunt. My friend and I lay in the Chamber, where the first and chief
disturbance had been. We slept well all Night, but early before day in the
Morning, I was awakened (and I awakened my Bedfellow) by a great knocking just
without our Chamber door. I asked who was there several times, but the knocking
still continued without answer. At last I said, In the Name of God, who is it,
and what would you have? to which a voice answered, nothing with you. We
thinking it had been some Servant of the House, went to sleep again. But
speaking of it to Mr. Mompesson when we came down, he assured us, that no one
of the House lay that way, or had business thereabout, and that his Servants
were not up till he called them, which was after it was day. Which they
confirmed and protested that the noise was not made by them.

Mr. Mompesson had told us before, that it would be gone in the middle of the
Night, and come agian diverse times early in the Morning about Four a Clock, and
this I suppose was about that time.

Another passage was this, my Man coming up to me in the Morning, told me, that
one of my Horses (that on which I rode) was all in a sweat, and looked as if he
had been rid all Night. My friend and I went down and found him so. I enquired
how he had been used, and was assured that he had been well sed, and ordered as
he used to be, and my Servant was one that was wont to be very careful about my
Horses. The Horse I had had a good time, and never knew but that he was very
sound. But after I had rid him a Mile or two, very gently over a plain Down
from Mr. Mompesson's house, he fell lame, and having made a hard shift to bring
me home, dyed in two or three days, no one being able to imagine what he ailed.
This I confess might be accident or some unusual distemper, but all things
being put together, it seems very probable that it was somewhat else.

But I go on with Mr. Mompesson's own particulars. There came one Morning a
light into the Childrens Chamber, and a voice crying, a Witch, a Witch, for at
least an hundred times together.

Mr. Mompesson at another time (being in the day) seeing some wood move that
was in the Chimney of a Room, where he was, as of it self, discharged a Pistol
into it, after which they found several drops of Blood on the Harth, and in
diverse places of the Stairs.

For two or three nights after the discharge of the Pistol, there was a calm in
the House, but then it came again, applying it self to a little Child newly
taken from Nurse. Which it so persecuted, that it would not let the poor Infant
rest for two nights together, nor suffer a Candle in the Room, but carry them
away lighted up the Chimney, or throw them under the Bed. It so scared this
Child by leaping upon it, that for some hours it could not be recovered out of
the sright. So that they were forced again to remove the Children out of the
house. The next night after which something about Midnight came up the Stairs,
and knocked at Mr. Mompesson's door, but he lying still, it went up another pair
of Stairs, to his Man's Chamber, to whom it appeared standing at his Beds foot.
The exact shape and proportion he could not discover, but he says he saw a
great Body with two red and glaring Eyes, which for some time were fixed
steadily upon him, and at length disappeared.

Another night strangers being present; it purr'd in the Childrens Bed like a
Cat, at which time also the Clothes and Children were list up from the Bed, and
six Men could not keep them down. Hereupon they removed the Children, intending
to have ripped up the Bed. But they were no sooner laid in another, but the
second Bed was more troubled than the first. It continued thus four hours, and
so beat the Childrens Legs against the Bed-posts, that they were forced to
arise, and sit up all night. After this, it would empty Chamberpots into their
Beds, and strew them with Ashes, though they were never so carefully watched. It
put a long piked Iron into Mr. Mompesson's Bed, and into his Mothers a naked
Knife upright. It would fill Porrengers with Ashes, throw every thing about and
keep a noise all day.

About the beginning of April, 1663. a Gentleman that lay in the house, had all
his money turned black in his Pockets; and Mr. Mompesson coming one Morning
into his Stable, found the Horse he was wont to Ride, on the Ground, having one
of his hinder Legs in his Mouth, and so fastened there, that it was difficult
for several Men to get it out with a Leaver. After this, there were some other
remarkable things, but my account goes no further. Only Mr. Mompesson writ me
word, that afterward the House was several nights beset with seven or eight in
the shape of Men, who, as soon as a Gun was discharged, would shuffle away
together into an Arbor.

The Drummer was tried at the Assizes at Salisbury upon this occasion. He was
committed first to Gloucester Gaol for stealing, and a Wiltshire Man coming to
see him, he asked what news in Wiltshire. The Visitant said, he knew of none.
No, says the Drummer! do not you hear of the Drumming at a Gentleman's house at
Tedworth. That I do enough, said the other. I, quoth the Drummer, I have
plagued him (or to that purpose) and he shall never be at quiet, till he has
made me satisfaction for taking away my Drum. Upon Information of this, the
fellow was tried for a Witch at Sarum, and all the main circumstances I have
related, were sworn at the Assizes by the Minister of the Parish, and diverse
others of the most intelligent and substantial Inhabitants, who had been Eye
and Ear witnesses of them, time after time for diverse years together.

The fellow was condemned to Transportation, and accordingly sent away; but I
know not how ('it is said by raising storms, and affrighting the Seamen) he made
a shift to come back again. And it is observable, that during all the time of
his restraint and absence the house was quiet, but as soon as ever he came back
at liberty, the disturbance returned.

He had been a Soldier under Cromwell, and used to talk much of Gallant Books
he had of an odd fellow, who was counted a Wizzard. Upon this occasion, I shall
here add a passage, which I had not from Mr. Mompesson, but yet relates to the
main purpose.

The Gentleman, who was with me at the House, Mr. Hill, being in company with
one Compton of Summersetshire, who practices Physic, and pretends to strange
matters, related to him this story of Mr. Mompesson's disturbance. The
Physician told him, he was sure it was nothing but a Rendezvous of Witches, and
that for an hundred pounds, he would undertake to rid the House of all
disturbance. In pursuit of this discourse, he talked of many high things, and
having drawn my friend into another Room apart from the rest of the company,
said, he would make him sensible he could do something more than ordinary, and
asked him who he desired to see. Mr. Hill had no great confidence in his talk,
but yet being earnestly pressed to name some one, He said, he desired to see no
one so much as his Wife, who was then many miles distant from them at her home.
Upon this, Compton took up a Looking-glass that was in the Room, and setting it
down again, bid my friend look in it; which he did, and there, as he most
solemnly and seriously professes, he saw the exact Image of his Wife in that
habit which she then wore, and working at her Needle in such a part of the Room
(there represented also) in which and about which time she really was as he
found upon inquiry when he came home. The Gentleman himself averred this to me,
and he is a very sober, intelligent, and credible person. Compton had no
knowledge of him before, and was an utter stranger to the person of his Wife.
The same Man we shall meet again in the story of the Witchcrafts of Elizabeth
Style, whom he discovered to be a Witch by foretelling her coming into an
house, and going out again without speaking, as is set down in the third
Relation. He was by all counted a very odd person.

Thus I have written the sum of Mr. Mompesson's disturbance, which I had
partly from his own mouth related before diverse, who had been witnesses of all,
and confirmed his relation, and partly from his own Letters, from which the
order and series of things is taken. The same particulars he writ also to Dr.
Creed, then Doctor of the Chair in Oxford.

Mr. Mompesson is a Gentleman, of whose truth in this account, I have not the
least ground of suspicion, he being neither vain nor credulous, but a discreet,
sagacious and manly person. Now the credit of matters of Fact depends much upon
the Relatours, who, if they cannot be deceived themselves nor supposed any ways
interessed to impose upon others, ought to be credited. For upon these
circumstances, all humane Faith is grounded, and matter of Fact is not capable
of any proof besides, but that of immediate sensible evidence. Now this
Gentleman cannot be thought ignorant, whether that he relates be true or no,
the Scene of all being his own house, himself a witness and that not of a
circumstance or two, but of an hundred, nor for once or twice only, but for the
space of some years, during which he was a concerned, and inquisitive Observer.
So that it cannot with any show of reason be supposed that any of his Servants
abused him, since in all that time he must needs have detected the deceit. And
what interest could any of his family have had (if it had been possible to have
managed it without discovery) to continue so long so troublesome, and so
injurious an Imposture? Nor can it with any whit of more probability be
imagined, that his own melancholy deluded him, since (besides that he is no
crazy nor imaginative person) that humor could not have been so lasting and
pertinacious. Or if it were so in him, can we think he infected his whole
Family, and those multitudes of neighbors and others, who had so often been
witnesses of those passages? Such supposals are wild, and not like to tempt
any, but those whose Wills are their Reasons. So that upon the whole, the
principal Relatour Mr. Mompesson himself knew, whether what he reports was true
or not, whether those things acted in his house were contrived Cheats, or
extraordinary Realities. And if so, what interest could he serve in carrying
on, or conniving at a juggling Design and Imposture?

He suffered by it in his Name, in his Estate, in all his Affairs, and in the
general peace of his Family. The Unbelievers in the matter of Spirits and
Witches took him for an Impostour. Many others judged the permission of such an
extraordinary evil to be the judgment of God upon him, for some notorious
wickedness or impiety. Thus his name was continually exposed to censure, and
his estate suffered, by the concourse of people from all parts to his house, by
the diversion it gave him from his affairs, by the discouragement of Servants,
by reason of which he could hardly get any to live with him. To which if I add
the continual hurry that his Family was in, the affrights, vexations and
tossings up and down of his Children, and the watchings and disturbance of his
whole house (in all which, himself must needs be the most concerned person) I
say, if these things are considered, there will be little reason to think he
could have any interest to put a cheat upon the World, in which he would most
of all have injured and abused himself. Or if he should have designed and
managed so incredible, so unprofitable a Delusion, it is strange that he should
have troubled himself so long in such a business, only to deceive, and to be
talked of. And it is yet more so, that none of those many inquisitive persons
that came thither purposely to criticize and examine the truth of those
matters, could make any discoveries of the Juggling, especially since many came
prejudiced against the belief of such things in general, and others resolved
beforehand against the belief of this, and all were permitted the utmost
freedom of search and inquiry. And after things were weighed and examined, some
that were before greatly prejudiced, went away fully convinced. To all which I
add, that

There are diverse particulars in the story, in which no abuse or deceit could
have been practiced, as the motion of Boards and Chairs of themselves, the
beating of a Drum in the midst of a Room, and in the Air, when nothing was to
be seen; the great heat in a Chamber that had no Fire in excessive cold
weather, the scratching and panting, the violent beating and shaking of the
Bedsteads, of which there was no perceivable cause or occasion: In these and
such like instances, it is not to be conceived how tricks could have been put
upon so many, so jealous, and so inquisitive persons as were witnesses of them.

It Is true, that when the Gentlemen the King sent were there, the House was
quiet, and nothing seen nor heard that night, which was confidently and with
triumph urged by many, as a confutation of the story. But 'twas bad Logic to
conclude in matters of Fact from a single Negative and such a one against
numerous Affirmatives, and so affirm that a thing was never done, because not
at such a particular time, and that no body ever saw what this Man or that did
not. By the same way of reasoning, I may infer that there were never any
Robberies done on Salisbury Plain, Ho^nslow Heath, or the other noted places,
because I have often Traveled all those ways, and yet was never Robbed; and
the Spaniard inferred well that said, There was no Sun in England, because he
had been six Weeks here and never saw it. This is the common argument of those
that deny the Being of Apparitions, they have Traveled all hours of the night,
and never saw any thing worse than themselves (which may well be) and thence
they conclude, that all pretended Apparitions are Fancies or Impostures. But
why do not such arguers conclude, that there was never a Cutpurse in London,
because they have lived there many years without being met with by any of those
Practisers? Certainly he that denies Apparitions upon the confidence of this
Negative against the vast heap of Positive assurances, is credulous in
believing there was ever any Highway-man in the World, if he himself was never
Robbed. And the Trials of Assizes and Attestations of those that have (if he
will be just) ought to move his Assent no more in this case, than in that of
Witches and Apparitions, which have the very same evidence.

But as to the quiet of Mr. Mompesson's house when the Courtiers were there, it
may be remembered and considered, that the disturbance was not constant, but
intermitted sometimes several days, sometimes Weeks. So that the intermission
at that time might be accidental, or perhaps the Demon was not willing to give
so public a Testimony of those Transactions, which possibly might convince
those, who he had rather should continue in the unbelief of his existence. But
however it were, this circumstance will afford but a very slender inference
against the credit of the story, except among those who are willing to take any
thing for an Argument against things which they have an interest not to
acknowledge.

I have thus related the sum of the story, and noted some circumstances that
assure the truth of it. I confess the passages recited are not so dreadful,
Tragical and amazing, as there are some in story of this kind, yet are they
never the less probable or true, for their being not so prodigious and
astonishing. And they are strange enough to prove themselves effects of some
invisible extraordinary Agent, and so demonstrate that there are Spirits, who
sometimes sensibly intermeddle in our affairs. And I think they do it with
clearness of evidence. For these things were not done long ago, or at far
distance, in an ignorant age, or among a barbarous people, they were not seen
by two or three only of the Melancholic and superstitious, and reported by
those that made them serve the advantage and interest of a party. They were not
the passages of a Day or Night, nor the vanishing glances of an Apparition; but
these Transactions were near and late, public, frequent, and of diverse years
continuance, witnessed by multitudes of competent and unbyassed Attestors, and
acted in a searching incredulous Age: Arguments enough one would think to
convince any modest and capable reason.

ADVERTISEMENT.
This Narrative of the Demon of Tedworth is published in an Epistolar Form in
the former Impressions. But the enlargement thereof, that is to say, the said
Narrative enlarged for this intended Edition, is not in that form, and
therefore is thus published according to Mr. Glanvil 's M. S. in this bare
simple form it was found. As for Mr. Glanvil 's Letter to Dr. More, which was
in the former Impressions, though for the first parts sake it might seem ^it
here to be interserted, it containing Objections and Queries touching the
stirrs at Mr. Mompesson 's house, yet the greater part by far being of another
subject, and the most material of those Objections and Queries being so well
satisfied in this more perfect Narrative it self, I thought it more advisable
to omit that Letter in this present Edition, that there might be left more room
for what is more congenerous to the Argument in hand. And therefore we will
immediately proceed to the second Relation.

RELAT. II.
Which is concerning Witchcraft practiced by Jane Brooks upon Richard Jones,
Son of Henry Jones of Shepton Mallet.

ON Sunday 15. of November. 1657. about Three of the Clock in the Afternoon,
Richard Jones then a sprightly youth about Twelve years old, Son of Henry Jones
of Shepton Mallet, in the County of Somerset, being in his Fathers house alone,
and perceiving one looking in at the Windows, went to the Door, where one Jane
Brooks of the same Town (but then by name unknown to this Boy) came to him. She
desired him to give her a piece of close Bread, and gave him an Apple. After
which she also stroked him down on the right side, shook him by the hand, and
so bid him good night. The youth returned into the house, where he had been
lest well, when his Father and one Gibson went from him, but at their return,
which was within an hour or thereabout, they found him ill, and complaining of
his right side, in which the pain continued the most part of that night. And on
Monday following in the Evening, the Boy roasted the Apple he had of Jane
Brooks, and having eaten about half of it, was extremely ill, and sometimes
speechless, but being recovered, he told his Father, that a Woman of the Town
on the Sunday before, had given him that Apple, and that she stroked him on the
side. He said he knew not her name, but should her person, if he saw her. Upon
this Jones was advised to invite the Women of Shepton to come to his House,
upon the occasion of his Sons illness, and the Child told him, that in case the
Woman should come in when he was in his Fit, if he were not able to speak, he
would give him an intimation by a Jogg, and desired that his Father would then
lead him through the room, for he said he would put his hand upon her, if she
were there. After this he continuing very ill, many Women came daily to see
him. And Jane Brooks the Sunday after, came in with Two of her Sisters, and
several other Women of the Neighborhood were there.

Upon her coming in, the Boy was taken so ill, that for some time he could not
see nor speak, but having recovered his sight, he gave his Father the Item, and
he led him about the Room. The Boy drew toward Jane Brooks, who was behind her
two Sisters among the other Women, and put his hand upon her, which his Father
perceiving, immediately scratcheth her Face and drew Blood from her. The youth
then presently cried out that he was well, and so he continued seven or eight
days. But then meeting with Alice Coward, Sister to Jane Brooks, who passing by
said to him [How do you my Hony] he presently fell ^ll again. And after that,
the said Coward and Brooks often appeared to him. The Boy would describe the
Clothes and Habit they were in at the time exactly, as the Constable and others
have found upon repairing to them, though Brooks's house was at a good distance
from Jones's. This they often tried, and always found the Boy right in his
Descriptions.

On a certain Sunday about Noon, the Child being in a Room with his Father and
one Gibson, and in his fit, he on the sudden called out, that he saw Jane
Brooks on the Wall, and pointed to the place, where immediately Gibson struck
with a Knife. Upon which the Boy cried out, [O Father, cooz Gibson has cut
Jane Brooks's hand, and it is Bloody] The Father and Gibson immediately repaired
to the Constable a discreet Person, and acquainting him with what had passed,
desired him to go with them to Jane Brooks's house, which he did. They found
her sitting in her room on a stool with one hand over the other. The Constable
asked her how she did? she answered, not well. He asked again why she sat with
one hand over the other? she replied, she was wont to do so. He enquired if any
thing were amiss with her hand? her answer was, it was well enough. The
Constable desired he might see the hand that was under, which she being
unwilling to show him, he drew it out and found it bloody according to what the
Boy had said. Being asked how it came so, she said 'twas scratched with a great
Pin.

On the Eighth of December, 1657. The Boy, Jane Brooks, and Alice Coward,
appeared at Castle-Cary before the Justices, Mr. Hunt and Mr. Carry. The Boy
having begun to give his Testimony, upon the coming in of the two Women and
their looking on him was instantly taken Speechless; and so remained till the
Women were removed out of the room, and then in a short time upon examination
he gave a full relation of the mentioned particulars.

On the Eleventh of January following, the Boy was again examined by the same
Justices at Shepton Mallet, and upon the sight of Jane Brooks was again taken
Speechless, but was not so afterward when Alice Coward came into the room to
him.

On the next appearance at Shepton, which was on the Seventeenth of February,
there were present many Gentlemen, Ministers and others. The Boy fell into his
fit upon the sight of Jane Brooks, and lay in a Man's Arms like a dead Person;
the Woman was then willed to lay her hand on him, which she did, and he
thereupon started and sprang out in a very strange and unusual manner. One of
the Justices to prevent all possibilities of Legerdemain, caused Gibson and the
rest to stand off from the Boy, and then that Justice himself held him; the
Youth being blindfolded, the Justice called as if Brooks should touch him, but
winked to others to do it, which two or three successively did, but the Boy
appeared not concerned. The Justice then called on the Father to take him, but
had privately before desired one Mr. Geoffry Strode, to bring Jane Brooks to
touch him at such a time as he should call for his Father, which was done, and
the Boy immediately sprang out after a very odd and violent fashion. He was
after touched by several Persons and moved not, but Jane Brooks being again
caused to put her hand upon him, he started and sprang out twice or thrice as
before. All this while he remained in his fit and some time after; and being
then laid on a bed in the same room, the People present could not for a long
time bow either of his Arms or Legs.

Between the mentioned 15. of Nov. and the 11. of Jan. the two Women appeared
often to the Boy, their Hands cold, their Eyes staring, and their Lips and
Cheeks looking pale. In this manner on a Thursday about Noon, the Boy being
newly laid into his bed, Jane Brooks and Alice Coward appeared to him, and told
him that what they had begun they could not perform. But if he would say no
more of it, they would give him Money, and so put a Twopence into his Pocket.
After which they took him out of his bed, laid him on the ground, and vanished,
and the Boy was found by those that came next into the room lying on the flour,
as if he had been dead. The Twopence was seen by many, and when it was put
into the fire and hot, the Boy would fall ill; but as soon as it was taken out
and cold, he would be again as well as before. This was seen and observed by a
Minister a discreet Person, when the Boy was in one room and the Twopence
(without his knowledge) put into the fire in another, and this was diverse times
tried in the presence of several Persons.

Between the 8. of Dec. and the 17. of Feb. in the Year mentioned, diverse
Persons at sundry times heard in the Boy a noise like the croaking of a Toad,
and a voice within him saying, Jane Brooks, Alice Coward, twelve times in near
a quarter of an hour. At the same time some held a Candle before the Boys face,
and earnestly looked on him, but could not perceive the least motion of his
Tongue, Teeth or Lips, while the voice was heard.

On the 25. of Feb. between two and three in the Afternoon, the Boy being at
the house of Richard Isles in Shepton Mallet, went out of the room into the
Garden, Isles his Wife followed him, and was within two Yards when she saw him
rise up from the ground before her, and so mounted higher and higher till he
passed in the Air over the Garden wall, and was carried so above ground more
than 30 Yards, falling at last at one Jordan's Door at Shepton, where he was
found as dead for a time. But coming to himself told Jordan, that Jane Brooks
had taken him up by the Arm out of Isles his Garden, and carried him in the Air
as is related.

The Boy at several other times was gone on the sudden, and upon search after
him found in another room as dead, and at sometimes strangely hanging above the
ground, his hands being flat against a great Beam in the top of the room, and
all his Body two or three foot from ground. There he has hung a quarter of an
hour together, and being afterward come to himself, he told those that found
him, that Jane Brooks had carried him to that place and held him there. Nine
People at a time saw the Boy so strangely hanging by the Beam.

From the 15. of Nov. to the 10. of March following, he was by reason of his
fits much wasted in his body and unspirited, but after that time, being the day
the two Women were sent to Gaol, he had no more of those fits.

Jane Brooks was Condemned and Executed at Charde Assizes, March 26. 1658.

This is the sum of Mr. Hunts Narrative, which concludes with both the Justices
attestation, thus:

The aforesaid passages were some of them seen by us: and the rest and some
other remarkable ones, not here set down, were upon the examination of several
credible witnesses taken upon Oath before us.

Subscribed;

Rob. Hunt, John Carry.

This I think is good evidence of the being of Witches; if the Sadducee be not
satisfied with it, I would fain know what kind of Proof he would expect. Here
are the Testimonies of sense, the Oaths of several credible attesters, the nice
and deliberate scrutiny of quick-sighted and judicious examiners, and the
judgment of an Assize upon the whole. And now the security of all our lives and
fortunes depends upon no greater circumstances of evidence than these. If such
proof may not be credited, no Fact can be proved, no wickedness can be
punished, no right can be determined, Law is at an end, and blind Justice
cannot tell how to decide any thing.

ADVERTISEMENT.
The most fit Advertisement here is Mr. Glanvills Transition to fresh
Evidences, out of Mr. Hunts examinations, which is this. Thus far, says he,
the Evidence of Fact went in the former Editions, but having resolved upon this
Reenforcement, I writ again to my Honored Friend Mr. Hunt, knowing that he had
more materials for my purpose, and such as would afford proof sufficient to any
modest doubter. In Answer he was pleased to send me his Book of Examinations of
Witches, which he kept by him fairly written. It contains the discovery of such
an hellish Knot of them, and that discovery so clear and plain, that perhaps
there has not yet any thing appeared to us with stronger Evidence to confirm
the belief of Witches. And had not his discoveries and endeavors met with
great opposition and discouragements from some then in Authority, the whole
Clan of those hellish Confederates in these parts had been justly exposed and
punished. Out of that Book I have Collected some main instances, the clearness
of which I think will be enough to overcome and silence any indifferent
prejudice. But some are so settled and obdurate, that no proof in the World is
sufficient to remove them. I begin with the Witchcrafts of Elizabeth Style.

RELAT. III.
Which contains the Witchcrafts of Elizabeth Style of Bayford, Widow.

THis Elizabeth Style of Stoke Trister, in the County of Somerset, was accused
by diverse Persons of Credit upon Oath before Mr. Hunt, and particularly and
largely confessed her guilt her self, which was found by the Jury at her Trial
at Taunton; But she prevented Execution by dying in Gaol, a little before the
expiring of the term her Confederate Demon had set for her enjoyment of
Diabolical pleasures in this life. I have shortened the examinations, and cast
them into such an order, as I think fittest for the rendering the matter clear
and intelligible.

1. Exam. Rich. Hill of Stoke Trister, in the County of Somerset Yeoman, being
examined upon Oath, Jan. 23. 1664. before Rob. Hunt, Esquire one of His Majesty's
Justices for that County, concerning the bewitching of his Daughter by Eliz.
Style, declares, That his Daughter Eliz. Hill, about the Age of 13 Years, has
been for about two Months last past taken with very strange fits which have
held her an hour, two, three and more; and that in those fits the Child has
told her Father, the Examinant and others, that one Eliz. Style of the same
Parish appeared to her, and is the Person that Torments her. She also in her
fits usually tells what Clothes Eliz. Style has on at the time, which the
informant and others have seen and found true.

He says further, that about a Fortnight before Christmas last, he told Style
that his Daughter spoke much of her in her fits, and did believe that she was
bewitched by her. Whereupon Francis White, and Walter, and Robert Thick being
present, willed her to complain to the Justice against him for accusing of her.
But she having used several put-offs, said she would do worse than fetch a
Warrant. After which the Girl grew worse than before, and at the end of a fit
she tells the Examinant when she shall have another, which happens accordingly,
and affirms, that Style tells her when the next fit shall come. He informs
further, that Monday Night after Christmas day about Nine of the Clock, and
four or five times since about the same hour of the Night, his Daughter has
been more Tormented than formerly, and that though held in a Chair by four or
five People, sometimes six, by the Arms, Legs, and Shoulders, she would rise
out of her Chair, and raise her body about three or four foot high. And that
after, in her fits, she would have holes made in her Hand-wrists, Face, Neck,
and other parts of her Body, which the Informant and others that saw them
conceived to be with Thorns. For they saw Thorns in her Flesh, and some they
hooked out. That upon the Child's pointing with her Finger from place to place,
the Thorns and Holes immediately appeared to the Informant and others looking
on. And as soon as the Child can speak after the fit, she says that Widow
Style did prick her with Thorns in those several places, which was horrible
Torment, and she seemed to the Informant and others standing by, to be in
extreme pain and torture. The Child has been so tormented and pricked with
Thorns four several Nights, at which times the Informant and many other People
have seen the flesh rise up in little bunches in which Holes did appear. The
Pricking held about a quarter of an hour at a time during each of the four
fits, and the Informant has seen the Child take out some of those Thorns.

The same Rich. Hill Examined Jan. 26. 1664. informs, that when he rode from
the Justices house with a Warrant to bring Styles before him, his Horse on a
sudden sat down on his breech and he could not after ride him, but as soon as
he atte^ed to get up, his Horse would sit down (...) paw with his feet before.
He says further, that since Styles was Examined before the Justice and made
her Consession to him, she has acknowledged to the Informant that she had hurt
his Daughter, and that one Anne Bishop, and Alice Duke, did join in bewitching
of her.

Taken upon Oath before me,

Rob. Hunt.

2. Exam. William Parsons Rector of Stoke Trister, in the County of Somerset,
Examined the 26. of Jan. 1664. before Rob. Hunt, Esquire concerning the bewitching
of Rich. Hill's Daughter says, That on Monday Night after Christmas day then
last past, he came into the room when Eliz. Hill was in her fit, many of his
Parishioners being present and looking on. He there saw the Child held in a
Chair by main force by the People, plunging far beyond the strength of nature;
foaming and catching at her own Arms and Clothes with her Teeth. This fit he
conceives held about half an hour. After some time, she pointed with her finger
to the left side of her Head, next to her left Arm, and then to her left Hand,
etc. and where she pointed he perceived a red spot to arise with a small black
in the midst of it like a small Thorn. She pointed also to her Toes one after
another, and expressed great sense of Torment. This latter fit he guesses
continued about a quarter of an hour, during most or all of which time her
stomach seemed to swell, and her head where she seemed to be pricked did so very
much. She sat foaming much of the time, and the next day after her fit, she
showed the Examinant the places where the Thorns were stuck in, and he saw the
Thorns in those places.

Taken upon Oath before me Subscribed,

Rob. Hunt.

William Parsons Rector of Stoke Trister.

3. Exam. Nicholas Lambert of Bayford, in the County of Somerset Yeoman,
Examined upon Oath before Rob. Hunt, Esquire Jan. 30. 1664. concerning the
bewitching of Rich. Hill's Daughter by Elizabeth Style, testifies, That Monday
after Christmas day last, being with others in the house of Rich. Hill, he saw
his Daughter Elizabeth taken very ill, and in fits that were so strong that six
Men could not hold her down in a Chair in which she was sat, but that she
would raise the Chair up in spite of their utmost force. That in her fits
being not able to speak, she would rest her body as one in great Torment, and
point with her Finger to her Neck, Head, Hand-wrists, Arms and Toes. And he,
with the rest looking on the places to which she pointed, saw on the sudden
little red spots arise with little black ones in the midst, as if Thorns were
stuck in them, but the Child then only pointed without touching her flesh with
her Finger.

Taken upon Oath before me

Rob. Hunt.

4. Exam. Richard Vining of Stoke Trister Butcher, Examined Jan. 26. 1664.
before Rob. Hunt, Esquire concerning the bewitching of his Wife by Eliz. Style,
says, That about two or three days before S. James's day three years since or
thereabou^ his late Wife Agnes fell out with Eliz. Style, and within two or
three days after she was taken with a grievous pricking in her Thigh, which
pain continued for a long time, till after some Physic taken from one Hallet,
she was at some ease for three or four weeks. About the Christmas after the
mentioned S. James's day, Style came to the Examinants house, and gave Agnes
his Wife two Apples, one of them a very fair red Apple, which Style desired her
to eat, which she did, and in a few hours was taken ill and worse than ever she
had been before. Upon this, the Examinant went to one Mr. Compton, who lived in
the Parish of Ditch-Eate, (the same Person that showed my Friend his Wife in a
Glass, as I have related in the story of Mr. Mompesson) for Physic for his
Wife. Compton told him he could do her no good, for that she was hurt by a near
Neighbor, who would come into his house and up into the Chamber where his Wife
was, but would go out again without speaking. After Vining came home, being in
the Chamber with his Wife, Style came up to them, but went out again without
saying a word. Agnes the Wife continued in great pain till Easter Eve
following, and then she dyed. Before her Death her Hip rotted and one of her
Eyes swelled out, she declared to him then and at several times before, that
she believed Eliz. Style had bewitched her, and that she was the cause of her
Death.

Taken upon Oath before me,

Rob. Hunt.

Whilst the Justice was Examining Style at Wincaunton, (which is not above a
Mile and a half from Stoke Trister) upon the former evidence against her, he
observed that Rich. Vining looked very earnestly upon him. Whereupon he asked
Vining if he had any thing to say unto him. He answered that Style had
bewitched his Wife, and told the manner how, as is in his deposition related.
The Woman Style upon this seemed appaled and concerned, and the Justice saying
to her, You have been an old sinner, etc. You deserve little mercy: the
replied, I have asked God mercy for it. Mr. Hunt asked her, why then she would
continue in such ill courses? she said the Devil tempted her: and then began to
make some Confession of his actings with her. Upon this the Justice sent her to
the Constables house at Bayford, which is in the Parish of Stoke Trister, (the
Constable was one Mr. Gapper) and the next Morning went thither himself,
accompanied with two Persons of quality Mr Bull, and Mr Court, now Justices of
the Peace in this County.

Now before I proceed further in the story, I shall take notice that here are
Three credible witnesses, swearing to the same particulars, in that the Child
Elizabeth Hill was sometimes in strange fits, in which her strength was
increased beyond the proportion of Nature, and the force of diverse Men; that
then she pointed to the parts of her Body, where they saw red spots arising,
and black specks in the midst of them, that she complained she was pricked with
Thorns, and two of them saw Thorns in the places of which she complained. Some
of which Thorns, one swears that he and others saw hooked out, and that the
Girl her self pulled out others; that in her sits she declared Style appears to
her (as Jane Brooks did to Richard Jones, in the former Relation) and tells her
when she shall have another fit, which happens accordingly; that she describes
the Clothes the Woman has on, exactly as they find. But notwithstanding, all
this shall be Melancholy and Fancy, or Legerdemain, or natural Distemper, or
any thing but Witchcraft, or the Fact shall be denied, and the three Witnesses
perjured, though this confidence against the Oaths of sober Men, tend to the
overthrow of all Testimony and History, and the rendering all Laws useless. I
shall therefore proceed to further proof, and such as will abundantly
strengthen this. It is the confession of Style her self.

I left Mr. Hunt, and the other two Gentlemen at the Constables house, where
Style was, upon business of further Examination, where she enlarged upon the
Confession she had before begun to make, and declared the whole matter at that
and two other times after in the particulars that follow.

5. Exam. Elizabeth Styles her Confession of her Witchcrafts, Jan. 26. and 30.
and Feb. 7. 1664. before Rob. Hunt Esquire She then confessed, that the Devil about
Ten years since, appeared to her in the shape of a handsome Man, and after of a
black Dog. That he promised her Money, and that she should live gallantly, and
have the pleasure of the World for Twelve years, if she would with her Blood
sign his Paper, which was to give her Soul to him, and observe his Laws, and
that he might suck her Blood. This after four solicitations, the Examinant
promised him to do. Upon which he pricked the fourth Finger of her right hand,
between the middle and upper joint (where the sign at the Examination remained)
and with a drop or two of her Blood, she signed the Paper with an [O]. Upon
this the Devil gave her Sixpence, and vanished with the Paper.

That since he has appeared to her in the shape of a Man, and did so on
Wednesday seven-night past, but more usually he appears in the likeness of a
Dog, and Cat, and a Fly like a Millar, in which last he usually sucks in the
Poll about four of the Clock in the Morning, and did so Jan. 27. and that it
usually is pain to her to be so sucked.

That when she has a desire to do harm, she calls the Spirit by the name of
Robin, to whom when he appears, she uses these words, O Satan give me my
purpose. She then tells him what she would have done. And that he should so
appear to her, was part of her Contract with him.

That about a Month ago he appearing, she desired him to torment one Elizabeth
Hill, and to thrust Thorns into her flesh, which he promised to do, and the
next time he appeared, he told her he had done it.

That a little above a Month since this Examinant, Alice Duke, Anne Bishop and
Mary Penny, met about nine of the Clock in the Night, in the Common near
Trister Gate, where they met a Man in black Clothes with a little Band, to whom
they did Courtesy and due observance, and the Examinant verily believes that
this was the Devil. At that time Alice Duke brought a Picture in Wax, which was
for Elizabeth Hill. The Man in black took it in his Arms, anointed its
Forehead, and said, I Baptize thee with this Oil, and used some other words.
He was Godfather, and the Examinant and Anne Bishop Godmothers. They called it
Elizabeth or Bess. Then the Man in Black, this Examinant, Anne Bishop, and
Alice Duke stuck Thorns into several places of the Neck, Hand-wrists, Fingers,
and other parts of the said Picture. After which they had Wine, Cakes and
Roastmeat (all brought by the Man in black) which they did eat and drink. They
danced and were merry, were bodily there, and in their Clothes.

She further says, that the same persons met again, at or near the same place
about a Month since, when Anne Bishop brought a Picture in Wax, which was
Baptized John, in like manner as the other was, the Man in black was Godfather,
and Alice Duke and this Examinant Godmothers. As soon as it was Baptized, Anne
Bishop stuck two Thorns into the Arms of the Picture, which was for one Robert
Newman's Child of Wincaunton. After they had eaten, drank, danced and made
merry, they departed.

That she with Anne Bishop, and Alice Duke met at another time in the Night, in
a ground near Marnhul, where also met several other persons. The Devil then
also there in the former shape, Baptized a Picture by the name of Anne or
Rachel Hatcher. The Picture one Durnford's Wife brought, and stuck Thorns in
it. Then they also made merry with Wine and Cakes, and so departed.

She says, before they are carried to their meetings, they anoint their
Foreheads, and Hand-wrists with an Oil the Spirit brings them (which smells
raw) and then they are carried in a very short time, using these words as they
pass, Thout, tout a tout, tout, throughout and about. And when they go off from
their Meetings, they say, Rentum Tormentum.

That at their first meeting, the Man in black bids them welcome, and they all
make low obeisance to him, and he delivers some Wax Candles like little
Torches, which they give back again at parting. When they anoint themselves,
they use a long form of words, and when they stick in Thorns into the Picture
of any they would torment they say, A Pox on thee, I Will spite thee.

That at every meeting before the Spirit vanishes away, he appoints the next
meeting place and time, and at his departure there is a foul smell. At their
meeting they have usually Wine or good Beer, Cakes, Meat or the like. They eat
and drink really when they meet in their bodies, dance also and have Music.
The Man in black sits at the higher end, and Anne Bishop usually next him. He
uses some words before meat, and none after, his voice is audible, but very
low.

That they are carried sometimes in their Bodies and their Clothes, sometimes
without, and as the Examinant thinks their Bodies are sometimes left behind.
When only their Spirits are present, yet they know one another.

When they would bewitch Man, Woman or Child, they do it sometimes by a Picture
made in Wax, which the Devil formally Baptizeth. Sometimes they have an Apple,
Dish, Spoon or other thing, from their evil Spirit, which they give the party
to whom they would do harm. Upon which they have power to hurt the person that
eats or receives it. Sometimes they have power to do mischief by a touch or
curse, by these they can mischief Cattle, and by cursing without touching; but
neither without the Devils leave.

That she has been at several general meetings in the night at High Common,
and a Common near Motcombe, at a place near Marnhull, and at other places where
have met John Combs, John Vining, Richard Diokes, Thomas Boster or Bolster,
Thomas Dunning, James Bush a lame Man, Rachel King, Richard Lannen, a Woman
called Durnford, Alice Duke, Anne Bishop, Mary Penny and Christopher Ellen, all
which did obeisance to the Man in black, who was at every one of their
meetings. Usually they have at them some Picture Baptized.

The Man in black, sometimes plays on a Pipe or Cittern, and the company
dance. At last the the Devil vanishes, and all are carried to their several
homes in a short space. At their parting they say [A Boy! merry meet, merry
part.]

That the reason why she caused Elizabeth Hill to be the more tormented was,
because her Father had said, she was a Witch. That she has seen Alice Dukes
Familiar suck her, in the shape of a Cat, and Anne Bishops suck her in the
shape of a Rat.

That she never heard the name of God or Jesus Christ mentioned at any of their
meetings.

That Anne Bishop, about five years and a half since, did bring a Picture in
Wax to their meeting, which was Baptized by the Man in black, and called Peter.
It was for Robert Newman's Child at Wincaunton.

That some two years ago, she gave two Apples to Agnes Vining, late Wife of
Richard Vining, and that she had one of the Apples from the Devil, who then
appeared to her and told, That Appls would do Vining' s Wives business.

Taken in the presence of several grave and Orthodox Divines before me

Robert Hunt.

6. Exam. William Parsons Rector of Stoke Trister, Examined Feb. 7. 1664.
before Rob. Hunt Esquire concerning Elizabeth Style's confession, says, That he
heard Style before the Justice of Peace, at the time of her Examination
confess, as she has done also to the Examinant several times since, that she
was in Covenant with the Devil, that she had signed it with her Blood, that she
had been with the Devil at several meetings in the night, that at one time of
those meetings, there was brought a Picture in blackish Wax, which the Devil in
the shape of a Man in blakish Clothes, did Baptize by the name of Eliz. Hill,
that she did stick in one Thorn into the Hand-wrists of the Picture, that Alice
Duke stuck Thorns into the same, and that Anne Bishop and Mary Penny were
present at that meeting with the Devil.

Taken upon Oath before me Subscribed,

Robert Hunt.

William Parsons Rector of Stoke Trister.

This Confession of Styles was free and unforced, without any torturing or
watching, drawn from her by a gentle Examination, meeting with the Convictions
of a guilty Conscience. She confesses that she desired the Devil to torment
Eliz. Hill, by thrusting Thorns into her flesh, which he promised, and said he
had done it. That a Picture was Baptized for her the said Elizabeth, and that
She, the Familiar, and Alice Duke stuck Thorns into several places of the Neck,
Hand-wrists, Fingers and other parts thereof, which exactly agrees with the
strange effects related, concerning the torments the Child suffered, and this
mischief she confesses she did, because her Father said she was a Witch. She
confesses she gave two Apples to Vinings Wife, one of which she had from the
Devil, who said it would do the business, which suits also with the Testimony
of Vining concerning his Wife.

She confesses further, That the Devil uses to suck her in the Poll, about
four a Clock in the Morning, in the Form of a Fly like a Millar, concerning
which, let us hear Testimony (the other particulars of her Confession we shall
consider as occasion offers.)

7. Exam. Nicholas Lambert Examined again Jan. 26. 1664. before Rob. Hunt Esquire
concerning what happened after Styles confession, testifyeth, That Eliz. Style
having been Examined before the Justice, made her Confession, and committed to
the Officer, the Justice required this Examinant, William Thick and William
Read of Bayford to watch her, which they did; and this Informant sitting near
Style by the fire, and reading in the Practice of Piety, about Three of the
Clock in the Morning, there came from her Head a glistering bright Fly, about
an Inch in length, which pitched at first in the Chimney, and then vanished. In
less than a quarter of an hour after, there appeared two Flies more of a less
size, and another color, which seemed to strike at the Examinants hand, in
which he held his Book but missed it, the one going over, the other under at
the same time. He looking steadfastly then on Style, perceived her countenance
to change, and to become very black and ghastly, the fire also at the same time
changing its color; whereupon the Examinant, Thick and Read conceiving that
her Familiar was then about her, looked to her Poll, and seeing her Hair shake
very strangely took it up, and then a Fly like a great Millar flew out from the
place, and pitched on the Table-board, and then vanished away. Upon this the
Examinant, and the other two persons looking again in Styles Poll, found it
very red and like raw Beef. The Examinant asked her what it was that went out of
her Poll, she said it was a Butterfly, and asked them why they had not caught
it. Lambert said, they could not. I think so too, answered she. A little while
after, the Informant and the others looking again into her Poll, found the
place to be of its former color. The Examinant demanding again what the Fly
was, she confessed it was her Familiar, and that she felt it tickle in her
Poll, and that was the usual time when her Familiar came to her.

Taken upon Oath before me

Robert Hunt.

8. Exam. Eliz. Torwood of Bayford, Examined Feb. 7. 1664. before Rob. Hunt Esquire
concerning the mark sound about Eliz. Style after her Confession, Deposes,
That she together with Catharine White, Mary Day, Mary Bolster, and Bridget
Prankard, did a little after Christmas last, search Eliz. Style, and that in
her Poll they found a little rising which felt hard like a Kernel of Beef,
whereupon they suspecting it to be an ill mark, thrust a Pin into it, and
having drawn it out, thrust it in again the second time, leaving it sticking in
the flesh for some time, that the other Women might also see it.
Notwithstanding which, Style did neither at the first or second time make the
least show that she felt any thing. But after, when the Constable told her he
would thrust in a Pin to the place, and made a show as if he did, O Lord, said
she, do you prick me, whenas no one then touched her.

The Examinant further says, that Style has since confessed to her, that her
Familiar did use to suck her in the place mentioned, in the shape of a great
Millar or Butterfly.

Catharine White, Mary Day, Mary Bolster and Bridget Prankard do say, that the
abovesaid Examination of Eliz. Torwood is truth.

Taken upon Oath before me Rob. Hunt.

RELAT. IV.
Which is the Examination and Confession of Alice Duke, alias Manning another
Witch of Styles Knot) of Wincaunton, in the County of Somerset Widow, taken
Jan. 27. and Feb. 2. 7. 10. 21. An. 1664. before Robert Hunt Esquire.

THe Examinant says, That when she lived with Anne Bishop of Wincaunton, about
Eleven or Twelve years ago, Anne Bishop persuaded her to go with her into the
Churchyard in the nightime, and being come thither, to go backward round the
Church, which they did three times. In their first round, they met a Man in
black Clothes, who went round the second time with them, and then they met a
thing in the shape of a great black Toad, which leapt up against the Examinants
Apron. In their third round they met somewhat in the shape of a Rat, which
vanished away. After this the Examinant and Anne Bishop went home, but before
Anne Bishop went off, the Man in black said somewhat to her softly, which the
Informant could not hear.

A few days after, Anne Bishop speaking about their going round the Church,
told the Examinant, that now she might have her desire, and what she would wish
for. And shortly after, the Devil appeared to her in the shape of a Man,
promising that she should want nothing, and that if she cursed any thing with A
Pox take it, she should have her purpose, in case she would give her Soul to
him, suffer him to suck her Blood, keep his Secrets, and be his instrument to
do such mischief as he would set her about. All which, upon his second
appearing to her, she yielded to, and the Devil having pricked the fourth finger
of her right hand between the middle and upper joint (where the mark is yet to
be seen) gave her a Pen, with which she made a cross or mark with her Blood on
Paper or Parchment, that the Devil offered her for the confirmation of the
Agreement, which was done in the presence of Anne Bishop. And as soon as the
Examinant had signed it, the Devil gave her Sixpence, and went away with the
Paper or Parchment.

Further she confesses, That she has been at several meetings in Lie Common,
and other places in the night, and that her Forehead being first anointed with
a Feather dipped in Oil, she has been suddenly carried to the place of their
meeting. That about five or six Weeks since (or more) she met in the said
Common in the night; where were present Anne Bishop, Mary Penny of Wincaunton,
Elizabeth Style of Bayford, and a Man in black Clothes with a little Band, whom
she supposes to have been the Devil. At the meeting there was a Picture in
Wax, which the Man in black took in his Arms, and having anointed its Forehead
with a little greenish Oil, and using a few words, Baptized it by the name of
Elizabeth or Bess Hill, for the Daughter of Richard Hill. Then the Devil, this
Examinant, Anne Bishop, and Elizabeth Style stuck Thorns in the Neck, Head,
Hand-wrists, Fingers and other parts of the Picture, Saying, A Pex on thee,
I Will spite thee. This done, all sat down, a white Cloth being spread on the
ground, and did drink Wine, and eat Cakes and Meat. After all was ended, the
Man in black vanished, leaving an ugly smell at parting. The rest were on a
sudden conveyed to their homes.

On Monday night after Christmas day last, she met the same Company again, near
about the same place, and then Anne Bishop (who was there in a green Apron, a
French Wastcoat and a red Petticoat) brought in her Apron a Picture in blackish
Wax, which the Devil Baptized as before, by the name of John Newman, for the
Son of Rob. Newman of Wincaunton, and then the Devil first, after Anne Bishop
and this Examinant thrust in Thorns into the Picture, Anne Bishop sticking in
two Thorns into the Arms of it. The Picture Anne Bishop carried away with her.
They were all there present in their Clothes, and the Devil in the shape of a
Man in black.

About Five years and a half since, the same persons were at the Baptizing of
another Image, by the name of Peter Newman, another Son of Robert Newman, both
which are since dead, and then Anne Bishop desired the Examinant to join with
her in bewitching of Peter and John Newman.

At another time she was carried to a meeting in the night, to a green place
near Marnhull as she was then told, where were present Anne Bishop, Eliz.
Style, Mary Penny, and some unknown to her. Then also an Image in Wax was
Baptized by the Devil, in the fore-related manner, by the name of Anne or
Rachel Hatcher one of Marnhull, as she was then informed. After the Ceremony
was ended, they had Wine, Cakes, etc.

She likewise confesses, that she was at another such meeting, where twelve
persons were present, many of whom were unknown to her, but she took notice of
one lame Man in blackish Hair among them, and of the Devil as before.

She says that after their meetings, they all make very low obeysances to the
Devil, who appears in black Clothes and a little Band. He bids them welcome at
their coming, and brings Wine or Beer, Cakes, Meat, or the like. He sits at the
higher end, and usually Anne Bishop sits next him. They eat, drink, dance, and
have Music. At their parting they use to say, Merry meet merry part, and that
before they are carried to their meetings, their Foreheads are anointed with
greenish Oil that they have from the Spirit which smells raw. They for the most
part are carried in the Air. As they pass, they say, Thout, tout a tout, tout,
throughout and about. Passing back they say, Rentum Tormentum, and another word
which she does not remember.

She consesseth that her Familiar does commonly suck her right Breast about
seven at night, in the shape of a little Cat of a dunnish color, which is as
smooth as a Want, and when she is sucked, she is in a kind of a Trance.

That she hurt Thomas Garret's Cowes, because he refused to write a Petition
for her.

That she hurt Thomas Conway, by putting a Dish into his Hand, which Dish she
had from the Devil, she gave it him to give his Daughter for good hansel.

That she hurt Dorothy the Wife of George Vining, by giving an Iron slate to
put into her steeling Box.

That being angry with Edith Watts, the Daughter of Edmond Watts for treading
on her Foot, she cursed Edith with a Pox on you, and after touched her, which
has done the said Edith much harm, for which she is sorry.

That being provoked by Swanton's first Wife, she did before her death curse
her, with a Pox on you, believes she did thereby hurt her, but denies she did
bewitch Mr. Swanton's Cattle.

She says, That when the Devil does any thing for her, she calls for him by
the name of Robin, upon which he appears, and when in the shape of a Man, she
can hear him speak, but his voice is very low. He promised her when she made
her contract with him, that she should want nothing, but ever since she has
wanted all things.

Taken before me

Rob. Hunt.

1. Exam. Thomas Conway of Wincaunton, in the County of Somerset, Examined Feb.
12. 1664. before Robert Hunt Esquire, concerning Alice Duke, informs, That
about Twelve Months since Alice Duke alias Manning, brought a little Pewter
Dish to this Informant, and told him it was good hansel for his Daughter. The
Examinant willed the said Alice to carry it to her, she being within by the
fire, but she forced the Dish into his hand and went away. Shortly after he was
taken extremely ill in all his Limbs. Of which illness the Physicians, whom he
applied himself to, could give no account. When she went from him, she was very
angry and muttered much, because he would not sign a Petition on her behalf.
She has confessed to him since that she had the Dish from the Devil, and gave
it to him on purpose to hurt him. He has been, and is since in great torment,
and much weakened and wasted in his Body, which he imputes to the evil practices
of Alice Duke.

Taken upon Oath before me

Rob. Hunt.

2. Exam. Mary the Wife of Tho. Conway, Examined March 6. 1664. before Rob.
Hunt Esquire concerning Alice Duke, says, That her Husband Tho. Conway about a
year ago delivered her a little Pewter Dish, telling her he had it from Alice
Duke for good hansel for his Daughter, who had lately lain in. In this Dish she
warmed a little Deer-sewet and Rose Water, anointing her Daughters Nipples with
it, which put her to extreme pain. Upon which suspecting harm from the dish,
she put it into the fire, which then presently vanished and nothing of it could
afterward be found. After, when she anointed her Daughters Nipples with the
same Deer-sewet and Rose Water, warmed in a spoon, she complained not of any
pain. She further says, That her Husband after he had received the dish from
the hands of Alice Duke, was taken ill in all his Limbs, and held for a long
time in a very strange manner.

Taken upon Oath before me

Rob. Hunt.

3. Exam. Edward Watts of Wincaunton, in the County of Somerset, Examined Mar.
6. 1664: before Robert Hunt, Esquire concerning Alice Duke, says, That he has a
Child called Edith, about Ten years of Age, who for the space of half a year
has languished and pined away, and that she told him that treading one day on
the Toe of Alice Duke, she in great anger cursed her with a Pox on thee, and
that from that time the Child began to be ill and to pine away, which she has
done ever since.

Taken upon Oath before me

Rob. Hunt.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Besides the plain agreement betwixt the Witnesses, and the Witches own
Confession, it may be worth the taking notice here, how well her confession of
having her Familiar such her in the shape of a Cat, agrees with Eliz. Style 's
Confession, that she had seen Alice Dukes Familiar suck her in that shape. As
also how the bewitching of Edward Watts 's Child by Alice Duke her saying, a
Pox on her, agrees with the promise of the Devil to her, which is expressly,
That if she cursed any thing with a Pox take it, she should have her purpose.
She also testifying of the Baptizing the Image of Eliz. Hill, and of those
forms of words, Thout, tout a tout, and Rentum Tormentum at their going to
their meetings and departing, plainly shows that these things are not
transacted in dreams but in reality. The Devil also as in other stories leaving
an ill smell behind him, seems to imply the reality of the business, those
ascititious particles he held together in his visible vehicle, being loosened
at his vanishing, and so offending the nostrils by their floating and diffusing
themselves in the open Air.

RELAT. V.
Which is the Examination and Consession of Christian Green, Aged about thirty
three years, Wife of Rob. Green of Brewham, in the County of Somerset, taken
before Rob. Hunt, Esquire March 2. 1664.

THis Examinant says, That about a year and a half since (she being in great
poverty) one Catharine Green of Brewham, told her, that if she would she might
be in a better condition, and then persuaded her to make a Covenant with the
Devil. Being afterward together in one Mr. Hussey's Ground in Brewham Forest
about Noon, Catharine called for the Devil, who appeared in the shape of a Man
in blackish Clothes, and said somewhat to Catharine which Christian could not
hear. After which the Devil (as she conceived him) told the Examinant that she
should want neither Clothes, Victuals, nor Money, if she would give her Body
and Soul to him, keep his secrets, and suffer him to suck her once in twenty
four hours, which at last upon his and Catharine Greens persuasion she yielded
to; then the Man in black pricked the fourth finger of her Right Hand between
the middle and upper joints, where the sign yet remains, and took two drops of
her blood on his finger, giving her fourpence halfpenny, with which she after
bought Bread in Brewham. Then he spoke again in private with Catharine and
vanished, leaving a smell of Brimstone behind.

Since that time the Devil (she says) has and does usually su^k her left
Breast about five of the Clock in the Morning in the likeness of an Hedg-hog,
bending, and did so on Wednesday Morning last. She says it is painful to her,
and that she is usually in a trance when she is sucked.

She says also, that Catharine Green, and Margaret Agar of Brewham, have told
her that they are in Covenant with the Devil, and confesses that she has been
at several meetings in the Night in Brewham Common, and in a Ground of Mr.
Hussey's, that she has there met with Catharine Green and Margaret Agar, and
three or four times with Mary Warberton of Brewham, That in all those meetings
the Devil has been present in the shape of a Man in black Clothes. At their
first coming he bids them welcome, but always speaks very low.

That at a meeting about three weeks or a Month since at or near the former
place, Margaret Agar brought thither an Image in Wax, for Elizabeth the Wife of
Andrew Cornish of Brewham, and the Devil in the shape of a Man in black Clothes
did Baptize it, and after stuck a Thorn into its Head; that Agar stuck one into
its Stomach, and Catharine Green one into its side. She further says, that
before this time, Agar said to her this Examinant, that she would hurt Eliz.
Cornish, who since the Baptizing of the Picture has been taken and continues
very ill.

She says, that three or four days before Jos. Talbot of Brewham dyed,
Margaret Agar told her that she would rid him out of the World, because being
Overseer of the Poor he made her Children go to Service, and refused to give
them such good Clothes as she desired. And since the Death of Talbot, she
confessed to the Examinant, that she had bewitched him to Death. He dyed about a
year since, was taken ill on Friday, and dyed about Wednesday after.

That her Mother-in-Law Catharine Green, about five or six years ago was taken
in a strange manner. One day one Eye and Cheek did swell, another day another,
and so she continued in great pain, till she dyed. Upon her Death she several
times said in the hearing of the Examinant, that her Sister-in-Law Catharine
Green had bewitched her, and the Examinant believes that she bewitched her to
Death.

That a little before Michaelmas last, the said Catharine cursed the Horses of
Rob. Walter of Brewham, saying, A Murrain on them Horses to Death. Upon which
the Horses being three, all dyed.

Taken before me Rob. Hunt.

RELAT. VI.
Containing further Testimonies of the villainous feats of that rampant hagg
Margaret Agar of Brewham, in the County of Somerset.

1. Exam. ELizabeth Talbot of Brewham, Examined March 7. 1664. before Rob.
Hunt, Esquire says, That about three weeks before her Father Jos. Talbot dyed,
Margaret Agar fell out with him, because he being Overseer for the Poor, did
require Agar's Daughter to go to Service, and said to him, that he was proud of
his living, but swore by the blood of the Lord, that he should not long enjoy
it. Within three weeks of which he was suddenly taken in his body as if he had
been stabbed with Daggers, and so continued four or five days in great pain and
then dyed.

Rob. Hunt.

2. Exam. Jos. Smith of Brewham, Husbandman, Examined March 15. 1664. before
Rob, Hunt, Esquire says, That some few days before Jos. Talbot dyed, he heard
Margaret Agar rail very much at him, because he had caused her Daughter to go
to Service, and said, that he should not keep his living but be drawn out upon
four Men's shoulders. That she should tread upon his jaws, and see the grass
grow over his head, which she swore by the blood of the Lord.

Taken upon Oath before

Rob. Hunt.

3. Exam. Mary the Wife of William Smith of Brewham, Examined March 8. 1664.
before Rob. Hunt, Esquire says, That about two years since Margaret Agar came to
her and called her Whore, adding, A Plague take you for an old Whore, I shall
live to see thee rot on the Earth before I die, and thy Cows shall fall and die
at my feet. A short time after which, she had three Cows that died very
strangely, and two of them at the door of Margaret Agar. And ever since the
Examinant has consumed and pined away, her Body and her Bowels rotting, and
she verily believes that her Cattle and her self were bewitched by Agar.

Taken upon Oath before

Rob. Hunt.

4. Exam. Catharine Green alias Cornish of Brewham, Widow, Examined May 16.
1665. before Rob. Hunt, Esquire says, That on Friday in the Evening, in the
beginning of March last, Margaret Agar came to her, and was earnest she should
go with her to a Ground called Husseys-knap, which she did, and being come
thither they saw a little Man in black Clothes with a little band. As soon as
they came to him Margaret Agar took out of her lap a little Picture in blackish
Wax, which she delivered to the Man in black, who stuck a Thorn into the Crown
of the Picture, and then delivered it back to Agar. Upon which she stuck a
Thorn toward the heart of the Picture, Cursing and saying, a Plague on you;
which she told the Examinant was done to hurt Eliz. Cornish, who as she has
been told has been very ill ever since that time.

That a little above a year since Jos. Talbot late of Brewham, being Overseer
for the Poor, did cause two of Agar's Children to go to Service. Upon which she
was very angry and said in the Examinants hearing a few days before he fell
sick and died, that she had trod upon the jaws of three of her Enemies, and
that she should shortly see Talbot rot and tread on his jaws. And when this
Examinant desired her not to hurt Talbot, she swore by the blood of the Lord,
she would confound him if she could. The day before he dyed, she said to the
Examinant, Gods wounds I Will go and see him, for I shall never see him more; and
the next day Talbot dyed.

That she heard Margaret Agar curse Mary Smith, and say, she should live to see
her and her Cattle fall and rot before her face.

Taken upon Oath before

Rob. Hunt.

5. Exam. Mary Green of Brewham, single Woman, Examined June 3. 1665. before
Rob. Hunt, Esquire says, That about a Month before Jos. Talbot late of Brewham
dyed, Margaret Agar fell out with him about the putting out of her Child to
Service. After that she saw a Picture in Clay or Wax in the hands of Agar,
which she said was for Talbot, the Picture she saw her deliver in Redmore, to
the Fiend in the shape of a Man in black about an hour in the Night, who stuck
a Thorn in or near the Heart of it, Agar stuck another in the Breast, and
Catharine Green, Alice Green, Mary Warberton, Henry Walter and Christian Green,
all of Brewham, were then and there present, and did all stick Thorns into the
Picture.

At that time Catharine Green spoke to Agar not to hurt Talbot, because she
received somewhat from him often times, but Agar replied, by the Lords blood
she would confound him, or words to that purpose.

That a little before Talbot was taken sick; Agar being in the house where the
Examinant lived, swore that she should e're long tread upon his jaws. And that
if Talbot made her Daughter go to Service for a year, yet if she came home in a
quarter it would be time enough to see him carried out upon four Men's shoulders
and to tread upon his jaws.

That on the day Talbot dyed, she heard Agar swear that she had now plagued
Talbot; and that being in company with her some time before, and seeing a dead
Horse of Talbot's drawn along by another of his Horses, she swore that that
Horse should be also drawn out to morrow, and the next day she saw the well
Horse also drawn out dead.

That above a Month before Margaret Agar was sent to Gaol, she saw her, Henry
Walter, Catharine Green, Jone Syms, Christian Green, Mary Warberton and others,
meet at a place called Husseys-knap in the Forest in the Night time, where met
them the Fiend in the shape of a little Man in black Clothes with a littleband,
to him all made obeysances, and at that time a Picture in Wax or Clay was
delivered by Agar to the Man in black, who stuck a Thorn into the Crown of it,
Margaret Agar one toward the Breast, Catharine Green in the side; after which
Agar threw down the Picture and said, there is Cornishes Picture with a Murrain
to it, or Plague on it. And that at both the meetings there was a noisome smell
of Brimstone.

That about two years since in the Night there met in the same place Agar,
Henry Walter, Catharine Green, Jone Syms, Alice Green and Mary Warberton. Then
also Margaret Agar delivered to the little Man in black a Picture in Wax, into
which he and Agar stuck Thorns, and Henry Walter thrust his Thumb into the side
of it. Then they threw it down and said, there is Dick Greens Picture with a
Pox in it. A short time after which Rich. Green was taken ill and dyed.

Further he says, That on Thursday Night before Whitsunday last, about the
same place met Catharine Green, Alice Green, Jone Syms, Mary Warberton, Dinah
and Dorothy Warberton and Henry Walter, and being met they called out Robin.
Upon which instantly appeared a little Man in black Clothes to whom all made
obeisance, and the little Man put his hand to his Hat, saying, How do ye?
speaking low but big. Then all made low obeysances to him again. That she has
seen Margaret Clark twice at the meetings, but since Margaret Agar was sent to
Prison she never saw her there.

Taken before me

Rob. Hunt.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Before we pass to other Relations, it will not be amiss further to remark upon
these taken out of the Examinations of Mr. Hunt: From the poisoned Apples that
Jane Brooks gave to Rich. Jones, and Eliz. Style to Agnes Vining, and the
poisoned Pewter-dish that Alice Duke put into the hands of Thomas Conway,
(which dish and apples they had from the Devil) we may observe in what a
peculiar sense Witches and Wizzards are called (...), Venefici and Veneficoe,
Poysoners. Not that they mischieve People ordinarily by natural Poisons, as
Arsenick and the like, but rather by some hellish malignancy infused into
things by the art and malice of the Devil, or by the steams of their own Body
which the Devil sucks. For the hand of Jane Brooks stroaking down Rich. Jones
his side impressed a pain thereon.

We may observe also what an eximious Example of Moses his Mecassephah (the
word which he uses in that Law, Thou shall not suffer a Witch to live) Margaret
Agar is, and how fitly some interpreters render Mecassephim, Malefici, from the
great mischief they do and delight in. And what a great credit this Agar is to
J. Webster, and the rest of the Hagg-advocates, which would make them to be
mere couzening Queans or Melancholic Fopps that had nothing to do with the
Devil. As if the Man in black and a little band were but such another as J.
Webster, or any other Haggadvocate that in waggery acted the part of the Devil
in Husseys Knap, or any such like place of a Forest, and so after all quickly
and suddenly recoiling behind a bush and letting sly into the wind, the
deluded Haggs took it for the vanishing of the very Fiend and his perfuming the
Air with the smell of Brimstone. One that can resolve all the feats of the
Hartummim of Egypt into tricks of Legerdemain, cannot ^e easily delude the
company with such a feat as this, the old Wives being thick of hearing and
carrying their spectacles not on their noses but in their pockets?

And lastly srom the Devils covenanting with the Witches for their Souls, it
may be observed that the old Haggs dealing bona fidde, and thinking they have
Souls surviving their bodies, are better Philosophers than the huffy Wits of
our Age that deny distinction of Soul and Body. But if they have not (as these
Huffers would have it) and the Haggs think so themselves, it is a pretty
Paradox that these old Fopps should be able to outwit the very Devil; who does
not in bartering for their Bodies and Souls buy a Pig in a poke, as the Proverb
is, but a poke without a Pig. But I rather believe that these huffing Wits, as
high as they are, may learn one true point of Philosophy from these Haggs and
their Familiars; these evil Spirits certainly making their bargains wisely
enough in covenanting for the Witches Soul. Which clause if it were not
expressed, the Soul were free from the Familiars jurisdiction after death.
Wherefore it is no contemptible argument these evil Spirits covenanting for the
Soul of the Witch, that they know the Soul survives the Body, and therefore
make their bargain sure for the possession of it as their Peculium after death.
Otherwise if the Soul were mortal they would tell the Wit^es so, the more
easily to precipitate them into (...) wickedness, and make them more eager by
their ministry to enjoy this present life. But this Doctrine is inconsistent
with the form of his Covenant, whereby they are assured to him after death.

RELAT. VII.
Touching Florence Newton an Irish Witch of Youghal, taken out of her Trial at
the Assizes held for the Country of Cork, Sept. 11. Ann. 1661.

THis Florence Newton was committed to Youghall Prison, by the Major of the
Town, March 24. 1661. for bewitching Mary Longdon, who gave evidence against
her at Cork Assizes, as follows. Mary Longdon being sworn and examined what she
could say against the said Florence Newton for any practice of Witchcraft upon
her self, and being bidden to look on the Prisoner, her countenance changed
pale, and she was very fearful to look toward her, but at last she did. And
being asked whether she knew her, she said she did, and wished she never had.
Being asked how long she had known her, she said for three or four years. And
that at Christmas last the said Florence came to the Deponent, at the House of
John Pyne in Youghall, where the Deponent was a Servant. And asked the Deponent
to give her a piece of Beef out of the Powdering-Tub. And the Deponent
answering her, that she could not give away her Masters Beef, she said Florence
seemed to be very angry, and said, thou had as good have given it me, and so
went away grumbling.

That about a week after, the Deponent being going to the Water with a Pail of
Cloth on her head, she met the said Florence Newton, who came full in her face,
and threw the Pail off her Head, and violently kissed her, and said, Mary, I pray
thee, let thee and I be friends, for I bear thee no ill will, and I pray thee
do thou bear me none. And that she the Deponent went afterward home, and that
within a few days after, she saw a Woman with a Vail over her face, stand by
her Bedside, and one standing by her like a little Old Man in silk Clothes,
and that this Man which she took to be a Spirit, drew the Vail from off the
Woman's Face, and then she knew it to be Goody Newton, and that the Spirit spoke
to the Deponent, and would have had her promise him to follow his advice, and
she should have all things after her own heart, to which she says, she
answered, that she would have nothing to say to him, for her trust was in the
Lord.

That within a Month after the said Florence had kissed her, she this Deponent
fell very ill of Fits or Trances, which would take her on the sudden, in that
violence that three or four Men could not hold her. And in her Fits she would
often be taken with Vomitings, and would Vomit up Needles, Pins, Horse-nails,
Stubbs, Wool and Straw, and that very often. And being asked whether she
perceived at these times what she Vomited? she said she did. For then she was
not in so great distraction as in other parts of her fits she was. And that a
little before the first beginning of her fits, several (and very many)
smallstones would fall upon her as she went up and down, and would ^llow her
from place to place, and from one room to another, and would hit her on the
head, shoulders, and arms, and fall to the ground and vanish away. And that she
and several others would see them both ^ll upon her, and on the ground, but
could never take them, save only some few, which she and her Master caught in
their hands. Amongst which one that had a hole in it she tied (as she was
advised) with a Leather thong to her Purse, but it was vanished immediately
though the Leather continued tied on a fast Knot.

That in her fits she often saw this Florence Newton, and cried out against her
for tormenting of her, for she says that she would several times stick Pins
into her Arms, and some of them so fast that a Man must pluck three or four
times to get out the Pin, and they were stuck betwixt the skin and the flesh.
That sometimes she should be removed out of her bed into another room,
sometimes she should be carried to the top of the house laid on a board betwixt
two Sollar Beams, sometimes put into a Chest, sometimes under a parcel of wool,
sometimes betwixt two Feather-beds on which she used to lie, and sometimes
betwixt the Bed and the Mat in her Masters Chamber in the day time. And being
asked how she knew she was thus carried about and disposed of, seeing in her
fits she was in a violent distraction? she answered, she never knew where she
was till they of the Family and the Neighbors with them would be taking her
out of the places whither she was so carried and removed. And being asked the
reason wherefore she cried out so much against the said Florence Newton in her
fits? she answered, because she saw her and felt her torturing.

And being asked how she could think it was Florence Newton that did her this
prejudice? she said, first because she threatened her, then because after she
had kissed her she sell into these fits, and that she both saw and felt her
tormenting. And lastly, that when the People of the Family by advice of the
Neighbors and consent of the Major, had sent for Florence Newton to come to
the Deponent, she was always worse when she was brought unto her, and her fits
more violent than at another time. And that after the said Florence was
committed at Youghall, the Deponent was not troubled, but was very well till a
little while after the said Florence was removed to Cork, and then the
Deponent was as ill as ever before. And the Major of Youghall one Mr. Mayre,
then sent to know whether the said Florence were bolted (as the Deponent was
told) and finding she was not, order was given to put the bolts on her, which
being done the Deponent says she was well again, and so has continued ever
since. And being asked whether she had such like fits before the said Florence
gave her the kiss, she says she never had any, but believes that with that
kiss she bewitched her, and the rather because she has heard from Nicholas Pyne
and others, that the said Florence had confessed as much

This Mary Longdon having closed up her Evidence, Florence Newton peeped at her
as it were betwixt the heads of the bystanders that interposed betwixt her and
the said Mary, and lifting up both her hands together as they were manacled
cast them in an angry violent kind of motion (as was seen and observed by W.
Aston,) toward the said Mary, as if she intended to strike at her if she could
have reached her, and said Now she is down. Upon which the maid fell suddenly
down to the ground like a stone, and fell into a most violent fit, that all the
People that could come to lay hands on her could scarce hold her, she biting
her own Arms and shreeking out in a most hideous manner to the amazement of all
the beholders. And continuing so for about a quarter of an hour (the said
Florence Newton sitting by her self all that while pinching her own Hands and
Arms as was sworn by some that observed her) the maid was ordered to be carried
out of Court and taken into a house. Whence several Persons after that, brought
word that the Maid was in a Vomiting fit, and they brought in several crooked
Pins and Straws and Wool, in white foam like spittle in great proportions.
Whereupon the Court having taken notice that the Maid had said she had been
very well when the said Florence was in bolts, and ill again when out of them,
till they were again put on her, demanded of the Jailer if she were in bolts or
no, to which he said she was not, but only manacled. Upon which order was
given to put on her bolts, and upon putting them on she cried out, she was
killed, she was undone, she was spoiled, why do you torment me thus? and so
continued complaining grievously for half a quarter of an hour. And then came
in a Messenger from the Maid and informed the Court the Maid was well. At which
Florence immediately and cholerickly uttered these words, She is not well yet.
And being demanded how she knew she was not well yet? she denied she said so,
though many in Court heard her say the words, and she said, if she did, she
knew not what she said, being old and disquieted and distracted with her
sufferings. But the Maid being reasonably well come to her self, was, before
the Court knew any thing of it, sent out of Town to Youghall, and so was no
further Examined by the Court.

The fit of the Maid being urged by the Court with all the Circumstances of it
upon Florence, to have been a continuance of her Devilish practice, she denied
it, and likewise the motion of her hands, or the saying, Now she is down,
though the Court saw the first, and the words were sworn by one Roger Moor. And
Thomas Harrison swore that he had observed the said Florence peep at her and
use that motion with her hands, and saw the Maid fall immediately upon that
motion, and heard the words, Now she is down, uttered.

Nicholas Stout was next produced by Mr. Attorney General, who being sworn and
Examined said, That he had often tried her, having heard say that Witches could
not say the Lords Prayer, whether she could say that Prayer or no* and sound
she could not. Whereupon she said she could say it, and had often said it. And
the C^rt being desired by her to hear her lay it, gave her leave. And four
times together after these words [give us this day our daily bread] she
continually said as we forgive them, leaving always out the words [and forgive
us our trespasses] upon which the Court appointed one near her to teach her
these words she so left out. But she either could not or would not say them,
using only these or the like words when these were repeated, Ay Ay trespasses,
that is the words. And being often pressed to utter the words as they were
repeated to her, she did not. And being asked the reason, she said she was old
and had a bad memory; and being asked how her memory served her so well for
other parts of the Prayer, and only fail her for that, she said she knew not,
neither could she help it.

John Pyne being likewise sworn and Examined, said that about January last the
said Mary Longdon being his Servant was much troubled with little Stones that
were thrown at her where ever she went, and that he has seen them come as if
they were thrown at her, others as if they dropped on her, and that he has
seen very great quantities of them, and that they would, after they had hit
her, fall on the ground, and then vanish, so that none of them could be found.
And further, that the Maid once caught one of them, and he himself another, and
one of them with a hole in it, she tied to her purse, but it vanished in a
little time, but the knot of the Leather that tied it remained unaltered. That
after the stones had thus haunted her, she fell into most grievous fits,
wherein she was so violently distracted, that sour Men would have very much ado
to hold her, and that in the highest extremity of her fits, she would cry out
against Gammer Newton for hurting and tormenting of her. That sometimes the
Maid would be reading in a Bible, and on a sudden he has seen the Bible struck
out of her Hand into the middle of the Room, and she immediately cast into a
violent fit. That in the fits he has seen two Bibles laid on her Breast, and
in the twinkling of an Eye they would be cast betwixt the two Beds the Maid lay
upon, sometime thrown into the middle of the Room, and that Nicholas Pyne held
the Bible in the Maids Hand so fast, that it being suddenly snatched away two
of the leaves were Torn. That in many other fits the Maid was removed
strangely, in the twinkling of an Eye, out of the bed, sometimes into the
bottom of a Chest with Linen, under all the Linen, and the Linen not at all
disordered, sometimes betwixt the two Beds she lay on, some^imes under a parcel
of Wool, sometimes betwixt his Bed and the Mat of it in another Room, and once
she was laid on a small deal Board, which lay on the top of the House betwixt
two Sollar Beams, where he was forced to rear up Ladders to have her fetched
down. That in her fits she has often Vomited up Wool, Pins, Horse-Nails,
Stubs, Straw, Needles and Moss, with a kind of white Foam or Spittle, and has
had several Pins stuck into her Arms and Hands, that sometimes a Man must pull
three or four times before he could pull one of them out, and some have been
stuck between the flesh and the Skin, where they might be perfectly seen, but
not taken ^ut, nor any place seen where they were put in. That when the Witch
was brought into the Room, where she was, she would be in more violent and
longer lasting fits than at other times. That all the time the Witch was at
liberty, the Maid was ill, and as soon as she was committed and bolted, she
recovered and was well, and that when the Witch was removed to Cork, the Maid
fell ill. And thereupon the Major of Youghall sent to see if she were bolted or
no, and to acquaint them the Maid was ill, and desire them if the Witch were
not bolted, they would bolt her. That she immediately mended and was as well as
ever she was: and when the Messenger came from Cork, and told them when the
Witch was bolted, it fell out to be the very time the Maid amended at Youghall.

Nicholas Pyne being sworn, says, That the second night after that the Witch
was in Prison, being 24 of March last, he and Joseph Thompson, Roger Hawkins,
and some others went to speak with her concerning the Maid, and told her that
it was the general Opinion of the Town that she had bewitched her, and desired
her to deal freely with them, whether she had bewitched her or no. She said she
had not bewitched her, but it may be she had over-looked her, and that there
was a great difference betwixt bewitching and over-looking, and that she could
not have done her any harm if she had not touched her, and that therefore she
had kissed her. And she said that what mischief she thought of at that time she
kissed her, that would fall upon her, and that she would not but confess she had
wronged the Maid, and thereupon fell down upon her Knees, and prayed God to
forgive her for wronging the poor Wench. They wished that she might not be
wholly destroyed by her; to which she said, it must be another that must help
her, and not they that did the harm. And then she said, there were others, as
Goody Halfpenny, and Goody Dod in Town, that could do these things as well as
she, and that it might be one of them that had done the Maid wrong.

That toward Evening, the Door of the Prison shook, and she arose up hastily
and said, What make thou here this time a night? and there was a very great
noise, as if some body with Bolts and Chains had been running up and down the
Room, and they asked her what it was she spoke to, and what it was made the
noise; and she said she saw nothing, neither did she speak, and if she did, it
was she knew not what. But the next day she confessed it was a Spirit, and her
Familiar in the shape of a Greyhound.

He says further, That he and Mr. Edward Perry and others, for Trial of her
took a Tyle off the Prison, next to the place where the Witch lay, and carried
it to the House where the Maid lived, and put it into the fire till it was red
hot, and then dropped some of the Maids Water upon it, and the Witch was then
grievously tormented, and when the Water was consumed, she was well again.

And as to the stones falling on and cast at the Maid, as to the Maids fits,
her removal into the Chest under the Wool, betwixt the Feather-beds, on the top
of the deal Board betwixt two Sollar beams, concerning the Bibles and their
remove, his holding one of them in the Maids hands till two Leaves were torn,
concerning the Maids Vomiting, and her calling out against the Witch, he
agrees perfectly throughout with John Pyne as before.

Edward Perry being likewise sworn deposes, That he, Mr. Greatrix and Mr.
Blackwall went to the maid, and M. Greatrix and he had read of a way to
discover a Witch, which he would put in practice. And so they sent for the
Witch, and set her on a Stool, and a Shoemaker with a strong Awl endeavored to
stick it in the Stool, but could not till the third time. And then they bad her
come off the Stool, but she said she was very weary and could not stir. Then
two of them pulled her off, and the Man went to pull out his Awl, and it dropped
into his hand with half an Inch broke off the blade of it, and they all looked
to have found where it had been stuck, but could find no place where any entry
had been made by it. Then they took another Awl and put it into the Maids hand,
and one of them took the Maids hand, and ran violently at the Witches hand with
it, but could not enter it, though the Awl was so bent that none of them could
put it straight again. Then Mr. Blackwall took a Lance and launc't one of her
hands an Inch and a half long, and a quarter of an Inch deep, but it bled not
at all. Then he launc't the other and, and then they bled.

He further says, That after she was in Prison, he went with Roger Hawkins and
others to discourse with the Witch about the Maid, and they asked what it was
she spoke to the day before, and after some denial, she said it was a Greyhound
which was her Familiar, and went out at the Window, and then she said if I have
done the Maid hurt, I am sorry for it. And being then asked whether she had
done her any hurt, she said she never did bewitch her, but confessed she had
overlooked her that time she kissed her, but that she could not now help her, for
none could help that did the mischief, but others. And further the Deponent
says, That after at the Assize at Cashal, he meeting with one William Lap, and
discoursing about these passages with him, the said Lap told the Deponent, that
if he would but take a Tyle off the House near the place where the Witch lay,
and heat it red hot in the fire, and then take some of the Maids Water and drop
upon it, that so long as this was doing, he should find the Witch most
grievously tormented: That afterward he, Edward Perry, Nicholas Pyne and
others put this in practice, and found that the Witch was extremely tormented
and vexed, and when the experiment was over, she came to her self, and then
they asked her how she came to hurt the Maid? and she said, that what evil she
thought against the Maid that time she kissed her, that would fall upon her, and
that she could not have hurt her except she had touched her, and then she fell
on her knees and confessed she had wronged the Maid, and desired God to forgive
her. And then they put her upon saying the Lord Prayer, but she could not say
the words, and forgive us our trespasses.

Mr. Wood a Minister being likewise sworn, and Examined deposes, That having
heard of the stones dropped and thrown at the Maid, and of her fits, and meeting
with the Maids Brother, he went along with him to the Maid, and found her in
her fit crying out against Gammer Newton, that she pricked her and hurt her. And
when she came to her self he asked her what had troubled her, and she said
Gammer Newton. And the Deponent said, why, she was not there. Yes, said she, I
saw her by my bed side. The Deponent then asked her the original of all, which
she related from the time of her begging the Beef, and after Kissing and so to
that time. That then they caused the Maid to be got up and sent for Florence
Newton, but she refused to come, pretending she was sick, though indeed it
appeared she was well. Then the Major of Youghall came in and spoke with the
Maid, and then sent again and caused Florence Newton to be brought in, and
immediately the Maid fell into her fit far more violent, and three times as
long as at any other time, and all the time the Witch was in the Chamber the
Maid cried out continually of being hurt here and there, but never named the
Witch; but as soon as she was removed, then she cried out against her by the
name of Gammer Newton, and this for several times. And still when the Witch was
out of the Chamber the Maid would desire to go to Prayers, and he found good
affections in her in time of Prayer. but when the Witch was brought in again,
though never so privately, although she could not possibly, as the Deponent
conceives, see her, she would be immediately senseless and like to be strangled,
and so would continue till the Witch were taken out, and then though never so
privately carried away she would come again to her senses. That afterward Mr.
Greatrix, Mr. Blackwall and some others, who would need satisfy themselves in
the influence of the Witches presence, tried it and found it several times.
Although he did it with all possible privacy, and so as none could think it
possible for the Maid to know either of the Witches coming in or going out.

Richard Mayre Major of Youghall, being likewise sworn says, That about the
24th of March last, he sent for Florence Newton, and Examined her about the
Maid, and she at first denied it, and accused Goodwife Halspenny and Goodwife
Dod, but at length when he had caused a Boat to be provided, and had thought to
have tried the Water Experiment on them all three, then Florence Newton
consessed she had overlooked the Maid and done her wrong with a kiss. For which
she was heartily sorry and desired God to forgive her. That then he likewise
Examined the other two Women Halspenny and Dod, but they utterly denied, it and
were content to abide any Trial. Whereupon he caused both Florence, Halspenny,
and Dod, to be carried to the Maid. And he told her these two Women, or one of
them were said by Gammer Newton to have done her hurt, but she answered No no,
they are honest Women, but it is Gammer Newton that hurts me, and I believe she
is not far off. That then they afterward brought in Newton privately, and then
she fell into a most violent fit, ready to be strangled, till the Witch was
removed, and then she was well again, and this for three several times. He
further deposes, that there were three Aldermen in Youghall, whose Children
she had kissed as he had heard them affirm, and all the Children died presently
after. And as to the sending to Cork to have the bolts put on, swears as is
formerly deposed.

Joseph Thomson being likewise sworn said, That he went in March last with
Roger Hawkins, Nicholas Pyne, and others to the Prison to confer with Florence
Newton about the Maid. But she would confess nothing that time. But toward
Night there was a noise at the Prison door as if something had shook the door,
and Florence started up and said, What aileth thee to be here at this time of
the Night? and there was much noise. And they asked her what she spoke to, and
what made the great noise? But she denied that she spoke or that she knew of
any noise, and said, if I spoke I said I knew not what. And they went their
ways at that time and went to her again the next Night, and asked her very
seriously about the last Nights passage and the noise. And then she confessed
to them that it was a Grayhound that came to her, and that she had seen it
formerly, and that it went out at the Window. And then she confessed she had done
the Maid wrong, for which she was sorry and desired God to forgive her.

Hitherto we have heard the most considerable Evidence touching Florence
Newton's Witchcraft upon Mary Longdon, for which she was committed to Youghall
Prison, March 24. 1661. But April following she bewitched one David Jones to
death, by kissing his hand thr^ugh the grate of the Prison, for which she was
indicted at Cork Assizes, and the Evidence is as follows.

Elenor Jones Relict of the said David Jones, being sworn and Examined in open
Court what she knew concerning any practice of Witchcraft by the said Florence
Newton upon the said David her Husband? gave in the Evidence That in April
last, the said David her late Husband having been out all the Night, came home
early in the Morning, and said to the said Elenor his Wife, where do thou
think I have been all Night? To which she answered she knew not. Whereupon he
replied, I and Frank Beseley have been standing Sentinel over the Witch all
Night. To which she the said Elenor said why what hurt is that? Hurt, quoth he?
marry, I doubt it is never a jot the better for me. For she has kissed my hand
through the grate, and ever since she kissed my hand, I have had a great pain in
that Arm, and I verily believe she has bewitched me if ever she bewitched any
Man. To which she answered, the Lord forbid. That all the Night and continually
from that time he was restless and ill, complaining exceedingly of a great pain
in his Arm for seven days together, and at the seven days end he complained
that the pain was come from his Arm to his Heart, and then kept his Bed Night
and Day grievously afflicted and crying out against Florence Newton, and about
fourteen Days after he dyed.

Francis Beseley, being sworn and Examined said, That about the time
aforementioned meeting with the said David Jones, and discoursing with him of
the several reports then stirring concerning this Florence Newton (who was then
in Prison at Youghall for bewitching Mary Longdon) viz. that she had several
Familiars resorting to her in sundry shapes, the said David Jones told him the
said Francis Beseley, that he had a great mind to watch her the said Florence
Newton one Night to see whether he could observe any Cats or other Creatures
resort to her through the grate, as 'twas suspected they did, and desired the
said Francis to go with him, which he did. And that when they came thither
David Jones called to Florence, and told her that he heard she could not say
the Lords Prayer: To which she answered she could. He then desired her to say
it: But she excused her self by the decay of Memory through old Age. Then David
Jones began to teach her, but she could not or would not say it, though often
taught it.

Upon which the said David Jones and Beseley being withdrawn a little from her,
and discoursing of her, not being able to learn this Prayer, she called out to
David Jones, and said, David! David! come hither, I can say the Lords Prayer
now. Upon which David went toward her, and the said Deponent would have plucked
him back, and persuaded him not to have gone to her. But he would not be
persuaded, but went to the Grate to her, and she began to say the Lords Prayer,
but could not say, [Forgive us our Trespasses]. So that David again taught her.
Which she seemed to take very thankfully, and told him she had a great mind to
have kissed him, but that the Grate hindered, but desired she might kiss his hand.
Whereupon he gave her his hand through the Grate, and she kissed it, and toward
break of day, they went away and parted, and soon after the Deponent heard that
David Jones was ill.

Whereupon he went to visit him, and found him about two or three days after
very ill of a pain in the Arm. Which he exceedingly complained of, and told the
Deponent that ever since he parted with him he had been seized on with that
pain, and that the Old Hag had bewitched him when she kissed his hand, and that
she had him now by the hand, and was pulling off his Arm. And he said, Do you
not see the Old Hag how she pulls me? Well, I lay my Death on her, she has
bewitched me. And several times after would complain, that she had tormented
him, and had bewitched him, and that he laid his Death on her. And after
fourteen days languishing, he the said David Jones dyed.

ADVERTISEMENT.
This Relation is taken out of a Copy of an Authentic Record, as I conceive,
every half sheet having W. Aston writ in the Margin, and then again W. Aston at
the end of all, who in all likelihood must be some public Notary or
Record-Keeper. But this Witch of Youghall is so famous, that I have heard Mr.
Greatrix speak of her at my Lord Conway's at Ragley, and remember very well he
told the story of the Awl to me there. There is in this Relation an eximious
example of the Magical venom of Witches (whence they are called Veneficae) in
that all the mischief this Witch did, was by kissing, or some way touching the
party she bewitched, and she confessed unless she touched her, she could do her
no hurt. Which may be called a Magical venom or contagion. But how
Over-looking and Bewitching are distinguished with those of this Hellish
Fraternity, I know not. But that Mary Longdon was bewitched by her over-looking
her is manifest. Whether this Over-looking relates to (...), and that the
Magical venom came out at her Eyes when she kissed the Maid, and whether this
(...) was the first kind of Witchery distinct from that of bewitching people by
Images made of Wax, and afterward any bewitching by mere looking or touching,
was called Over-looking, we will leave to the Critics of that black School to
decide. As also what is that, which in the Witches shape, so haunts and
torments the bewitched party. For that it is not the mere fancy of the
bewitched seems reasonable to judge, because their mere fancy could not create
such kinds of extreme torments to them. And therefore it is either the Witches
Familiar in her shape, or the Astral Spirit of the Witch, because the Witch is
sometimes wounded by striking at her Appearance, as it happened in the
appearance of Jane Brooks, and also in that of Julian Cox, as you shall find in
the Relation following.

RELAT. VIII.
The Narrative of Mr. Pool, a Servant and Officer in the Court to Judge Archer
in his Circuits, concerning the Trial of Julian Cox for Witchcraft; who being
himself then present an Officer in the Court, noted as follows, viz.

JUlian Cox, aged about 70 years, was Indicted at Taunton in Somersetshire,
about Summer Assizes 1663. before Judge Archer then Judge of Assize there, for
Witchcraft, which she practiced upon a young Maid, whereby her body languished,
and was impaired of Health, by reason of strange fits upon account of the said
Witchcraft.

The evidence against her was divided into two Branches; First, to prove her a
Witch in general; Secondly, to prove her guilty of the Witchcraft contained in
the Indictment.

For the proof of the first particular, The first Witness was an Huntsman, who
swore that he went out with a pack of Hounds to hunt a Hare, and not far off
from Julian Cox her house, he at last started a Hare. The Dogs hunted her very
close, and the third ring hunted her in view, till at last the Huntsman
perceiving the Hare almost spent, and making toward a great Bush, he ran on
the other side of the Bush to take her up, and preserve her from the Dogs. But
as soon as he laid hands on her, it proved to be Julian Cox, who had her head
grovelling on the ground, and her globes (as he expressed it) upward. He knowing
her, was affrighted, that his Hair on his Head stood on end; and yet spoke to
her, and asked her what brought her there. But she was so far out of Breath,
that she could not make him any answer. His Dogs also came up with full cry to
recover the game, and smelt at her, and so left off hunting any further. And
the Huntsman with his Dogs went home presently, sadly affrighted.

Secondly, Another Witness swore, that as he passed by Cox her Door, she was
taking a Pipe of Tobacco upon the Threshold of her Door, and invited him to
come in and take a Pipe, which he did. And as he was taking Julian said to him,
Neighbor look what a pretty thing there is. He looked down, and there was a
monstrous great Toad betwixt his Legs, staring him in the face. He endeavored
to kill it by spurning it, but could not hit it. Whereupon Julian bad him
forbear, and it would do him no hurt. But he threw down his Pipe and went home,
(which was about two Miles off of Julian Cox her house) and told his Family
what had happened, and that he believed it was one of Julian Cox her Devils.
After, he was taking a Pipe of Tobacco at home, and the same Toad appeared
betwixt his Legs. He took the Toad out to kill it, and to his thinking cut it
in several pieces, but returning to his Pipe, the Toad still appeared. He
endeavored to burn it, but could not. At length he took a Switch and beat it.
The Toad ran several times about the Room to avoid him, he still pursuing it
with correction. At length the Toad cried and vanished, and he was never after
troubled with it.

Thirdly, Another swore that Julian past by his Yard while his Beasts were in
Milking, and stooping down scored upon the ground for some small time. During
which time his Cattle ran mad, and some ran their heads against the Trees, and
most of them dyed speedily. Whereupon concluding they were bewitched, he was
after advised to this Experiment, to find out the Witch, viz. to cut off the
Ears of the bewitched Beasts and burn them, and that the Witch would be in
misery and could not rest till they were plucked out. Which he tried, and while
they were burning, Julian Cox came into the House, raging and scolding that
they had abused her without cause, but she went presently to the fire and took
out the Ears that were burning, and then she was quiet.

Fourthly, Another Witness swore that she had seen Julian Cox fly into her own
Chamber Window in her full proportion, and that she very well knew her, and was
sure it was she.

Fifthly, Another evidence was the confession of Julian Cox her self upon her
Examination before a Justice of Peace, which was to this purpose, That she had
been often tempted by the Devil to be a Witch, but never consented. That one
evening she walked out about a Mile from her own House, and there came riding
toward her three persons upon three Broom-staves, born up abo^ yard and an
half from the ground. Two of them she formerly knew, which was a Witch and a
Wizzard that were hanged for Witchcraft several years before. The third person
she knew not. He came in the shape of a black Man, and tempted her to give him
her Soul, or to that effect, and to express it by pricking her finger, and
giving her name in her Blood in token of it, and told her that she had revenge
against several persons that had wronged her, but could not bring her purpose
to pass without his help, and that upon the terms aforesaid he would assist her
to be revenged against them. But she said, she did not consent to it. This was
the sum of the general Evidence to prove her a Witch.

But now for the second particular, to prove her guilty of the Witchcraft upon
the Maid whereof she was indicted, this Evidence was offered:

It was proved that Julian Cox came for an Alms to the house where this Maid
was a Servant, and that the Maid told her, she should have none, and gave her a
cross answer that displeased Julian. Whereupon Julian was angry and told the
Maid she should repent it before Night, and so she did. For before Night she
was taken with a Convulsion fit, and after that left her, she saw Julian Cox
following her and cried out to the People in the house to save her from Julian.

But none saw Julian but the Maid, and all did impute it to her imagination
only. And in the Night she cried out of Julian Cox, and the black Man, that
they came upon her bed and tempted her to drink something they offered her. But
she cried out, she desied the Devils Drenches. This also they imputed to her
imagination, and bad her be quiet, because they in the same Chamber with her
did not see or hear any thing, and they thought it had been her conceit only.

The Maid the next Night expecting the same conflict she had the Night before,
brought up with her a Knife, and laid it at her beds head: About the same time
of the Night as before, Julian and the black Man came again upon the Maids bed
and tempted her to drink that which they brought, but she refused, crying in
the audience of the rest of the Family, that she defied the Devils Drenches,
and took the Knife and stabbed Julian, and, as she said, she wounded her in the
Leg and was importunate with the Witness to ride to Julian Cox's house
presently to see if it were not so. The Witness went and took the Knife with
him. Julian Cox would not let him in, but they forced the Door open and found a
fresh wound in Julian's Leg, as the Maid had said, which did suit with the
Knife, and Julian had been just dressing it when the Witness came. There was
blood also found upon the Maids bed.

The next Morning the Maid continued her outcries that Julian Cox appeared to
her in the house wall, and offered her great Pins which she was forced to
swallow. And all the Day the Maid was observed to conveigh her hand to the
house wall, and from the wall to her Mouth, and she seemed by the motion of her
Mouth as if she did eat something. But none saw any thing but the Maid, and
therefore thought still it might be her phansy, and did not much mind it. But
toward Night this Maid began to be very ill and complained, that the Pins that
Julian forced her to eat out of the wall, did torment her in all parts of her
Body that she could not endure it, and made lamentable outcries for pain.
Whereupon several Persons being present the Maid was undressed, and in several
parts of the Maids Body several great swellings appeared, and out of the head
of the swellings several great Pins points appeared. Which the Witnesses took
out, and upon the Trial there were about Thirty great Pins produced in Court
(which I my self handled) all which were sworn by several Witnesses that they
were taken out of the Maids Body in manner as is aforesaid.

Judge Archer who tried the Prisoner, told the Jury that he had heard that a
Witch could not repeat that petition in the Lords Prayer, viz. [And lead us not
into temptation] and having this occasion he would try the Experiment, and told
the Jury that whether she could or could not, they were not in the least
measure to guide their Verdict according to it, because it was not legal
Evidence, but that they must be guided in their Verdict by the former Evidences
given in upon Oath only.

The Prisoner was called for up to the next Bar to the Court, and demanded if
she could say the Lords Prayer? She said she could, and went over the Prayer
readily till she came to that petition. Then she said [And lead us into
temptation] or [And lead us not into no temptation] but could not say [And lead
us not into temptation] though she was directed to say it after one that
repeated it to her distinctly. But she could not repeat it otherwise than is
expressed already, though tried to do it near half a score times in open Court.
After all which the Jury found her guilty, and Judgment having been given
within three or four days, she was Executed without any Confession of the Fact.

ADVERTISEMENT.
This is a Copy of the Narrative sent by Mr. Pool, October. 24. 1672. to Mr.
Archer of Emanuel College, Nephew to the Judge upon the desire of Dr. Bright.
But I remember here at Cambridge, I heard the main passages of this Narrative
when they first were spread abroad after the Assizes, and particularly by G.
Rust after Bishop of Dromore in Ireland. Nor do I doubt but it is a true
account of what was attested before Judge Archer at the Assizes. For it is a
thing to me altogether incredible, that he that was an Officer or Servant of
the Judge and present in the Court at the Examination and Trial, and there took
Notes, should write a Narrative, when there were so many Ear-witnesses besides
himself of the same things, that would be obnoxious to the disproof of those
who were present as well as himself. It may not be amiss here to transcribe
what Dr. M. did write to Mr. G. touching this story in a Letter dated Dec. 26.
1678.

This Narrative, says he, has the most Authentic confirmation that human
affairs are capable of, Sense and the sacredness of an Oath. But yet I confess
I have heard that judge Archer has been taxed by some of overmuch credulity,
for sentencing Julian Cox to death upon those Evidences. But to deal freely I
suspect by such as out of their ignorance misinterpreted several passages in
the Evidence, or were of such a dull stupid Sadducean temper, that they believe
there are no Spirits nor Witches. And truly I must confess that the Huntsman,
though he deposed upon Oath, that when he came in to take up the Hare at the
Bush, it proved to be Julian Cox with her face toward the ground, etc. his
expressing of himself touching her Globes and the Dogs smelling, etc. looks
something humoursomly and ludicrousty on it. But I must further add, that I
think it was only that his fancy was tickled with the featness of the
Phenomenon, not that he would be so wicked as to tell a lie upon Oath and that
for nothing. Sic vita hominum est, says Tully, ut ad maleficium nemo conetur
sine spe atque emolumento accedere. But that those half-witted People thought
he swore false, I suppose was because they imagined that what he told implied
that Julian Cox was turned into an Hare. Which she was not, nor did his report
imply any such real Metamorphosis of her body, but that these ludicrous Demons
exhibited to the sight of this Huntsman and his Dogs the shape of an Hare, one
of them turning himself into such a form, and others hurrying on the body of
Julian near the same place, and at the same swiftness, but interposing betwixt
that Hare-like Spectre and her body, modifying the Air so that the scene there,
to the beholders sight, was as if nothing but Air were there, and a show of
Earth perpetually suited to that where the Hare passed. As I have heard of some
Painters that have drawn the Sky in an huge large Landscape, so lively that the
Birds have flown against it, thinking it free Air, and so have fallen down. And
if Painters' and Juglers by the tricks of Legerdemain can do such strange feats
to the deceiving of the sight, it is no wonder that these Airy invisible
Spirits as far surpass them in all such praestigious doings as the Air
surpasses the Earth for subtilty.

And the like Praestigiae may be in the Toad. It might be a real Toad (though
actuated and guided by a Demon) which was cut in pieces, and that also which
was whipped about, and at last snatched out of sight (as if it had vanished) by
these AErial Hocus-Pocus' s. And if some Juglers have tricks to take hot Coals
into their Mouth without hurt, certainly it is no strange thing that some small
attempt did not suffice to burn that Toad. That such a Toad, sent by a Witch
and crawling up the Body of the Man of the house as he sat by the fire's side,
was overmastered by him and his Wife together, and burnt in the fire; I have
heard sometime ago credibly reported by one of the Isle of Ely. Of these
Daemoniack Vermin, I have heard other stories also, as of a Rat that followed a
Man some score of Miles trudging through thick and thin along with him. So
little difficulty is there in that of the Toad.

And that of Julian Cox' s being seen to fly in at her own Chamber Window,
there is no difficulty in it, if it be understood of her Familiar, the black
Man, that had transformed himself into her shape. For this is no such unusual
thing for Witches to appear either in their Astral Spirits or by their
Familiars, as if it were their very bodily Persons. But when she appeared to
the Maid together with the black Man and offered her to drink, it is likely it
was her Astral Spirit, and Julians being wounded in her body by the wound on
her Astral Spirit is just such another case, as that of Jane Brooks, which you
your self note in your Book of Witchcraft.

The most incredible thing is her eating of Pins, she knowing them to be such.
But they that are bewitched are not themselves, and being possessed are
actuated in the parts of their body, and their mind driven by that ugly inmate
in them, to what he will; which is notorious in the story of Mrs. Frogmorton 's
Children. And for the Pins thus swallowed, their comeing out into the exterior
parts of her body, Examples of this sort are infinite; and far more strange
than these are recorded by Baptista Van Helmont, de Injectis.

These are the most incredible passages in this Narrative, and yet you see how
credible they are, if rightly understood. But those that believe no Spirits
will believe nothing never so credible of this kind, and others that have some
natural aversion from these things will presently interpret them in the vulgar
sense, and then sweetly snear at their own ignorance. But I must confess if
this be a true Relation of what passed in the Court, I do not question but the
things that were sworn did so appear to them that swore them. Or else there is
nothing to be credited in human affairs. But concerning the truth of the
Relation, besides what I hinted in my last to you, you would do well to write
to some or other in Taunton, etc. Thus far Dr. M.

And if any one be so curious as to desire an account of Mr. G. his further
inquiry into this business, I can tell him that he wrote to Mr. Hunt who then
busy in some Court, yet made shift to read the Narrative and wrote two or three
lines to him back to this effect. That one principal Evidence was omitted in
the Narrative, but that is nothing against the truth of the rest. But he adds
also, that some things were false. Which would stumble one and make him think
that the credit of this Narrative is quite blasted thereby. But this Riddle is
easily unriddled by him that considers, that Mr. Hunt may respect those things
that are said to be confessed by her in her examination before a Justice of
Peace. For he also having some time Examined her, and she making no such
confession to him (as Mr. G. himself says in a Letter to Dr. M. that he perused
that Examination in Mr. Hunts Book, and there was not any thing considerable
therein) might speak this in reference to the Examination which he had taken,
she then not confessing so freely as to some other Justice, whose Examination
therefore was made use of in the Court. But this cannot concern at all the rest
of the Narrative, which was given upon Oath in the Court in the hearing of all.
This I thought fit not to omit as being desirous to deal with all faithfulness
in concealing nothing, and not to impose upon the Reader, but that he may make
his judgment upon the whole matter.

As for the Witches being hurried along with that Hare-like Spectre, her being
out of breath (as the Huntsman testified) makes it most probable; or at least
that she was hurried from some other place on the earth, or in the air (to meet
there at length with the Hare-like Spectre) but this invisibly by that (...),
or Prestigiatory art or faculty of these ludicrous Demons, whereby they can so
modifie the Air immediately next to the party they would conceal, that it looks
there like the free Sky, or what Landscape they please; as when they show in a
Shew-stone or Glass, the very Room in which the party is, the Demon by the
power of his Imagination, so modifying at least his own Vehicle. Which power
some of those of the Atheistick Brotherhood cannot wish any face deny,
supposing there are Demons, they giving a greater power to the Imagination of
a Man, as if it were able to transform the Air into real Birds or Mice, or such
like Creatures livingly such for the present. But any thing must be believed,
rather than the Existence of Witches and Demons.

It will not be amiss here to take notice what an eminent example this Julian
Cox is of Moses his Megnonenah or Mecassephah taken in the same sense, that is,
of such a Witch as is thought by a (...), or prestigiatory power (though it is
the Devil that does these feats, not she) to transform her self into strange
shapes, and use other like deceptions of the sight. As also it is a notable
instance of the Astral Spirits of Witches, how strongly, though at a distance
of place, they are tied together in a fatal Sympathy with their Bodies, the
Body of Julian being wounded by a stab at her Astral Spirit, as it fared also
in Jane Brooks, and an Old Woman in Cambridge-shire, whose Astral Spirit coming
into a Man's house, (as he was sitting alone at the fire) in the shape of an
huge Cat, and setting her self before the fire, not sar from him, he stole a
stroke at the back of it with a Fire-fork, and seemed to break the back of it,
but it scambled from him, and vanished be kn^w not how. But such an Old Woman, a
reputed Witch, was found dead in her Bed that very night, with her Back broken,
as I have heard some years ago credibly reported.

That also is a mavelous Magical Sympathy in this story of Julian Cox, that
the burning of the Ears of the Beast bewitched by her, should put her into such
rage and torment. Like the heating of the Tile red hot in the story of Florence
Newton, and pouring some of the bewitched Maids water upon it. Which puts me in
mind of a very remarkable story of this kind, told me by Mr. Brearly, once
Fellow of Christ's College in Cambridge, who boarded in an house in Suffolk,
where his Landlady had been ill handled by Witchcraft.

For an Old Man that Traveled up and down the Country, and had some
acquaintance at that house, calling in and asking the Man of the house how he
did and his Wife; He told him that himself was well, but his Wife had been a
long time in a languishing condition, and that she was haunted with a thing in
the shape of a Bird, that would flurr near to her face, and that she could not
enjoy her natural rest well. The Old Man bid him and his Wife be of good
courage. It was but a dead Spright, he said, and he would put him in a course
to rid his Wife of this languishment and trouble. He therefore advised him to
take a Bottle, and put his Wives Urine into it, together with Pins and Needles
and Nails, and Cork them up, and set the Bottle to the fire, but be sure the
Cork be fast in it, that it fly not out. The Man followed the prescription, and
set the Bootle to the fire well corkt, which when it had felt a while the heat
of the fire began to move and joggle a little, but he for sureness took the
Fireshovel, and held it hard upon the Cork. And as he thought he felt something
one while on this side, another while on that, shove the Fireshovel off, which
he still quickly put on again, but at last at one shoving the Cork bounced out,
and the Urine, Pins, Nails and Needles all flew up, and gave a report like a
Pistol, and his Wife continued in the same trouble and languishment still.

Not long after, the Old Man came to the house again, and inquired of the Man
of the house how his Wife did. Who answered as ill as ever, if not worse. He
asked him if he had followed his direction. Yes, says he, and told him the event
as is abovesaid. Ha, quoth he, it seems it was too nimble for you. But now I
will put you in a way, that will make the business sure. Take your Wive's Urine
as before, and Cork it in a Bottle with Nails, Pins and Needles, and bury it in
the Earth; and that will do the feat. The Man did accordingly. And his Wife
began to mend sensibly, and in a competent time was finely well recovered. But
there came a Woman from a Town some miles off to their house, with a lamentable
Outcry, that they had killed her Husband. They asked her what she meant and
thought her distracted, telling her they knew neither her nor her husband. Yes,
says she, you have killed my husband, he told me so on his Deathbed. But at
last they understood by her, that her Husband was a Wizzard, and had bewitched
this Man's Wife, and that this Counter-practice prescribed by the Old Man, which
saved the Man's Wife from languishment, was the death of that Wizzard that had
bewitched her. This story did Mr. Brearly hear from the Man and Woman's own Mouth
who were concerned, and at whose House he for a time Boarded, nor is there any
doubt of the truth thereof.

But it will be more easy for any rational Man to believe stories of this
kind, than to find out a satisfactory account of the operation and effect, or
to assure the lawfulness of such counter-practice against Witchcraft, unless
they can be resolved into the Sympathy and Synenergy of the Spiritus Mundanus,
(which Plotinus calls (...), the grand Magician) such as the operation of the
Weapon-salve, and other Magnetic Cures are resolved into. And forasmuch as the
power of a truly Divine Magic, such as Prophets and Holy Lawgivers are endued
with, is too great and August to be sound in ordinary good Men, that are to
bring in no new Law or Religion into the World, the benignity of Providence is
to be acknowledged in that the Villainies of Witchcraft lie obnoxious to such a
natural or ratified way of Discoveries and Counter-practices as these. But how
this obnoxiousness of Witches is complicated with their Familiars sucking their
Bodies, is a point too nice and prolix to enter upon here. But it is most safe
not to tamper at all with these things, and most happy to have no occasion for
it.

Lastly, as for Julian Cox her not being able to say one of the Petitions in
the Lords Prayer, the case is like that of Florence Newton the Irish Witch, but
unlike in this, that it was not the same Petition Florence Newton stuck at. And
I remember when I had the curiosity with a friend of mine, of examining certain
Witches at Castle-hill in Cambridge, the most notorious of them, who also was
hanged for a Witch, offered to say the Creed and Lords Prayer, as an Argument
she was no Witch, and so far as I remember, she said the Lords Prayer right,
but was out at the Creed; nor do I think this any certain sign of their guilt
or innocenty, and therefore Judge Archer did well to lay no stress on it. But
these things are of less moment, and therefore I pass to the next Relation,
which looks not so much like Witchcraft, as the Apparition of the Ghost of one
deceased.

RELAT. IX.
Which is a Relation of Thomas Goddard of Marlbrough, in the County of Wilts,
Weaver, made the 23. Nov. 1674.

Who says, That on Monday the Ninth of this Instant, as he was going to
Ogborn at a Style on the Highway near Mr. Goddards ground, about Nine in the
Morning, he met the Apparition of his Father in Law, one Edward Avon of this
Town Glover, who dyed in May last, having on, to his appearance, the same
Clothes, Hat, Stockings and Shoes he did usually wear when he was living,
standing by, and leaning over that Style. Which when he came near, the
Apparition spoke to him with an audible voice these words, Are you afraid? To
which he answered, I am, thinking on one who is dead and buried, whom you are
like. To which the Apparition replied with the like voice, I am he that you
were thinking on, I am Edward Avon your Father in Law, come near to me, I will
do you no harm. To which Goddard answered, I trust in him who has bought my
Soul with his precious Blood, you shall do me no harm. Then the Apparition
said, How stand cases at home? Goddard asked what cases? Then it asked him how do
William and Mary, meaning as he conceived, his Son William Avon a Shoemaker
here, and Mary his Daughter the said Goddards Wife. Then, it said, What! Tailor
is dead, meaning, as he thought, one Tailor of London, who Married his Daughter
Sarah, which Tailor dyed about Michaelmas last. Then the Apparition held out
its hand, and in it, as Goddard conceived, twenty or thirty shillings in
silver, and then spoke with a loud voice: Take this Money and send it to Sarah,
for I shut up my Bowels of compassion toward her in the time of my life, and
now here is somewhat for her. And then said, Mary (meaning his the said
Goddards Wife as he conceived) is troubled for me. But tell her, God has
showed mercy to me contrary to my deserts. But the said Goddard answered, In
the Name of Jesus Christ, I refuse all such Money. Then the Apparition said, I
perceive you are afraid. I will meet you some other time. And immediately it
went up the Lane to his appearance. So he went over the same Style, but saw it
no more that day.

He says, The next night about seven of the Clock, it came and opened his shop
Window, and stood in the like Clothes, looked him in the face, but said nothing
to him. And the next night after, as Goddard went forth into his Backside with
a Candle light in his hand, it appeared to him again in the same shape, but he
being in fear ran into his house, and saw it no more then.

But he says, That on Thursday the twelfth instant, as he came from Chilton,
riding down the Hill between the Mannor-house and Axford-Farm-field, he saw
somewhat like a Hare crossed his way, at which his Horse frighted threw him in
the dirt, and as soon as he could recover on his feet, the same Apparition
there met him again in the same habit, and there standing about eight foot
directly before him in the way, spoke again to him with a loud voice, Source (a
word he commonly used when living) you have stayed long, and then said to him,
Thomas, bid William Avon take the Sword that he had of me, which is now in his
house, and carry it to the Wood as we go to Alton, to the upper end of the Wood
by the ways side. For with that Sword I did wrong above Thirty years ago, and
he never prospered since he had that Sword. And bid William Avon give his
Sister Sarah twenty shillings of the money which he had of me. And do you talk
with Edward Lawrence, for I borrowed twenty shillings of him several years ago,
and did say I had paid him, but I did not pay it him, and I would desire you to
pay him twenty shillings out of the money which you had from James Elliot at
two payments. Which money the said Goddard now says was five pounds, which
James Elliot a Baker here owed the said Avon on Bond, and which he the said
Goddard had received from the said Elliot since Michaelmas at two payments,
viz. 35 s. at one, and 3 l. 5 s. at another payment. And it further said to
him, Tell Margaret (meaning his own Wise as he conceived) that I would desire
her to deliver up the little which I gave to little Sarah Tailor to the Child,
or to any one she will trust for it. But if she will not, speak to Edward
Lawrence to persuade her. But if she will not then, tell her that I will see
her very suddenly. And see that this be done within a Twelve-moneth and a day
after my decease, and peace be with you. And so it went away over the Rails
into the Wood there in the like manner as any Man would go over a Style to his
apprehension, and so he saw it no more at that time. And he says, that he paid
the twenty shillings to Edward Lawrence of this Town, who being present now
does remember he lent the said Avon twenty shillings about twenty years ago,
which none knew but himself and Wife, and Avon and his Wife, and was never paid
it again before now by this Goddard.

And this said Goddard further says, That this very day by Mr. Majors order,
he with his Brother in Law William Avon went with the Sword, and about Nine a
Clock this Morning, they laid down the Sword in the Copse near the place the
A^parition had appointed Goddard to carry it, and then coming away thence,
Goddard looking back, saw the same Apparition again in the like habit as
before. Whereupon he called to his Brother in Law, and said, Here is the
Apparition of our Father, Who said I see nothing. Then Goddard fell on his
Knees and said, Lord open his Eyes that he may see it. But he replied, Lord
grant I may not see it, if it be thy blessed Will. And then the Apparition to
Goddards appearance, beckned with his hand to him to come to it. And then
Goddard said, In the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, what would you
have me to do? Then the Apparition said to him, Thomas, Take up the Sword and
follow me. To which he said, should both of us come, or but one of us? To which
it answered, Thomas, do you take up the Sword. And so he took up the Sword and
followed the Apparition about Ten Lugs (that is Poles) further into the Copse,
and then turning back, he stood still about a Lug and a half from it, his
Brother in Law staying behind at the place where they first laid down the
Sword. Then Goddard laying down the Sword upon the ground, saw something stand
by the Apparition like a Mastiff Dog of a brown color. Then the Apparition
coming toward Goddard, he stepped back about two steps, and the Apparition said
to him, I have a permission to you, and commission not to touch you, and then
it took up the Sword, and went back to the place at which before it stood, with
a Mastiff Dog by it as before, and pointed the top of the Sword into the ground
and said. In this place lies buried the Body of him which I murdered in the
year 1635. which is now rotten and turned to dust. Whereupon Goddard said, I do
adjure you in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, wherefore did you do
this murder? And it said, I took money from the Man, and he contended with me,
and so I murdered him. Then Goddard asked him, who was consederate with him in
the said murder? and it said, none but my self. Then Goddard said, What would
you have me to do in this thing? And the Apparition said, This is that the
World may know that I murdered a Man, and buried him in this place in the year
1635.

Then the Apparition laid down the Sword on the bare ground there, whereon grew
nothing, but seemed to Goddard to be as a Grave sunk in. And then the
Apparition rushing further into the Copse vanished, and he saw it no more.
Whereupon Goddard and his Brother in Law Avon, leaving the Sword there and
coming away together, Avon told Goddard he heard his voice, and understood what
he said, and heard other words distinct from his, but could not understand a
word of it, nor saw any Apparition at all. Which he now also present affirms,
and all which the said Goddard then attested under his hand, and affirmed he
will depose the same when he shall be thereto required.

In the presence of Christ. Lypyatt Major, Rolf Bailey Town Clerk, Joshuah
Sacheverell Rector of St. Peter's in Malebrough,

Examined by me

Will. Bailey.

ADVERTISEMENT.
That Tho. Goddard saw this Apparition, sesms to be a thing indubitable; but
whether it was his Father in Law's Ghost, that is more questionable. The former
is confirmed from an hand at least impartial, if not disfavourable to the
story. The party in his Letter to Mr. G -- writes briefly to this effect. 1.
That he does verily think that this Tho. Goddard does believe the story most
strongly himself. 2. That he cannot imagine what interest he should have in
raising such a story, he bringing Infamy on his Wives Father, and obliging
himself to pay twenty shillings debt, which his poverty could very ill spare.
3. That his Father in Law Edward Avon, was a resolute sturdy fellow in his
young years, and many years a Bailiff to Arrest people. 4. That Tho. Goddard
had the repute of an honest Man, knew as much in Religion as most of his rank
and breeding, and was a constant frequenter of the Church, till about a year
before this happened to him, he fell off wholly to the Non-Conformists.

All this hitherto, save this laft of all, tends to the Confirmation of the
story. Therefore this last shall be the first Allegation against the
credibility thereof. 2. It is further alleged, that possibly the design of the
story may be to make him to be accounted an extraordinary somebody amongst the
dissenting party. 3. That he is sometimes troubled with Epileptical fits. 4.
That the Major sent the next Morning to digg the place where the Spectre said
the Murdered Man was Buried, and there was neither bones found nor any
difference of the Earth in that place from the rest.

But we answer briefly to the first, That his falling off to the
Non-Conformists though it may argue a vacillancy of his judgment, yet it does
not any defect of his external senses, as if he were less able to discern when
he saw or heard any thing than before: To the second, That it is a perfect
contradiction to his strong belief of the truth of his own story, which plainly
implies that he did not feign it to make himself an extraordinary somebody: To
the third, That an Epileptical Person when he is out of his fits, has his
external senses as true and entire, as a Drunken Man has when his Drunken fit
is over, or a Man awake after a night of sleep and dreams. So that this
argument has not the least show of force with it, unless you will take away the
authority of all Men's senses, because at sometimes they have not a competent
use of them, namely in sleep, drunkenness or the like. But now lastly for the
fourth which is most considerable, it is yet of no greater force than to make
it questionable whether this Spectre was the Ghost of his Father, or some
ludicrous Goblin that would put a trick upon Thomas Goddard, by personating his
Father-in-Law, and by a false pointing at the pretended grave of the Murdered
make him ridiculous. For what Porphyrius has noted, 1. doubt not but is true,
That Demons sometimes personate the Souls of the deceased. But if an
uncossined body being laid in a ground exposed to wet and dry, the Earth may in
30 years space consume the very bones and assimilate all to to the rest of the
mold, when some Earths will do it in less than the fifteenth part of that
space: Or if the Ghost of Edward Avon might have forgot the certain place (it
being no grateful object of his memory) where he buried the murdered Man, and
only guessed that to be it because it was something sunk, as if the Earth
yielded upon the wasting of the Buried body, the rest of the story will still
naturally import that it was the very Ghost of Edward Avon. Besides, himself
expressly declares, as that the body was Buried there, so that by this time it
was all turned into dust.

But whether it was a ludicrous Demon or Edward Avons Ghost, concerns not our
scope. It is sufficient that it is a certain instance of a real Apparition, and
I thought sit as in the former story, so here to be so faithful as to conceal
nothing that any might pretend to lessen the credibility thereof. Stories of
the appearing of Souls departed are not for the tooth of the Non-conformists,
who, as it is said, if they generally believe this, it must be from the
undeniable evidence thereof nor could Thomas Goddard gratify them by inventing
of it. And that it was not a phansy the knowledge of the 20 Shillings debt
imparted to Thomas Goddard ignorant thereof before, and his Brother Avon' s
hearing a voice distinct from his in his discourse with the Apparition, does
plainly enough imply. Nor was it Goddard' s own phansy, but that real Spectre
that opened his shop-window. Nor his imagination, but something in the shape of
an Hare that made his Horse start and cast him into the dirt; The Apparition of
Avon being then accompanied with that Hare, as after with the Mastiff-Dog. And
lastly the whole frame of the story, provided the Relator does verily think it
true himself (as Mr. S. testifies for him in his Letter to Mr. Glanvil, and
himself professed he was ready at any time to swear to it) is such, that it being
not a voluntary invention, cannot be an imposing phansy.

RELAT. X.
The Apparition of the Ghost of Major George Sydenham, to Captain William Dyke,
taken out of a Letter of Mr. James Douch of Mongton, to Mr. Jos. Glanvil.

COncerning the Apparition of the Ghost of Major George Sydenham (late of
Dulverton in the County of Somerset,) to Captain William Dyke (late of Skilgate
in this County also, and now likewise deceased) be pleased to take the Relation
of it as I have it from the Worthy and Learned Dr. Tho. Dyke, a near Kinsman of
the Captains, Thus: Shortly after the Major's Death, the Doctor was desired to
come to the House to take care of a Child that was there sick, and in his way
thither he called on the Captain, who was very willing to wait on him to the
place, because he must, as he said, have gone thither that Night, though he had
not met with so encouraging an opportunity. After their arrival there at the
House and the civility of the People shown them in their Entertainment, they
were seasonably conducted to their Lodging, which they desired might be
together in the same bed, Where, after they had lain a while, the Captain
knocked and bids the Servant bring him two of the largest and biggest Candles
lighted that he could get. Whereupon the Doctor enquires what he meant by this?
The Captain answers, you know Cousin what disputes my Major and I have had
touching the being of a God, and the Immortality of the Soul. In which points
we could never yet be resolved, though we so much sought for and desired it.
And therefore it was at length fully agreed between us, That he of us that dyed
first should the third night after his Funeral, between the hours of Twelve and
One come to the little house that is here in the Garden and there give a full
account to the surviver touching these matters, who should be sure to be
present there at the set time and so receive a full satisfaction. And this,
says the Captain, is the very Night, and I am come on purpose to fulfill my
promise.

The Doctor dissuaded him, minding him of the danger of following those strange
Counsels, for which we could have no warrant, and that the Devil might by some
cunning device make such an advantage of this rash attempt, as might work his
utter ruin. The Captain replies, that he had solemnly engaged, and that
nothing should discourage him: and adds, That if the Doctor would wake a while
with him, he would thank him, if not, he might compose himself to his rest; but
for his own part he was resolved to watch, that he might be sure to be present
at the hour appointed. To that purpose he sets his Watch by him, and as soon as
he perceived by it that it was half an hour past Eleven, he rises, and taking a
Candle in each hand, goes out by a back Door of which he had before gotten the
Key, and walks to the Garden-house, where he continued two hours and an half,
and at his return declared that he neither saw nor heard any thing more than
was usual. But I know, said he, that my Major would surely have come, had he
been able.

About six weeks after the Captain rides to Eaton to place his Son a Scholar
there, when the Doctor went thither with him. They Lodged there at an Inn, the
Sign was the Christopher, and tarried two or three Nights, not lying together
now as before at Dulverton, but in two several Chambers. The Morning before
they went thence the Captain stayed in his Chamber longer than he was wont to
do before he called upon the Doctor. At length he comes into the Doctors
Chamber, but in a visage and form much differing from himself, with his Hair
and Eyes staring, and his whole body shaking and trembling. Whereat the Doctor
wondering, presently demanded, What is the matter, Cousin Captain? The Captain
replies, I have seen my Major. At which the Doctor seeming to smile, the
Captain immediately confirms it, saying; If ever I saw him in my life I saw him
but now. And then he related to the Doctor what had passed, Thus: This Morning
after it was light, some one comes to my beds side and suddenly drawing back
the Curtains calls Cap. Cap. (which was the term of familiarity that the Major
used to call the Captain by) to whom I replied, What my Major? To which he
returns, I could not come at the time appinted, but I am now come to tell you,
That there is a God and a very just and terrible one, and if you do not turn
over a new leaf (the very expression as is by the Doctor punctually remembered)
you will find it so. (the Captain proceeded) On the Table by, there lay a Sword
which the Major had formerly given me. Now after the Apparition had walked a
turn or two about the Chamber he took up the Sword, drew it out, and finding it
not so clean and bright as it ought, Cap. Cap. says he, this Sword did not use
to be kept after this manner when it was mine. After which words he suddenly
disappeared.

The Captain was not only thoroughly persuaded of what he had thus seen and
heard, but was from that time observed to be very much affected with it. And
the humor that before in him was brisk and jovial, was then strangely altered.
Insomuch as very little meat would pass down with him at Dinner, though at the
taking leave of their Friends there was a very handsome Treat provided. Yea it
was observed that what the Captain had thus seen and heard had a more lasting
influence upon him, and it is judged by those who were well acquainted with his
Conversation, that the remembrance of this passage stuck close to him, and that
those words of his dead Friend were frequently sounding fresh in his Ears,
during the remainder of his Life, which was about two years.

ADVERTISEMENT.
For a further assurance of the truth of the story, it will not be amiss to
take notice what Mr. Douch writes in his second Letter to Mr. Glanvil, touching
the Character of the Major and the Captain. They were both, says he, of my
good acquaintance, Men well bred, and of a brisk humor and jolly conversation,
of very quick and keen parts, having also been both of them University and Inns
of Court Gentlemen. The Major I conceive was about forty five years old when he
dyed, and I believe the Captain might then be fifty or somewhat more. I cannot
understand that the Doctor and the Captain had any discourse concerning the
former engagement to meet, after the disappointment at that time and place, or
whether the Captain had after that any expectation of the performance of the
promise which the Major had made him. Thus far Mr. Douch. And truly one would
naturally think, that he failing the solemn appointed time, the Captain would
consequently let go all hopes and expectation of his appearing afterward. Or if
he did, that it would be at such-time of the night as was first determined of,
and not at the morning light. Which season yet is less obnoxious to the
Impostures of Fancy and Melancholy, and therefore adds some weight to the
assurance of the truth of the Apparition. I will only add one clause more out
of that second Letter that makes to the point. This story, says he, has and
does still obtain credit from all that knew the Captain, who it seems was not
at all shie or scrupulous to relate it to any one that asked him concerning it,
though it was observed he never mentioned it, but with great terror and
trepidation.

RELAT. XI.
Being a Postscript of the first Letter of Mr. Douch, concerning the appearing
of the Ghost of Sir George Villiers, Father to the first Duke of Buckingham.

SIR,

SInce the writing of the premises, a passage concerning an Apparition of Sir
George Villiers, giving warning of his Son's (the Duke of Buckingham's) Murder
is come into my Mind, which has been assured by a Servant of the Dukes to be a
great truth. Thus: Some few days before the Dukes going to Portsmouth (where he
was stabbed by Felton) the Ghost of his Father Sir George Villiers appeared to
one Parker (formerly his own Servant, but then Servant to the Duke) in his
Morning Chamber Gown; charged Parker to tell his Son that he should decline
that Employment and design he was going upon, or else he would certainly be
murdered. Parker promised the Apparition to do it, but neglected it. The Duke
making preparations for his Expedition, the Apparition came again to Parker,
taxing him very severely for his breach of Promise, and required him not to
delay the acquainting his Son of the danger he was in. Then Parker the next day
tells the Duke, that his Fathers Ghost had twice appeared to him, and had
commanded him to give him that warning. The Duke slighted it, and told him he
was an old Doting Fool. That night the Apparition came to Parker a third time,
saying, Parker thou have done well in warning my Son of his danger, but though
he will not yet believe thee, Go to him once more however, and tell him from me
by such a Token (naming a private Token) which no body knows, but only he and
I, that if he will not decline this voyage, such a Knife as this is (pulling a
long Knife out from under his Gown) will be his death. This Message Parker also
delivered the next day to the Duke, who when he heard the private Token
believed that he had it from his Fathers Ghost, yet said that his honor was
now at stake, and he could not go back from what he had undertaken, come life
come death. This passage Parker after the Duke's murder communicated to his
fellow Servant one Henry Ceeley, who told it to a reverend Divine a Neighbor
of mine, from whose mouth I have it. This Henry Ceeley has not been dead above
Twenty years, and his habitation for several years before his death was at
North-Currey but three Miles from this place. My Friend the Divine aforesaid
was an intimate acquaintance of this Henry Ceeley's, and assures me he was a
person of known truth and integrity.

ADVERTISEMENT.
This story I heard (but another name put for Parker) with great assurance and
with larger circumstances from a Person of Honor, but I shall content my self
to note only what I find in a Letter of Mr. Timothy Locket of Mongton, to Mr.
Glanvil, That this Apparition to Mr. Parker was all three times toward
midnight when he was reading in some Book, and he mentions that the Dukes
Expedition was for the relief of Rochel. The rest is muchwhat as Mr. Douch has
declared. But I will not omit the close of Mr. Lockets Letter. I was confirmed
in the truth of the premises, says he, by Mr. Henry Ceeley, who was then a
Servant with this Mr. Parker, to the Duke, and who told me that he knew Mr.
Parker to be a Religious and sober Person, and that every particular related
was to his knowledge true.

RELAT. XII.
Of the appearing of Mr. Watkinson's Ghost to his Daughter Toppam, contained in
a Letter of Mrs. Tailor of the Ford by St. Neots, to Dr. Ezekias Burton.

SIR;

MY Service to you and your Lady. Now according to your desire I shall write
what my Cousin told me: Her name was Mary Watkinson, her Father did live in
Smithfield, but she was Married to one Francis Toppam, and she did live in
York, with her Husband being an ill one, who did steal her away against her
Parents consent, so that they could not abide him. But she came often to them,
and when she was last with him upon their parting, she expressed that she
feared she should never see him more. He answered her, if he should dye, if
ever God did permit the dead to see the living, he would see her again. Now
after he had been Buried about half a year, on a Night, when she was in bed,
but could not sleep, she heard Music, and the Chamber grew lighter and
lighter, and she being broad awake, saw her Father stand at her bedside: Who
said, Mal did not I tell thee that I would see thee once again? She called him
Father, and talked of many things; and he bad her be Patient and Dutiful to her
Mother. And when she told him that she had a Child since he did dye, he said
that would not trouble her long. He bad her speak what she would now to him,
for he must go, and that he should never see her more till they met in the
Kingdom of Heaven. So the Chamber grew darker and darker, and he was gone with
Music. And she said that she did never dream of him nor ever did see any
Apparition of him after.

He was a very honest godly Man as far as I can tell.

ADVERTISEMENT.
This story G. Rust, who was after Bishop of Dromore, told me I remember with
great assurance some Twenty years ago, who was not at all credulous in these
things. And it was so as Mrs. Tailor relates to Dr. Burton. The next Relation
shall be of a Daughter appearing to her Father.

RELAT. XIII.
The appearing of the Ghost of the Daughter of Dr. Farrar to him after her
death, according to a brief Narrative sent from Mr. Edward Fowler to Dr. H.
More, Anno 1678. May 11.

THis week Mr. Pearson who is a worthy good Minister of this City of London,
told me, That his Wife's Grandfather a Man of great Piety and Physician to this
present King, his name Farrar, nearly related (I think Brother) to the famous
Mr. Farrar of little Giddon, I say this Gentleman and his Daughter (Mrs.
Pearsons Mother a very pious soul) made a compact at his entreaty that the
first of them that dyed, if happy, should after death appear to the surviver,
if it were possible; the Daughter with some difficulty consenting thereto.

Some time after, the Daughter who lived at Gillingham. Lodge two Miles from
Salisbury, fell in labor, and by a mistake being given a noxious potion
instead of another prepared for her, suddenly dyed.

Her Father lived in London, and that very Night she dyed she opened his
Curtains and looked upon him. He had before heard nothing of her ilness, but
upon this Apparition confidently told his Maid, that his Daughter was dead, and
two days after received the news. Her Grandmother told Mrs. Pearson this, as
also an Uncle of hers, and the abovesaid Maid, and this Mrs. Pearson I know,
and she is a very prudent and good Woman.

RELAT. XIV.
The appearing of the Ghost of one Mr. Bower of Guilford, to an Highway-man in
Prison, as it is set down in a Letter of Dr. Ezekias Burton, to Dr. H. More.

ABout Ten years ago one Mr. Bower an ancient Man living at Guilford in Surrey,
was upon the Highway not far from that place found newly Murdered very
barbarously, having one great Cut cross his Throat, and another down his
Breast. Two Men were seized upon suspicion, and put into Gaol at Guilford to
another, who had before been committed for Robbing as I suppose. That Night
this third Man was awakened about one of the Clock and greatly terrified with
an Old Man, who had a great gash cross his Throat almost from Ear to Ear, and a
wound down his Breast. He also came in stooping and holding his hand on his
back. Thus he appeared but said nothing. The Thief calls to his two new
Companions, they grumbled at him but made no answer.

In the Morning he retained so lively an impression of what he had seen, that
he spoke to them to the same purpose again, and they told him it was nothing
but his Phantasy. But he was so fully persuaded of the r^ality of this
Apparition, that he told others of it, and it came to the Ears of my Friend Mr.
Reading Justice of Peace in Surrey, and Cousin to the Gentleman that was
Murdered.

He immediately sent for the Prisoner and asked him in the first place whether
he was born or had lived about Guilford? To which he answered, No. Secondly, He
enquired if he knew any of the Inhabitants of that Town or of the
Neighborhood? He replied that he was a stranger to all thereabout. Then he
enquired, if he had ever heard of one Mr. Bower? He said No. After this he
examined him for what cause those other two Men were imprisoned? To which he
answered, he knew not, but supposed for some Robbery.

After these preliminary Interrogatories he desired him to tell him what he had
seen in the Night? Which he immediately did, exactly according to the Relation
he had heard, and I gave before. And withal deseribed the Old Gentleman so by
his picked beard, and that he was, as he called it, rough on his Cheeks, and
that the Hairs of his Face were Black and White, that Mr. Reading says he
himself could not have given a more exact description of Mr. Bower, than this
was. He told the Highway-man that he must give him his Oath (though that would
signify little from such a Rogue) to which the Man readily consented, and took
Oath before the Justice of all this.

Mr. Reading being a very discreet Man concealed this story from the Jury at
the Assizes, as knowing that this would be no evidence according to our Law.
However the Friends of the Murdered Gentleman had been very inquisitive, and
discovered several suspicious circumstances. One of which was, that those two
Men had washed their Clothes, and that some stains of blood remained. Another,
that one of them had denied he ever heard that Mr. Bower was dead, when as he
had in another place consest it two hours before. Upon these and such like
evidences those two were Condemned and Executed, but denied it to the last. But
one of them said, the other could clear him if he would, which the Bystanders
understood not.

After some time a Tinker was hanged (where, the Gentleman has forgot) who at
his death said, that the Murder of Mr. Bower of Guilford was his greatest
trouble. For he had a hand in it; he confessed he struck him a blow on the back
which fetched him from his Horse, and when he was down, those other Men that
were Arraigned and Executed for it cut his Throat and rifled him. This is the
first story which I had from Mr. Reading himself, who is a very honest prudent
person and not credulous.

I know you desire to have the Names of all the persons referred to in this
Relation, and the exact time and place, but Mr. Reading cannot recollect them
now, though he tells me he sent an exact and full Narrative of all to one Mr.
Onslow a Justice of Peace in that Neighborhood, with whom I have some
acquaintance, and I will endeavor to retrieve it.

ADVERTISEMENT.
The Names of all the Persons and exact time and place of all the actions, I
find not amongst Mr. Glanvil 's Papers, but the story is so perfect as it is,
and so credible, that I thought it worthy of a place amongst the rest. And this
appearing of Mr. Bower is just such another thing as the appearing of Anne
Walker. We proceed to the second story which Mr. Reading imparted to the Doctor.

RELAT. XV.
Another appearing of a Ghost of a Man of Guilford, for the recovery of a Field
for his Child unjustly detained by his Brother, out of the abovesaid Letter of
Dr. Ezekias Burton to Dr. H. More.

AN Inhabitant of the before-named Town of Guilford, who was possessed of some
Copyhold Land, which was to descend to his Children, or in default of such
issue to his Brother, dies having no Child born. And his Wife apprehending her
self not to be with Child (which her Husbands Brother asked her immediately
after his Brothers death) she told him she believed she was not, but afterward
proved to be. Which when she knew she went, by the instigation of Neighbors,
to her Brother, and told him how it was with her. He rated her, called her
Whore, and told her that she had procured some body to get her with Child,
knowing that such a Field must be inherited by the posterity of her Husband,
but her Whoring should not fool him out of that Estate. The poor Woman went
home troubled, that not only her Child should lose the Land, but which was
worse, that she should be thought a Whore. However she quieted her self, and
resolved to sit down with the loss.

When her time came she was delivered of a Son, he grew up and one Summers
Night as she was undressing him in her yard, her Husband appeared, and bid her
go to his Brother and demand the Field. Which she did, but was treated very ill
by him. He told her that neither she nor her Devil (for she had told him her
Husband appeared and bid her speak to him) should make him forgo his land.
Whereupon she went home again. But some time after as her Brother was going out
of this Field homeward, the dead Man appears to him at the style, and bids him
give up the Land to the Child, for it was his right. The Brother being greatly
frighted at this, runs away, and not long after comes to her and tells her, she
had sent the Devil to him, and bids her take the Land, and so gave it up, and
her Son is now possessed of it. His Name is Mat, he lived in the Service of Mr.
Readings Brother for some years, but he has forgot his Surname though he knows
him very well.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Though the Surname of the party be wanting, yet he is determinated so by
other circumstances, and the story so fresh, and told by so credible a person,
that the Narrative is sufficiently considerable as it is. But of Recovery of
Land to the right Owners, the story of Mrs. Brettons Ghost appearing is an
eximious example, which is as follows.

RELAT. XVI.
The appearing of the Ghost of Mrs. Bretton, for the recovery of some Lands
into the hands of the Poor, taken from them by some mistake in Law or Right, as
it is in a Narrative sent to Dr. H. More from Mr. Edward Fowler, Prebendary of
Gloucester.

DR. Bretton late Rector of Ludgate and Dedford, lived formerly in
Herefordshire, and Married the Daughter of Dr. S -- This Gentlewoman was a
person of extraordinary piety, which she expressed as in her life, so at her
death. She had a Maid that she had a great kindness for, who was Married to a
near Neighbor, whose name, as I remember, was Alice. Not long after her death,
as Alice was rocking her Infant in the night, she was called from the Cradle by
a knocking at her door, which opening she was surprised at the sight of a
Gentlewoman not to be distinguished from her late Mistress, neither in Person
nor habit. She was in a Morning-Gown, the same in appearance with that she had
often seen her Mistress wear. At first sight she expressed very great
amazement, and said, Were not my Mistress dead, I should not question but that
you are she. She replied I am the same that was your Mistress, and took her by
the hand. Which Alice affirmed was as cold as a Clod.

She added, That she had business of great importance to employ her in, and
that she must immediately go a little way with her. Alice trembled, and
beseecht her to excuse her, and entreated her very importunately to go to her
Master, who must needs be more fit to be employed. She answered, that he who
was her Husband was not at all concerned, but yet she had had a desire rather
to make use of him, and in order thereunto had several times been in his
Chamber, but he was still asleep, nor had she power to do more than once
uncover his feet toward the awakening of him. And the Doctor said, that he had
heard walking in his Chamber in the night, which till now he could give no
account of. Alice next objected that her husband was gone a journey, and she
had no one to look to her Child, that it was very apt to cry vehemently, and
she feared if it awaked before her return, it would cry it self to death, or do
it self mischief. The Spectre replied, The Child shall sleep till you return.

Alice seeing there was no avoiding it, sorely against her will, followed her
over a style into a large Field, who then said to her, observe how much of this
Field I measure with my Feet. And when she had taken a good large and leisurely
compass, she said, all this belongs to the Poor, it being gotten from them by
wrongful means, and charged her to go and tell her Brother, whose it was at
that time, that he should give it up to the Poor again forthwith as he loved
her and his deceased Mother. This Brother was not the Person who did this
unjust act, but his Father. She added, that she was the more concerned, because
her name was made use of in some writing that related to this Land.

Alice asked her how she should satisfy her Brother that this was no Cheat or
delusion of her Phansy. She replied, tell him this secret, which he knows that
only himself and I are privy to, and he will believe you. Alice having promised
her to go on this Errand, she proceeded to give her good advice, and entertained
her all the rest of the Night with most Heavenly and Divine discourse. When the
Twilight appeared they heard the whistling of Carters and the noise of
Horse-Bells. Whereupon the Spectre said, Alice I must be seen by none but your
self, and so she disappeared.

Immediately Alice makes all haste home; being thoughtful for her Child, but
found it as the Spectre had said, asleep as she left it. When she had dressed
it, and committed it to the care of a Neighbor, away she went to her Master
the Doctor, who amazed at the account she gave him, sent her to his Brother in
Law. He at first hearing Alice's story and message, laughed at it heartily. But
she had no sooner told him the secret, but he changed his countenance, told her
he would give the Poor their own, and accordingly he did it, and they now enjoy
it.

This with more circumstances has several times been related by Dr. Bretton
himself, who was well known to be a person of great goodness and sincerity. He
gave a large Narrative of this Apparition of his Wife to two of my Friends.
First, to one Mrs. Needham, and afterward a little before his death to Dr.
Whichcot.

Some years after I received the foregoing Narrative (viz. near four years
since) I light into the company of three sober persons of good rank, who all
lived in the City of Hereford, and I traveled in a Stage-Coach three days with
them. To them I happened to tell this story, but told it was done at Deptford,
for so I presumed it was, because I knew that there Dr. Bretton lived. They
told me as soon as I had concluded it, that the story was very true in the
main, only I was out as to the place. For 'twas not Deptford, but as I remember
they told me Pembridge near Hereford, where the Doctor was Minister before the
Return of the King. And they assured me upon their own knowledge, that to that
day the Poor enjoyed the piece of ground. They added, That Mrs. Bretton's
Father could never endure to hear any thing mentioned of his Daughters
appearing after her death, but would still reply in great anger, that it was
not his Daughter, but it was the Devil. So that he acknowledged that something
appeared in the likeness of his Daughter.

This is attested by me this 16 th. of Feb. 1680/1. Edward Fowler.

RELAT. XVII.
Of a Dutch Man that could see Ghosts, and of the Ghost he saw in the Town of
Woodbridge in Suffolk.

MR. Broom the Minister of Woodbridge in Suffolk, meeting one day, in a Barbers
shop in that Town, a Dutch Lieutenant (who was blown up with Obdam, and taken
alive out of the Water, and carried to that Town where he was a Prisoner at
large) upon the occasion of some discourse was told by him, that he could see
Ghosts, and that he had seen diverse. Mr. Broom rebuking him for talking so
idly, he persisted in it very stiffly. Some days after lighting upon him again,
he asked him whether he had seen any Ghost since his coming to that Town. To
which he replied, No.

But not long after this, as they were walking together up the Town, he said to
Mr. Broom, Yonder comes a Ghost. He seeing nothing, asked him whereabout it was?
The other said, it is over against such a house, and it walks looking upwards
toward such a side, flinging one arm with a Glove in its hand. He said
moreover, that when it came near them, they must give way to it. That he ever
did so, and some that have not done so, have suffered for it. Anon he said,
it is just upon us, let us out of the way. Mr. Broom believing all to be a
fiction, as soon as he said those words, took hold of his Arm, and kept him by
force in the way. But as he held him, there came such a force against them,
that he was flung into the middle of the street, and one of the palms of his
hands, and one knee bruised and broken by the fall, which put him for a while
to excessive pain.

But spying the Lieutenant lie like a dead man, he got up as soon as he could,
and applied himself to his relief. With the help of others he got him into the
next shop, where they poured strong-water down his Throat, but for some time
could discern no Life in him. At length, what with the strong-water, and what
with well chafing him he began to stir, and when he was come to himself, his
first words were, I will show you no more Ghosts. Then he desired a Pipe of
Tobacco, but Mr. Broom told him, he should take it at his house; for he feared,
should he take it so soon there, it would make him sick.

Thereupon they went together to Mr. Broom's house, where they were no sooner
entering in, but the Bell rang out. Mr. Broom presently sent his Maid to learn
who was dead. She brought word that it was such an One, a Tailor, who dyed
suddenly, though he had been in a Consumption a long time. And inquiring after
the time of his death, they found it was as punctually as it could be guessed
at the very time when the Ghost appeared. The Ghost had exactly this Tailors
known Gate, who ordinarily went also with one Arm swinging, and a Glove in that
hand, and looking on one side upwards.

ADVERTISEMENT.
This Relation was sent to Dr. H. More from Mr. Edw. Fowler; at the end whereof
he writes, that Dr. Burton as well as himself, heard it from Mr. Broom' s own
mouth. And I can add, that I also afterward heard it from his own mouth at
London.

RELAT. XVIII.
An Irish story of one that had like to have been carried away by Spirits, and
of the Ghost of a Man who had been seven years dead, that brought a Medicine to
the abovesaid parties Bedside.

A Gentleman in Ireland near to the Earl of Ororie's, sending his Butler one
afternoon to buy Cards; as he passed a Field, he, to his wonder, espied a
company of people sitting round a Table, with a deal of good cheer before them
in the midst of the Field. And he going up toward them, they all arose and
saluted him, and desired him to sit down with them. But one of them whispered
these words in his Ear; Do nothing this company invites you to. He thereupon
refused to sit down at the Table, and immediately Table and all that belonged
to it were gone. And the company are now dancing and playing upon Musical
Instruments. And the Butler being desired to join himself to them, but he
refusing this also, they fall all to work, and he not being to be prevailed
with to accompany them in working any more than in feasting or dancing, they
all disappeared, and the Butler is now alone. But instead of going forwards,
home he returns as fast as he could drive, in a great consternation of mind.
And was no sooner entered his Masters door, but down he falls, and lay some time
senseless, but coming to himself again, he related to his Master what had
happened to him.

The night following, there comes one of this company to his Bedside, and
tells him, that if he offered to stir out of doors the next day, he would be
carried away. Hereupon he kept within, but toward the Evening, having need to
make water, he adventured to put one foot over the threshold, several standing
by. Which he had no sooner done, but they espied a Rope cast about his middle,
and the poor Man was hurried away with great swiftness, they following after
him as fast as they could, but could not overtake him. At length they espied a
Horseman coming toward them, and made signs to him to stop the Man, whom he
saw coming near him, and both the ends of the Rope but no body drawing. When
they met, he laid hold on one end of the Rope, and immediately had a smart blow
given him over his Arm with the other end. But by this means the Man was stopped,
and the Horseman brought him back with him.

The Earl of Orory hearing of these strange passages, sent to the Master to
desire him to send this Man to his House, which he accordingly did. And the
morning following, or quickly after, he told the Earl that his Spectre had been
with him again, and assured him that that day he should most certainly be
carried away, and that no endeavors should avail to the saving of him. Upon
this he was kept in a large room, with a considerable number of persons to
guard him, among whom was the famous stroker Mr. Greatrix, who was a neighbor.
There were besides other Persons of Quality, two Bishops in the house at the
same time, who were consulted touching the making use of a Medicine the Spectre
or Ghost prescribed, of which, mention will be made anon, but they determined
on the Negative. But this by the By.

Till part of the Afternoon was spent all was quiet, but at length he was
perceived to rise from the ground, whereupon Mr. Greatrix and another lusty Man
clapped their Arms over his shoulders, one of them before him, and the other
behind, and weighed him down with all their strength. But he was forcibly taken
up from them, and they were too weak to keep their hold, and for a considerable
time he was carried in the Air to and fro over their heads, several of the
Company still running under him to prevent his receiving hurt if he should
fall. At length he fell and was caught before he came to ground, and had by
that means no hurt.

All being quiet till bedtime, My Lord ordered two of his Servants to lie with
him, and the next Morning he told his Lordship, that his Spectre was again with
him, and brought a wooden dish with gray liquor in it, and bad him drink it
off. At the first sight of the Spectre he said he endeavored to awake his
bedfellows, but it told him that that endeavor should be in vain, and that he
had no cause to fear him, he being his Friend, and he that at first gave him
the good advice in the Field, which had he not followed, be had been before now
perfectly in the power of the Company he saw there. He added, that he concluded
it was impossible but that he should have been carried away the day before,
there being so strong a Combination against him. But now he could assure him
that there would be no more attempts of that nature, but he being troubled with
two sorts of sad fits he had brought that liquor to cure him of them, and bad
him drink it. He peremptorily refusing, the Spectre was angry, upbraided him
with great disingenuity, but told him that however he had a kindness for him,
and that if he would take Plantain juice he should be well of one sort of fits,
but he should carry the other to his Grave. The poor Man having by this time
somewhat recovered himself, ask't the Spectre whether by the juice of Plantain
he meant that of the Leaves or Roots? It replied, the Roots.

Then it asked him whether he did not know him? He answered, No. He replied, I
am such a one? The Man answered: He has been long dead. I have been dead said
the Spectre or Ghost seven years, and you know that I lived a loose life. And
ever since have I been hurried up and down in a restless Condition with the
Company you saw, and shall be to the day of Judgment. Then he proceeded to tell
him, that had he acknowledged God in his ways, he had not suffered such severe
things by their means. And further said, you never prayed to God that day
before you met with this Company in the Field, and also was then going about an
unlawful business, and so vanished.

ADVERTISEMENT.
This story was also sent from Mr. E. Fowler to Dr. H. More, concerning which
he further adds by way of Postscript, that Mr. Greatrix told this story to Mrs.
Foxcraft at Ragley, and at her request he told it a second time in her hearing
at the Table. My Lady Roydon being then present, inquired afterward concerning
it of My Lord Orory, who confirmed the truth of it, acknowledging all the
circumstances of this Narrative to My Lady Roydon to be true except that
passage, That the Spectre told the Man that he was that day going about an
unlawful business. And Mr. Fowler further adds, that since an eminent Doctor in
this City told me that My Lord told him, that he saw at his own house a Man
taken up into the Air.

Lastly, I find Dr. H. More in a Letter to Mr. Glanvil, affirming that he also
heard Mr. Greatrix tell the story at My Lord Conway' s at Ragley, and that he
particularly inquired of Mr. Greatrix about the Man's being carried up into the
Air above Men's heads in the room, and that he did expressly affirm that he was
an Eyewitness thereof.

RELAT. XIX.
The miraculous Cure of Jesch Claes a Dutch Woman of Amsterdam, accompanied
with an Apparition.

THe Narrative taken by a Dutch Merchant from her own Mouth begins thus. A
miraculous Cure upon Jesch Claes, a Woman about fifty years of Age: For this
many years well known to my self and the Neighbors. This Woman for fourteen
years had been lame of both Legs, one of them being dead and without feeling,
so that she could not go but creep upon the ground, or was carried in Peoples
Arms as a Child, but now through the power of God Almighty she has walked
again. Which came to pass after this manner, as I have taken it from her own
Mouth.

In the year 1676. about the 13th or 14th of this Month October, in the Night
between one and two of the Clock, this Jesch Claes being in bed with her
Husband who was a Boatman, she was three times pulled by her Arm, with which
she awaked and cried out, O Lord! What may this be? Hereupon she heard an
answer in plain words: Be not afraid, I come in the Name of the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost. Your malady which has for many years been upon you shall cease,
and it shall be given you from God Almighty to walk again. But keep this to
your self till further answer. Whereupon she cried aloud, O Lord! That I had a
light, that I might know what this is. Then had she this answer, There needs no
light, the light shall be given you from God. Then came light all over the
room, and she saw a beautiful Youth about Ten years of Age, with Curled Yellow
Hair Clothed in White to the Feet, who went from the Beds-head to the Chimney
with a light which a little after vanished. Hereupon did there shoot something
or gush from her Hip, or diffuse it self through her Leg as a Water into her
great Toe, where she did find life rising up, felt it with her hand, crying
out, Lord give me now again my feeling which I have not had in so many years.
And further she continued crying and praying to the Lord according to her weak
measure.

Yet she continued that day Wednesday, and the next day Thursday, as before
till Evening at six a Clock. At which time she sat at the fire dressing the
food. Then came as like a rushing noise in both her Ears, with which it was
said to her Stand. Your going is given you again. Then did she immediately
stand up that had so many years crept, and went to the door. Her Husband
meeting her being exceedingly afraid drew back. In the mean while she cried
out, My dear Husband I can go again. The Man thinking it was a Spirit drew
back, saying, you are not my Wife. His Wife taking hold of him said, My dear
Husband I am the self same that has been Married these Thirty years to you.
The Almighty God has given my going again. But her Husband being amazed drew
back to the side of the room, till at last she claspt her hand about his neck,
and yet he doubted and said to his Daughter, is this your Mother? She answered,
yes Father, this we plainly see. I had seen her go also before you came in.
This Person dwells upon Princes Island in Amsterdam.

ADVERTISEMENT.
This account was sent from a Dutch Merchant procured by a Friend for Dr. R.
Cudworth, and contains the main Particulars that occur in the Dutch Printed
Narrative, which Monsieur Van Helmont brought over with him to my Lady Conway
at Ragley, who having inquired upon the Spot when he was there at Amsterdam,
though of a Genius not at all credulous of such Relations, found the thing to
be really true. As also Philippus Limbergius in a Letter to Dr. H. More, sent
this Testimony touching the party cured, That she was always reputed a very
honest good Woman, and that he believed there was no fraud at all in the
business.

RELAT. XX.
An house haunted some Thirty years ago or more at or near Bow, not far from
London, and strangely disturbed by Demons and Witches.

A Certain Gentleman about Thirty years ago or more, being to Travel from
London into Essex, and to pass through Bow, at the request of a Friend he
called at a house there, which began then to be a little disquieted. But not
any thing much remarkable yet, unless of a young Girl who was plucked by the
Thigh by a cold hand in her bed who dyed within a few days after.

Some weeks after this his occasions calling him back he passed by the same
house again, but had no design to give them a new visit, he having done that
not long before. But it happening that the Woman of the house stood at the
Door, he thought himself engaged to ride to her and ask how she did? To whom
she answered with a sorrowful Countenance; That though she was in tolerable
health, yet things went very ill with them, their house being extremely haunted
especially above stairs, so that they were forced to keep in the low rooms,
there was such flinging of things up and down, of Stones and Bricks through the
Windows and putting all in disorder. But he could scarce forbear laughing at
her, giving so little credit to such stories himself, and thought it was the
tricks only of some unhappy Wags to make sport to themselves and trouble to
their Neighbors.

Well says she, if you will but stay a while you may chance to see something
with your own Eyes. And indeed he had not stayed any considerable time with her
in the street, but a Window of an upper room opened of it self (for they of the
Family took it for granted no body was above stairs) and out comes a piece of
an old Wheel through it. Whereupon it presently clapped to again. A little while
after it suddenly flew open again and out come a Brick-bat, which inflamed the
Gentleman with a more eager desire to see what the matter was, and to discover
the Knavery. And therefore he boldly resolved if any one would go up with him,
he would in to the Chamber. But none present durst accompany him. Yet the keen
desire of discovering the cheat, made him adventure by himself alone into that
Room. Into which when he was come, he saw the Bedding, Chairs and Stools, and
Candlesticks, and Bedstaves, and all the furniture rudely scattered on the
floor, but upon search found no mortal in the Room.

Well! he stays there a while to try conclusions, anon a Bedstaff begins to
move, and turn it self round a good while together upon its Toe, and at last
fairly to lay it self down again. The curious Spectator, when he had observed
it to lie still a while, steps out to it, views it whether any small string or
hair were tied to it, or whether there were any hole or button to fasten any
such string to, or any hole or string in the Ceiling above; but after search,
he found not the least suspicion of any such thing.

He retires to the Window again, and observes a little longer what may fall
out. Anon, another Bedstaff rises off from the ground of its own accord higher
into the air, and seems to make toward him. He now begins to think there was
something more than ordinary in the business, and presently makes to the door
with all speed, and for better caution shuts it after him. Which was presently
opened again, and such a clatter of Chairs, and Stools, and Candlesticks, and
Bedstaves, sent after him down Stairs, as if they intended to have maimed him,
but their motion was so moderated, that he received no harm, but by this time
he was abundantly assured, that it was not mere Womanish fear or superstition
that so affrighted the Mistress of the house. And while in a low Room he was
talking with the Family about these things, he saw a Tobacco-pipe rise from a
side Table, no body being nigh, and fly to the other side of the Room, and
break it self against the wall for his further confirmation, that it was
neither the tricks of Waggs, nor the fancy of a Woman, but the mad frolicks of
Witches and Demons. Which they of the house being fully persuaded of, roasted
a Bedstaff, upon which an Old Woman a suspected Witch came to the House, and
was apprehended, but escaped the Law. But the House was after so ill haunted in
all the Rooms, upper and lower, that the house stood empty for a long time
after.

ADVERTISEMENT.
This Story is found amongst Mr. Glanvil's Papers, written to him from Dr. H.
More, who says, some three months before, he had received it from the parties
own mouth, that was at the haunted house in Bow, and saw the motion of the
Bedstaves and Tobacco-pipe, etc. And I very well remember, that about Thirty or
Forty years ago, there was a great fame of an house haunted at Bow, and such
like feats us this Spectator saw, was rumoured of it, and the time agrees with
that of this Spectator or Eyewitness of the above recited Feats. And a Book
was then said to be Printed, though I never saw any but one of late without any
date of the year, the things then being in Fieri, when it was Printed. And they
seem to referr to the same haunted place, though the Pamphlet names Plaisto for
Bow. But the haunting of which the fame went so many years ago I very well
remember was Bow. But whether Bow was talked of instead of Plaisto, it being a
place near, and of more note, I know not. And Paul Fox a Weaver, was the Man
whose house was haunted in Plaisto according to that Pamphlet.

If the Gentleman that so well remembers the strange things he saw, had not
forgot the Man's name whose house was haunted (and the strangeness of those
things would six themselves in his memory, even whether he would or no, when
the name of the Master of the house might easily in Thirty or Forty years time
slide out of it) we might be sure whether it were Plaisto or Bow. But I am sure
the fame went of Bow, though the Pamphlet name Plaisto, and that might make the
abovesaid Party, who told Dr. More the story, six the Scene without all scruple
in Bow.

But methinks I hear the Reader complain, that it was a great omission in Mr.
Glanvil, that he did not inquire of Dr. More who this party was that told him
the story, it seeming an headless piece without that part. Wherefore I find in
a Paper (whose Title is Doctor More' s Particulars about the Stories) these
words in answer to Mr. Glanvil. That it is Dr. Gibbs a Prebendary of
Westminster, and a sober intelligent person. And some dozen lines after, Dr.
More says, Dr. Gibbs told the story to my self, and to Dr. Outram, who brought
me to him. And I have told you already, that he is a person of understanding
and integrity. He has also some Sermons in Print as I take it.

But for as much as it was about three months after Dr. More had received this
account of the story from Dr. Gibbs, that he wrote to Mr. Glanvil, it is not to
be expected that he related it in the very same words, and in every punctilio
as he heard it. But I dare undertake for him that for the main, and that which
makes to the evincing of Witchcraft, and the ludicrous Feats of Demons, that
he has committed no error therein, nor set down any thing whose substance was
not related to him by the Reverend Dr. Gibbs.

RELAT. XXI.
Mr. Jermin's story of an house haunted, and what disturbance himself was a
Witness of there at a visit of his Wife's Sister.

ONe Mr. Jermin Minister of Bigner in Sussex, going to see a Sister of his
Wife's, found her very Melancholy, and asking her the reason, she replied, You
shall know to morrow morning. When he went to Bed there were two Maids
accompanied him in his Chamber, and the next day he understood that they durst
not go into any Room in the house alone.

In the night, while he was in his Bed, he heard the trampling of many feet
upon the Leads over his head, and after that the going off of a Gun, upon which
sollowed a great silence. Then they came swiftly down Stairs into his Chamber,
where they fell a wrestling and tumbling each other down, and so continued a
great while. After they were quiet, they fell a whispering and made a great
buzz, of which he could understand nothing. Then one called at the door, and
said, Day is broke, come away. Upon which they ran up Stairs as fast as they
could drive, and so he heard no more of them.

In the morning his Brother and Sister came in to him, and she said, Now
Brother you know why I am so melancholy, aft^r she had asked him how he had
slept, and he had answered, I never rested worse in my life, having been
disturbed a great part of the night with tumblings and noises. She complained
that her Husband would force her to live there, notwithstanding their being
continually scared. Whereto the Husband answered, Their disturbers never did
them any other mischief.

At Dinner they had a Physician with them, who was an acquaintance. Mr. Jermin
discoursing about this disturbance, the Physician also answered that never any
hurt was done, of which he gave this instance: That Dining there one day, there
came a Man on Horseback into the yard in mourning. His Servant went to know
what was his business, and found him sitting very melancholy, nor could he get
any answer from him. The Master of the House and the Physician went forth to
see who it was. Upon which the Man clapped Spurs to his Horse, and rode into the
house up Stairs into a long Gallery whither the Physician followed him, and saw
him vanish in a fire at the upper end of the Gallery. But though none of the
Family received hurt at any time; yet Mr. Jermin fell into a Fever with the
disturbance he experienced that endangered his Life.

ADVERTISEMENT.
Mr. Scot and his Wife heard this Narrative from Mr. Jermin' s own mouth. And I
also have heard it from Mr. Scot, who is a Minister of London, and the Author
of a late excellent good Treatise, which is entitled, The Christian Life, etc.

RELAT. XXII.
Contained in a Letter of Mr. G. Clark, to Mr. M. T. touching an house haunted
in Welton near Daventry.

SIR,
I Send you here a Relation of a very memorable piece of Witchcraft as I
suppose, which would fit Mr. More gallantly. I first heard the story related to
Sir Justinian Isham by a Reverend Minister, of his own experience. Sir
Justinian would have had me gone to the place, which I could not then do. But a
little after going to visit a friend, and not thinking of this, my friend told
me the story, the place being near him, and the principal man concerned in the
story being a Relation of his, and one that I my self had some acquaintance
with. He had occasion to go to this Man's house for some deeds of Land, and I
went with him for satisfaction touching this story, which I had to the full,
and in which I could not but acquiesce, though otherwise I am very chary, and
hard enough to believe passages of this nature.

The Story is this, At Welton within a Mile of Daventry in Northamptonshire,
where live together Widow Cowley, the Grandmother, Widow Stiff the Mother,
and her two Daughters. At the next house but one, live another Widow Cowley,
Sister to the former Widow Cowley, Moses Cowley my acquaintance her Son, and
Moses his Wife, having a good Estate in Land of their own, and very civil and
orderly people. These three told me, that the younger of the two Daughters, ten
years of age, Vomited in less than three days, three Gallons of Water to their
great Admiration. After this the elder Wench comes running, and tells them,
that now her Sister begins to Vomit Stones and Coals. They went and were
Eyewitnesses, told them till they came to Five hundred. Some weighed a quarter
of a pound, and were so big, as they had enough to do to get them out of her
mouth, and he professed to me, that he could scarce get the like into his
mouth; and I do not know how any one should, if they were so big as he showed
the like to me. I have sent you one, but not a quarter so big as some of them
were. It was one of the biggest of them that were left and kept in a bag. This
Vomiting lasted about a fortnight, and has Witnesses good store.

In the mean time they threw hards of Flax upon the fire, which would not blaze
though blown, but dwindled away. The Bed-clothes would be thrown off the Bed.
Moses Cowley told me, that he laid them on again several times, they all coming
out of the Room, and go but into the Parlour again, and they were off again.
And a strike of Wheat standing at the Beds feet, set it how they would, it
would be thrown down again. Once the Coffers and things were so transposed, as
they could scarce stir about the Room. Once he laid the Bible upon the Bed, but
the Clothes were thrown off again, and the Bible hid in another Bed. And when
they were all gone into the Parlour, as they used to go together, then things
would be transposed in the Hall, their Wheel taken in pieces, and part of it
thrown under the Table. In their Buttery their Milk would be taken off the
Table, and set on the ground, and once one Panchion was broken, and the Milk
spilt. A seven pound weight with a ring was hung upon the Spigot, and the Beer
mingled with Sand and all spoiled, their Salt mingled most perfectly with Bran.

Moses his Mother said that their Flax was thrown out of a Box, she put it in
again, it was thrown out again; she put it in again and locked the Box, trying
by the hasp or lid (as they use to do) whether it was fast, it was so. But as
soon as her back was turned the Box was unlocked, and the Flax was thrown out
again. Moses said that when he was coming out of the Parlour, he saw a loaf of
Bread tumbled off the form, and that was the first thing he saw. After a Woman's
Patten rose up in the house, and was thrown at them. He heard the Comb break in
the Window, and presently it flew at them in two pieces. A Knife rose up in the
Window, and flew at a Man, hitting him with the haft. An Ink-glass was thrown
out of the Window into the floor, and by and by the stopple came after it. Then
every day abundance of stones were thrown about the house which broke the
Windows, and hat the People, but they were the less troubled, because all this
while no hurt was done to their Persons, and a great many People being in the
room the wheat was thrown about amongst them.

I was in the house where I saw the Windows which were still broken, and the
People themselves showed me where the several particulars were done. The
Grandmother told me that she thought she had lost half a strike of Wheat, and
the like happened to some Fitches in the Barn. One Mr. Robert Clark a Gentleman
being hat with the stones, bad the Baker at the Door look to his Bread well,
and by and by a handful of crumbs were thrown into his lap. They could see the
things as they came, but no more.

At last some that had been long suspected for Witches were Examined, and one
sent to the Gaol, where it is said she plays her pranks, but that is of
doubtful credit. I asked the Old Woman whether they were free now. She said
that one Night since, they heard great knockings and cruel noise, which scared
them worse than all the rest, and once or twice that week her cheese was
crumbled into pieces and spoiled. I was there about May Day, 1658. This is all
that I remember at present. I have heard several other stories, and two or
three notable ones lately from Men's own Experience, which in reason I was to
believe as I did. But in my Judgment this outgoes all that I know of, it having
so much of sense and of the day time, so many and so credible Witnesses beyond
all cavil and exception. I will trouble you no further, but commending you to
the protection of God Almighty, I take my leave and rest

Loddington May 22th. 1658. Yours, G. Clark.

RELAT. XXIII.
The Relation of James Sherring, taken concerning the matter at Old Gast s
house of little Burton, June 23. 1677. as follows.

THe first Night that I was there with Hugh Mellmore and Edward Smith, they
heard as it were the washing in water over their heads. Then taking a Candle
and going up the stairs there was a wet Cloth thrown at them, but it fell on
the stairs. They going up farther then, there was another thrown as before. And
when they came up into the Chamber there stood a bowl of water, some of it
sprinkled over, and the water looked white as if there had been Soap used in
it. The Bowl just before was in the Kitchen, and could not be carried up but
through the room where they were. The next thing that they heard the same Night
was a terrible noise as if it had been a slat of Thunder, and shortly after
they heard great scratching about the Bedsted, and after that a great knocking
with a Hammer against the Beds-head, so that the two Maids that were in the Bed
cried out for help. Then they ran up the stairs, and there lay the Hammer on
the Bed and on the Beds-head, there were near a Thousand prints of the Hammer
which the violent strokes had made. The Maids said that they were scratched and
pinched with a hand that was put into the Bed which had exceeding long Nails.
They said that the Hammer was locked fast up in the Cupboard when they went to
Bed. This was that which was done the first Night, with many other things of
the like nature.

The second Night that James Sherring and Tho. Hillary were there, James
Sherring sat down in the Chimney to fill a Pipe of Tobacco. He made use of the
fire-tongs to take up a Coal to fire his Pipe, and by and by the Tongs were
drawn up the stairs, and after they were up in the Chamber, they were played
withal as many times Men do, and then thrown down upon the Bed. Although the
Tongs were so near him, he never perceived the going of them away. The same
Night one of the Maids left her shoos by the fire, and they were carried up
into the Chamber, and the Old Man's brought down and set in their places. The
same Night there was a Knife carried up into the Chamber, and it did scratch
and scrape the Beds-head all the Night, but when they went up into the Chamber
the Knife was thrown into the Loft. As they were going up the stairs there were
things thrown at them, which were just before in the low room, and when they
went down the stairs the Old Man's Breeches were thrown down after them. These
were the most remarkable things done that Night, only there was continual
knocking and pinching the Maids, which was usually done every Night.

The third Night, when James Sherring and Thomas Hillery were there, as soon as
the People were gone to bed, their Clothes were taken and thrown at the Candle
and put it out, and immediately after they cried out with a very hideous cry
and said, they should be all choked if they were not presently helped. Then
they ran up the stairs and there was abundance of Feathers plucked out of the
Bolster that lay under their Heads, and some thrust into their Mouths that they
were almost choked. The Feathers were thrown all about the Bed and room. They
were plucked out at a hole no bigger than the top of ones little finger. Some
time after they were vexed with a very hideous knocking at their heads as they
lay on the Bed. Then James Sherring and Thomas Hillery took the Candle and went
up stairs and stood at the Beds feet, and the knocking continued. Then they saw
a Hand with an Arm-wrist hold the Hammer which kept on knocking against the
Bedsted. Then James Sherring going toward the Beds-head, the Hand and Hammer
fell down behind the Bolster and could not be found. For they turned up the
Bed-clothes to search for the Hammer. But as soon as they went down the stairs
the Hammer was thrown out into the middle of the Chamber. These were the most
remarkable things that were done that Night.

The fourth and fifth Nights, there was but little done more than knocking and
scratching as was usually.

The sixth and seventh Nights, there was nothing at all but as quiet as at
other houses. These were all the Nights that they were there.

The things that do follow are what James Sherring heard the People of the
house report.

There was a Saddle in the house of their Uncle Warrens of Leigh, (which it
should seem they detained wrongfully from the right owner) that as it did hang
upon a Pin in the entry would come off and come into the house, and as they
termed it, hop about the house from one place to another, and upon the Table,
and so to another, which stood on the other side of the house. Jane Gast and
her Kinswoman took this Saddle and carried it to Leigh, and as they were going
along in the broad Common, there would be sticks and stones thrown at them,
which made them very much afraid, and going near together their Whittles which
were on their shoulders were knit together. They carried the Saddle to the
house which was Old Warrens, and there left it and returned home very quiet.
But being gone to Bed at Night the Saddle was brought back from Leigh, (which
is a Mile and half at the least from Old Gasts House) and thrown upon the Bed
where the Maids lay. After that, the Saddle was very troublesome to them, until
they broke it in small pieces and threw it out into the Highway.

There was a Coat of the same Parties, who was owner of the Saddle, which did
hang on the door in the Hall, and it came off from the place and flew into the
fire and lay there some considerable time, before they could get it out. For it
was as much as three of them could do to pluck it out of the fire, because of
the ponderous weight that lay on it, as they thought. Nevertheless there was no
impression on it of the fire.

Old Gast sat at Dinner with a Hat of this Old Warrens on his Head, and there
was something came and struck it off into the Dish where his Meat was.

There was a Pole which stood in the backside about Fourteen or Fifteen Foot
in length, which was brought into the House, and carried up into the Chamber,
and thrown on the Bed; but all the Wit they had could not get it out of the
Chamber, because of its length, until they took down a light of the Window.
They report that the things in the House was thrown about and broken, to their
great damage.

One Night there were two of this Old ^st his Grand daughters in Bed together,
they were aged, One of them about Twelve or Thirteen years, and the other about
Sixteen or Seventeen. They said, that they felt a Hand in Bed with them, which
they bound up in the Sheet, and took Bed-staves and beat it until it were as
soft as Wool, then they took a Stone which lay in the Chamber, about a quarter
of an Hundred weight, and put on it, and were quiet all the Night. In the
Morning, they found it as they left it the Night before. Then the eldest of the
Maids swear that she would burn the Devil, and goes and fetches a Fuz Faggot to
burn it, but when she came again, the Stone was thrown away, and the Cloth was
found wet.

There were many other things which is too long and tedious to write, it would
take up a great deal of time.

This which follows is the Relation of Jone Winsor of long Burton, she being
there Three Nights, taken the Third day of July, 1677.

She heard or saw nothing as long as the Candle did burn, but as soon as it was
out, there was something which did seem to sall down by the Bedside, and by
and by it began to lay on the Beds-head with a Staff, and did strike Jone
Winsor on the Head. She put forth her Hand and caught it, but was not able to
hold it fast. She got out of the Bed to light a Candle, and there was a great
Stone thrown after her, but it missed her. When the Candle was lighted, they
arose and went down to the Fire. One of them went up to fetch the Bed-clothes
to make a Bed by the Fire, and there lay a heap of Stones on the Bed vvhereon
they lay just before. As soon as the Bed was made, and they laid down to take
their rest, there was a scratching on the Form that stood by them in an extreme
manner. Then it came, and did heave up the Bolster whereon they laid their
Heads, and did endeavor to throw them out. At last it got hold on one end of
the Pillow, and set it quite on end, and there it stood for some considerable
time; at last falling down in its place, they fell fast asleep, and so
continued all that Night.

The Staff that was spoken of before was Jone Winsors, and she says, she left
it below in the Kitchen. She says, that which troubled, did endeavor to kill
the people, if it had power. She put them to it, to know the reason why they
were so troubled, and they said they knew nothing, unless it was about the
business of Old Warren. She was there Three Nights, and the trouble was much
after the same manner, nothing that was more remarkable.

This is the truth of what I heard them speak from their own Mouths, and they
will attest it if called thereunto.

ADVERTISEMENT.
A very considerable Story this is, and sufficiently circumstantiated for time
and place, saving that the County is not named. The reason whereof I conceive
to be, that it was in the very County in which Mr. Glanvil lived, to whom the
Information was sent, namely in Somersetshire. And there are Burtons more than
one there, and also Leighs, but this Burton is determined by the space of
something more than a Mile and an halfs distance from Leigh. So that the
Topographical account is sufficiently exact. And the manner of the Narrative is
so simple, plain and rural, that it prevents all suspicion of fraud or
Imposture in the Relatour.

The transporting of things out of one Room into another, and striking and the
like by invisible Agents, minds me of Mr. Lloyd' s story, as it is called in Mr.
Glanvil' s Papers, whom in a Letter he 'tells he may rely upon it for truth, as
being sent from a Person of Quality and Integrity in those parts. It is of an
House haunted of one Walter Meyrick of the Parish of Blethvaugh, in the County
of Radnor, some Two and Twenty Years ago. Where besides strange kind of Tunable
Whistlings in the Rooms, where none was seen to Whistle, there were stones
flung down out of a loft of great weight, the Doors bolted or barred against
them on the inside, when returned from the Church, no body being within. And at
Prayers at home when some of the Women out of fear held one another by the
Arms, some Invisible Power would pluck asunder their Arms, whether they would
or no. By such an Invisible force, one as he was sitting at Supper, was struck
flat to the ground, and a Trencher struck out of the Maids Hand that waited,
and a smart Box on the Ear given to another, no Visible thing being near that
did it. A Purse lost with Two Gold Rings, and Six and Four-pence in it, the
party complaining thereof, the Purse dropped down from the top of the Room, which
had no Room over it, and Four-pence only in it. That Men were struck down with
Stones, and yet had no great hurt, shows plainly they were not flung but
carried. But there was one beaten with Two S^aves black and blue, but none to
be seen that thus belabored him, though in the Day.

We pass by the Drying Pan, beaten with a little piece of Iron, and tinkling
over a Man's Head in the Night, to his being struck down with a Stick by Day,
while he tended the Goose roasting, which that Invisible Striker seemed to have
a Plot upon, as also by his knocking a Pick-Axe against the Lid of a Coffer, to
have a Design upon a Bag of Money. These and the like Feats, that Narrative
relates, which Mr. Glanvil calls Mr. Lloyd' s Story, who assures him he may
rely on the Truth thereof, he procuring it from a Justice of Peace, who took
the parties Testimonies that dwelt in the House, or upon occasions were present
there, and were Eyewitnesses of the strange Pranks that were played in the
place. And there being that Congeneracy betwixt James Sherrings Story and this,
they mutually corroborate one another.

RELAT. XXIV.
Mr. Andrew Paschall once fellow of Queens College in Cambridge, his Narrative
of three Nights disturbance at his Fathers house in London in Soper-Lane, in
August 1661.

THE first Nights disturbance; There was in Family my Father and Mother, my
Eldest Brother, and one of my Sisters with a young Maiden Gentlewoman her
Bedfellow (who seemed to be principally concerned) besides a Maid that lay in
the same Chamber.

The Gentlewoman before mentioned, being in bed with my Sister in a Chamber
within that where my Father and Mother lay, (the Maid lying in another bed
alone by) there seemed to her then lying awake, to be one walking in the
Chamber, by a noise made as of a long Gown or some Trailing Garment brushing
and sweeping up and down the Room.

By and by, there was a Noise of Clattering their Shoes under the Bed, with a
scratching and tugging of the Mat under the bed likewise. This continued for
some time, my Sister being awakened heard it, so did the Maid. After this my
Mother being called out of the next Chamber where she was up (to prepare a
Chemical water which required their being up all Night) came in, they being in
a great fright. My Brother went up also, who not gone to bed sat below. A
Candle was brought, and the noise ceased while they were in the Chamber.
Presently after they were gone out again, and the light removed, the Chamber
door (which shuts with difficulty) flew to with a great bounce, it being wide
open before, it shook the Room where my Mother was busied about the aforesaid
preparation. After this one of the shoos that was by the bed side was flung
over the bed with a mighty force against a Press that stood on the other side.
This put them to such a fright again that the Gentlewoman rise. My Brother went
into the Room again and sat up with them all Night.

This I received from my Brother, who came to Bed to me, (who by reason of some
ilness had gone to bed first in the Family) early the next Morning. I was
confirmed in it afterward by my Mother, upon whose bare assertion I dare
confidently believe any thing that shall be related.

The second Nights disturbance; The next Evening as we sat at Supper, we all
heard a great noise above in the Chamber, at the end of the house, as it were
slinging of Chairs and Stools about the Room or removing of great Trunks. And
going up to see, all was still till we came down again: However the Gentlewoman
resolved to go to bed again that Night in the same Chamber. My Sister went to
bed with her, and the rest to their Lodgings, only my Brother and I resolved
to sit up some time and expect the event. Within a while after we heard them
knock earnestly above, we went both up, they told us there had been the same
disturbance as the Night before and something more. For besides the tugging of
the Mat under the bed, the Bedclothes upon them were often tugged and pulled,
insomuch as they were fain to hold them hard with their hands to keep them from
being pulled off. All was quiet for a little time while we were in the Chamber
with a light, but we were no sooner out of the Chamber with the Candle, but the
noise under the ^ed, tugging of the Mat, pulling of the Bedclothes began again.
Moreover something came into the bed, which the Gentlewoman said ran up on her
by degrees, and seemed little and soft like a Mole. Upon this she skreekt out,
and we came in again with the Candle, then all was still again.

We retired often with the Candle, and presently the same Disturbance returned,
together with a low whispering* Noise in many places about the Bed, but chiefly
toward the beds head, which we all heard staying in the Chamber, and removing
the Candle into the next Room. My Father and Mother rise, and there were none
of us but heard all or most part of this, but nothing appeared to us. The thing
was continually moving and stirring in some part or other of the bed, and most
commonly at the feet, where it usually came up first. At last it came to that
boldness that it would make the same disturbance while the Candle was in the
Chamber, if but a little shaded behind the door, so that we could sometimes see
the Clothes pulled and tugged, and we frequently saw it heave and lift up the
Clothes upon the bed toward the feet, in a little hill or rising, which both
my Brother and I often clapped our hands upon, perceiving it to move, and withal
to make a little clacking noise, which cannot any more than the former
whispering be expressed in Writing. We could not perceive any thing more than the
Clothes, as often as we saw them so moved and heaved up. The shoos were laid up
upon the beds Tester, the second Night, to prevent the clattering which was
made with them the Night before, and whilst we were standing talking in the
Chamber, as I was some distance from the bed, one of the shoos flew off and hit
me lightly on the head, my Hat being on. And another came presently tumbling
down after it none stirring the bed. Afterward the aforesaid little thing came
upon the Gentlewoman so frequently, that if we were but the least removed, she
could not lie quiet in her bed. Then she fate up in her bed with a Mantle about
her, which when we were retired was pulled at as if it would have been plucked
from her. Whereupon she cried out again, and I came into the Chamber again, and
was desired to hold fast upon the Mantle about her, which notwithstanding upon
removal of the Candle was tugged hard again, which I very sensibly perceived.
Whereupon we perceiving no Cessation, my Brother and I continued in the Chamber
all that Night till break of day, with a Candle in the Room. The tugging of
the Matt under the Bed, the heaving of the Clothes about the Feet, and the
other whispering noise continuing by sits, till Light appeared. There was
scarcely any of us, especially she her self, that did not Conjure that
Whisperer by the most Sacred Names to speak out and tell us its intent, but
nothing was to be seen, nor any answer made.

The third Nights disturbance; The Gentlewoman resolved now to change her
Chamber, to try if the disturbance would follow, she did so, my Sister still
accompanying of her. My Brother and I sat up as before below expecting again
what would follow. The same noise was heard this third Night as the Night
before above in the Chamber. We had not sat long below before we were Summoned
up with loud knockings again, they were in the same case as before, if not
worse. A while after they were in bed in this other Chamber there was a
clattering heard at the door; presently after the same noise under the bed, the
same heaving of the Clothes, and the same whispering as before. But toward
Midnight that thing which came into the bed before, came now so often with such
ungrateful skippings up and down upon her, that she often skreekt and cried
out. It seemed cold and very smooth as she related, and would commonly come in
at her feet, and run all up on her by her side to her shoulder. Once she
desired meto clap my hand upon her back near her shoulder blade, as feeling it
just then come up thither. I did so on a sudden, and there seemed a cold blast
or puff of Wind to blow upon my hand just as I clapped it on her. And one thing
more remarkable was this, when the whispering was heard at her Beds-head, after
we had many times in vain conjured it to speak and tell us the intent of its
whisperings and disturbance, I spoke to it very earnestly to speak out or
whisper louder. Hereupon it hissed out much louder than before, but nothing
intelligible to be heard. At last this disturbance with the thing in the bed
being no longer tolerable to the Gentlewoman, my Mother rise (lying in the next
Chamber and hearing their perplexity) came into her Chamber and prayed sometime
at her Bedside just by her. Whereupon it pleased God within a very short time
after to remove all those noises and that which disturbed her. After that Night
I cannot tell certainly that there has been any thing of that nature heard in
the house.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THis Narrative though it was not among Mr. Glanvil's Papers, but I found it by
chance in mine own Study, yet it being made by an Eyewitness whom I knew to be
one of Judgment and Integrity, I thought fit to insert it. And the rather,
because of that passage, that when he clapped his Hand upon the Shoulder of the
Gentlewoman where the Ghost was, a cool blast or puff of Air seemed to bear or
blow against his Hand. Which is like Mr. Glanvil's Experiment of pressing the
Linen Bag in which some Spirit was moving as a living Animal. Which are
notable instances of their easy percribration through porous Bodies. This
troublesome Spirit I suspect to have been the Ghost of some party deceased who
would have uttered something, but had not the knack of speaking so articulately
as to be understood. And when they can speak intelligibly, it is ordinarily in
a hoarse and low Voice, as is observable in many stories, and particularly in a
very fresh story of the Ghost of one deceased that spoke to Jacob Brent some
two years ago, an Apprentice then to one Mr. Lawrence in the Little Minories;
of which to give some brief account, I think fitting for the very same reasons
that I have inserted this of Mr. Paschal, namely, that it is from an Eye-
witness, and a discreet and well-disposed young man, as they that know him do
testify: and I will set down no more, nor so much as he himself declared or
acknowledged, not only to Dr. Cudworth, Mr. Fowler, and Mr. Glanvil, but very
lately to my self also, viz.

That he had conference with the Ghost of some deceased party for about a
quarter of an hour: That he had a glimpse of the shape thereof, being called
into the Room where it was, by a Voice, saying, Here, Here; but that he
presently cried out, Good God, let me see nothing, he being so assrighted with
the sight. But however, he entertained discourse with it for about the time
abovementioned, received several things in charge from it to be done, and was
commanded secrecy in some special Matters; but it gave such instructions, and
made such discoveries, as right might be done to some that had been wronged by
the party deceased. Upon which performance of Jacob Brent, the disturbance of
the house ceased: But for about six Weeks before, Mr. Lawrence his house was
miserably disturbed, they being most nights affrighted with Thumpings and loud
Knockings at the Chamber-doors, sometimes with a strange whirling noise up and
down the Rooms, and clapping upon the Stairs. And that night Jacob Brent sat
up in the Kitchen expecting some conference with the Spirit for the quiet of
the House, he heard the Door of the Room above him that was fast locked, fly
open, while he was reading in Eusebius, and immediately a swift running down
the Stairs, and a great knock at the Kitchin-door which stood a jarr, and a
chinking of Money on the Stairs, as he passed from the Kitchen toward the
Dining Room over against it, whose Door was locked when they went to bed, but
now opened as the Door of the other Room above the Kitchen.

Into this Dining Room he was invited, as is abovesaid, by a Voice saying,
Here, Here; and there he received, and after executed, such directions as gave
quiet afterward to the House; and he received thanks from the Ghost after he
had made his Journey abroad to fulfill its desire, at his returning home, with a
promise it would never trouble the house more. And of the troubles of the house
before, the whole Family were Witnesses, as also of the Conference of J. B. and
the Spirit, that they heard two speaking in the Dining Room, though they were
not so near as to understand what they said; only they heard J. B. pray to God
that he might see nothing.

That the house was really Haunted, besides what has been said already, is
further confirmed by Mr. Bamfield, who was desired to lie in the house some
days before this Conference of J. B. with the Spirit: who though he heard no
noises, yet felt his Clothes tuckt about him, and his Hand kindly stroaked, he
being awake all night. And that this could be no trick of J. B. is further
evident from that great emotion of mind he was in after this for some two
hours, even almost to distraction, and was fain afterward to be let Blood. But
for his constant temper, he is observed to be, and I take him to be such, of a
sober honest and sensible Genius; nor is he any Sectarian, but an orderly Son
of the Church of England.

And if the Injunctions of the Ghost he conversed with, and common rules of
Prudence, did not forbid the declaring of some particulars, this is an
experiment that might convince the most incredulous touching such things. But
Mr. Glanvil complains in a Letter of his to Dr. H. More, that this shyness and
tender respect of persons has hindered him of many a considerable story; as I
have also taken notice long since how mutilate the story of the Shoemaker of
Breslaw is made, by reason of Martinus Weinrichius his concealing the
Shoemaker's Name. But the mentioning of locked Doors flying open of their own
accord, reminds me of Mr. Alcock's story of a Chest with three Locks unlocking
itself, and slying wide open, and then locking itself again. Which is as
follows.

RELAT. XXV.
The Story of Mr. John Bourne of Durley in Ireland, about a mile from
Bridgwater, Counselor at Law.

MR. John Bourne, for his skill, care, and honesty, was made by his Neighbor
John Mallet Esquire of Enmore, the chief of his Trustees for his Son John Mallet,
(Father to Elizabeth now Countess Dowager of Rochester) and the rest of his
Children in minority. He had the reputation of a worthy good man, and was
commonly taken notice of for an habitual saying by way of Interjection almost
to any thing, viz. You say true, You say true, You are in the right. This Mr.
Bourne sell sick at his house at Durley in the year 1654, and Dr. Raymond of
Oak was sent for to him, who after some time gave the said Mr. Bourne over.
And he had not now spoke in Twenty sour hours, when the said Dr. Raymond and
Mrs. Carlisle (Mr. Bourne's Nephews Wise, whose Husband he made one of his
Heirs) sitting by his Bedside, the Doctor opened the Curtains at the Beds feet,
to give him air; when on a sudden, to the horror and amazement of Dr. Raymond
and Mrs. Carlisle, the great Iron Chest by the Window at his Beds seet with
three Locks to it (in which were all the Writings and Evidences of the said Mr.
Mallet's Estate) began to open, first one Lock, then another, then the third.
Afterward the Lid of the said iron Chest lifted up itself, and stood wide
open. Then the Patient Mr. Bourne, who had not spoke in Twenty four hours,
lifted himself up also, and looking upon the Chest, cried, You say true, You
say true, You are in the right, I Will be with you by and by. So the Patient lay
down and spoke no more. Then the Chest fell again of itself, and locked itself
one Lock after another, as the three Locks opened; and they tried to knock it
open and could not, and Mr. Bourne died within an hour after.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THis Narrative was sent in a Letter to J. C. for Dr. H. More, from Mr. Thomas
Alcock of Shear Hampton; of which in a Letter to the said Doctor he gives this
account. I am, says he, very confident of the truth of the story: For I had it
from a very good Lady, the eldest Daughter of the said John Mallet, (whose
Trustee Mr. Bourne was) and only Aunt to the Countess of Rochester, who knew
all the parties; and have heard Dr. Raymond and Mr. Carlisle relate it often
with amazement, being both persons of credit.

The curious may be inquisitive what the meaning of the opening of the Chest
may be, and of Mr. Bourne his say, You say true, etc. I Will be with you by and
by. As for the former, it is noted by Paracelsus especially, and by others,
that there are signs often given of the departure of sick men lying on their
Deathbeds, of which this opening of the Iron Coffer or Chest and closing again,
is more than ordinary significant, especially if we consider the nearness of
sound and sense betwixt Coffer and Coffin, and recall to mind that of Virgil;
Olli dura quies oculos and serreus urget
Somnus --
though this quaintness is more than is requisite in these Prodigies presaging
the Sick man's death. As for the latter, it seems to be nothing else but the
saying Amen to the presage, uttered in his accustomary form of speech: As if he
should say, You of the invisible Kingdom of Spirits have given the token of my
sudden departure: And you say true, I shall be with you by and by. Which he
was enabled so assuredly to assent to, upon the advantage of the relaxation of
his Soul now departing from the Body. Which Diodorus Siculus, lib. 18. notes to
be the opinion of Pythagoras and his followers, That it is the privilege of
the Soul near her departure to exercise a fatidical faculty, and to pronounce
truly touching things future, (...), That humane Souls prognostic things to
come at what time they are separating from their Body.

RELAT. XXVI.
The Apparition of James Haddock to Francis Taverner near Drum-bridge in
Ireland, comprised in a Letter of Thomas Alcock to Dr. H. More.

AT Michaelmas 1662. Francis Taverner, about Twenty five years old, a lusty,
proper, stout fellow, then servant at large (afterward Porter) to the Lord
Chichester Earl of Donegal, at Belfast in the North of Ireland, County of
Antrim, and Diccess of Connor, riding late in the Night from Hilbrough
homeward, near Drum bridge, his Horse, though of good metal, suddenly made a
stand; and he supposing him to be taken with the Staggers, alighted to blood
him in the mouth, and presently mounted again. As he was setting forward, there
seemed to pass by him two Horsemen, though he could not hear the treading of
their seet, which amazed him. Presently there appeared a third in a white Coat,
just at his Elbow in the likeness of James Haddock formerly an Inhabitant in
Malone, where he died near five years before. Whereupon Taverner asked him in
the Name of God who he was? He replied, I am James Haddock, and you may call to
mind by this token; That about five years ago I and two other Friends were at
your Fathers House, and you by your Fathers appointment brought us some Nuts,
and therefore be not afraid, says the Apparition. Whereupon Taverner,
remembering the circumstances, thought it might be Haddock; and those two who
passed by before him, he thought to be his two Friends with him when he gave
them Nuts, and courageously asked him why he appeared to him rather than any
other. He answered, Because he was a man of more resolution than others; and if
he would ride his way with him, he would acquaint him with a business he had to
deliver him. Which Taverner refused to do, and would go his own way, (for they
were now at a Quadrivial) and so rode on homewards. But immediately on the
departure there arose a great wind, and withal he heard very hideous screeches
and noises, to his great amazement; but riding forward as fast as he could, he
at last heard the Cocks crow, to his comsort; he alighted off from his Horse,
and salling to prayer, desired God's assistance, and so got safe home.

The night after there appeared again to him the likeness of James Haddock and
bid him go to Elenor Welsh, (now the Wife of Davis living at Malone, but
formerly the Wife of the said James Haddock, by whom she had an only Son, to
whom the said James Haddock had by his Will given a Lease which he held of the
Lord Chichester, of which the Son was deprived by Davis who had married his
Mother) and to ask her if her Maiden-name was not Elenor Welsh; and if it were,
to tell her, that it was the Will of her former Husband James Haddock that
their Son should be righted in the Lease. But Taverner, partly loath to gain
the ill will of his Neighbors, and partly thinking he should not be credited
but looked on as deluded, long neglected to do his Message, till having been
every night for about a Months space haunted with this Apparition in several
forms every night more and more terrible, (which was usually preceded by an
unusual trembling over his whole Body, and great change of countenance manifest
to his Wife, in whose presence frequently the Apparition was, though not
visible to her) at length he went to Malone to Davis's Wife, and asked whether
her Maiden-name was not Elenor Welsh; if it was, he had something to say to
her. She replied, There was another Elenor Welsh besides her. Hereupon Taverner
returned without delivering his Message. The same night being fast asleep in
his Bed, (for the former Apparitions were as he sat by the Fire with his Wife)
by something pressing upon him, he was awakened, and saw again the Apparition
of James Haddock in a white Coat as at other times, who asked him if he had
delivered his Message? He answered, he had been there with Elenor Welsh. Upon
which the Apparition looking more pleasantly upon him, bid him not be afraid,
and so vanished in a flash of brightness.

But some nights after (he having not delivered his Message) he came again, and
appearing in many formidable shapes, threatened to tear him in pieces if he did
not do it. This made him leave his house where he dwelt in the Mountains, and
betake himself to the Town of Belfast, where he sat up all night at one
Pierce's house a Shoemaker, accompanied with the said Pierce and a Servant or
two of the Lord Chichester, who were desirous to see or hear the Spirit. About
midnight as they were all by the Fireside they beheld Taverner's Countenance
to change, and a trembling to fall on him, who presently espied the Apparition
in a Room opposite to him where he sat, and took up the Candle and went to it,
and resolutely asked it in the Name of God wherefore it haunted him? It replied,
because he had not delivered the Message, and withal threatened to tear him in
pi^ces if he did not do it speedily; and so, changing itself into many
prodigious shapes, it vanished in white like a Ghost. Whereupon Francis Taverner
became much dejected and troubled, and next day went to the Lord Chichester's
house, and with tears in his Eyes, related to some of the Family the sadness of
his condition. They told it to my Lord's Chaplain Mr. James South, who came
presently to Taverner, and being acquainted of his whole Story, advised him to
go this present time to Malone to deliver punctually his Message, and promised
to go along with him. But first they went to Dr. Lewis Downs then Minister of
Belfast, who upon hearing the Relation of the whole matter, doubted at first of
the truth of it, attributing it rather to Melancholy than any thing of reality.
But being afterward fully satisfied of it, the only scruple remaining was,
Whether it might be lawful to go on such a business, not knowing whose errand
it was; Since, though it was a real Apparition of some Spirit, yet it was
questionable whether of a good or a bad Spirit. Yet the justice of the Cause,
(it being the common report the Youth was wronged) and other considerations
prevailing, he went with them. So they three went to Davis's house, where the
Woman being desired to come to them, Taverner did effectually do his Message,
by telling her, that he could not be at quiet for the Ghost of her former
Husband James Haddock, who threatened to tear him in pieces if he did not tell
her she must right John Haddock her Son by him, in a Lease wherein she and
Davis her now Husband had wronged him. This done, he presently found great
quietness in his mind; and, thanking the Gentlemen for their Company, Advice,
and Assistance, he departed thence to his Brother's House at Drum-bridge:
Where, about two nights after, the aforesaid Apparition came to him again, and
more pleasantly than formerly, asked if he had delivered his Message? He
answered, he had done it fully. It replied, that he must do the same Message to
the Executors also, that the business might be perfected. At this meeting
Taverner asked the Spirit if Davis would do him any hurt; to which it answered
at first somewhat doubtfully; but at length threatened Davis if he attempted any
thing to the injury of Taverner, and so vanished away in white.

The day following, Dr. Jeremie Tailor Bishop of Down, Connor, and Dromore, was
to go to keep Court at Dromore, and commanded me, who was then Secretary to
him, to write for Taverner to meet him there, which he did. And there in the
presence of many people he examined Taverner strictly of this strange Scene of
Providence, as my Lord styled it; and by the account given him both by
Taverner, and others who knew Taverner and much of the former particulars, his
Lordship was satisfied that the Apparition was true and real; but said no more
there to him, because at Hilbrough, three miles from thence on his way home, my
Lord was informed that my Lady Conway and other persons of Quality were come
purposely to hear his Lordship examine the Matter. So Tarverner went with us to
Hilbrough, and there, to satisfy the curiosity of the fresh company, after
asking many things anew, and some over again, my Lord advised him the next time
the Spirit appeared to ask him these Questions. Whence are you? Are you a good
or a bad Spirit? Where is your abode? What station do you hold? How are you
regimented in the other World? And what is the reason that you appear for the
relief of your Son in so small a matter, when so many Widows and Orphans are
oppressed in the World, being defrauded of greater matters, and none from
thence of their Relations appear, as you do, to right them?

That night Taverner was sent for to Lisburne to my Lord Conway's three miles
from Hilbrough on his way home to Belfast, where he was again strictly examined
in the presence of many good men and women of the aforesaid matter, was ordered
to lie at my Lord Conway's all night; and about Nine or Ten a clock at night,
standing by the Fireside with his Brother and many others, his Countenance
changed, and he sell into a trembling, the usual prognostic of the Apparition;
and, being loath to make any disturbance in his Lordships house, he and his
Brother went out into the Court, where he saw the Spirit coming over the Wall;
which, approaching nearer, asked him if he had done his Message to the Executor
also? He replied, he had, and wondered it should still haunt him. It replied,
he need not fear, for it would do him no hurt, nor trouble him any more, but
the Executor if he did not see the Boy righted. Here his Brother put him in
mind to ask the Spirit what the Bishop bid him, which he did presently. But it
gave him no answer, but crawled on its Hands and Feet over the Wall again, and
so vanished in white, with a most melodious Harmony.

Note, (1) That Pierce, at whose house, and in whose presence the Apparition
was, being asked whether he saw the Spirit, said, he did not, but thought at
that time he had a Mist all over his eyes. (2) What was then spoke to Taverner
was in so low and hollow a voice, that they could not understand what it said.
(3) At Pierce's house it s^ood just in the entry of a Door; and as a Maid
passed by to go in at the Door, Taverner saw it go aside and give way to the
Maid, though she saw it not. (4) That the Lease was hereupon disposed on to the
Boys use. (5) The Spirit at the last apparition at my Lord Conway's house,
revealed somewhat to Taverner, which he would not discover to any of us that
asked him.

This Taverner, with all the Persons and Places mentioned in the Story, I knew
very well, and all wise and good men did believe it, especially the Bishop, and
Dean of Connor Dr. Rust: Witness

Your humble Servant

Thomas Alcock.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IT will not be amiss to set down here what Mr. Alcock adds by way of
Postscript in his Letter. There is an odd story, says he, depending on this,
which I cannot choose but tell you. The Boys Friends put the Trustees and
Executor on this Apparitions account into our Courts, where it was pleasant to
hear my Lord talk to them on the whole matter. The Uncle and Trustee, one John
Costlet, forswore the thing, railed on Taverner, and made strange imprecations,
and wished Judgments might fall on him if he knew of any such Lease; but the
fear of the Apparitions menaces by Taverner scared him into a promise of
justice at least. About four or five years after, when my Lord died, and the
noise of the Apparition was over, Costlet began again to threaten the Boy with
Law, etc. But being drunk at Hillhall by Lisburne, coming home he fell from his
Horse, and never spoke more. This is a sad truth to my knowledge.

RELAT. XXVII.
The Story of David Hunter Neat-herd to the Bishop of Down and Connor, at
Portmore in Ireland, 1663. from the same hand.

DAvid Hunter Neat-herd at the Bishop's house at Portmore, there appeared to
him one night, carrying a Log of Wood into the Dairie, an Old Woman, which
amazed him, for he knew her not: but the fright made him throw away his Log of
Wood and run into the house. The next night she appeared again to him, and he
could not choose but follow her all night; and so almost every night for near
three quarters of a Year. Whenever she came, he must go with her through the
Woods at a good round rate; and the poor fellow looked as if he was bewitched and
traveled off his legs. And when in bed with his Wife, if she appeared, he must
rise and go. And because his Wife could not hold him in his bed, she would go
too, and walk after him fill day, though she see nothing: But his little Dog
was so well acquainted with the Apparition, that he would follow her as well as
his Master. If a Tree stood in her walk, he observed her always to go through
it. In all this while she spoke not.

But one day the said David going over a Hedge into the Highway, she came just
against him, and he cried out, Lord bless me, would I was dead; shall I never
be delivered from this misery? At which, And the Lord bless me too, says she:
It was very happy you spoke first, for till then I had no power to speak,
though I have followed you so long. My Name, says she, is Margaret -- I lived
here before the War, and had one Son by my Husband. When he died I married a
Soldier, by whom I had several Children, which that former Son maintained,
else we must have all starved. He lives beyond the Baun-water; pray go to him
and bid him dig under such a Harth, and there he shall find 28 S. Let him pay
what I owe in such a place, and the rest to the charge unpayed at my Funeral;
and go to my Son that lives here, which I had by my latter Husband, and tell
him that he lives a wicked and a dissolute life, and is very unnatural and
ungrateful to his Brother that maintained him; and if he does not mend his
life, God Almighty will destroy him.

David Hunter told her he never knew her. No, says she, I died Seven years
before you came into the Country: But for all that, if he would do her
Message, she would never hurt him. But he deferred doing as the Apparition bid
him, and she appeared the night after as he lay in bed, and struck him on the
shoulder very hard; at which he cried out, and asked her if she did not promise
she would not hurt him? She said, that was if he did her Message; if not, she
would kill him. He told her he could not go now by reason the Waters were out.
She said she was content he should stay till they were abated; but charged him
afterward not to fail her. So he did her errand, and afterward she appeared
and gave him thanks. For now, said she, I shall be at rest, therefore pray you
lift me up from the ground, and I will trouble you no more. So David Hunter
lifted her up from the ground, and, as he said, she felt just like a bag of
Feathers in his arms. So she vanished, and he heard most delicate Music as she
went off, over his head; and he never was more troubled.

This account the poor fellow gave us every day as the Apparition spoke to him,
and my Lady Conway came to Portmore, where she asked the fellow the same
questions and many more. This I know to be true, being all the while with my
Lord of Down, and the fellow a poor Neatherd there.

Thomas Alcock.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IT is no small confirmation to my self of the truth of these two last Stories,
in both which my Lady Conway is mentioned, in that I received two Letters from
that incomparable Lady out of Ireland touching them both. The former is dated,
Lisburne, March 3. 1662. wherein she writes thus: I have spoken lately with two
simple Country People who have been much perplexed with two several persons who
have died lately. The stories are too long to relate; but the circumstances are
such, as I know not how to misbelieve the stories. The persons cannot be
suspected to have any design, and were altogether unacquainted in the Families
of them that appeared, and wholly ignorant of those things in them that they
now relate, and have charge to solicit the amendment of some miscarriages by
some persons entrusted, which they could never hear of, as is supposed, by any
other means. There are many other probabilities, but all evaded by several
persons here. And to give you a taste of their goodly E^asions, I will
transcribe a passage out of the other Letter of the said excellent Lady, dated,
Lisburne, April 29. 1663. wherein she writes thus: The Relation I sent you of
two in this Country is certainly liable to as little exception (there was
mention of the Drummer of Tedworth before) as any one shall meet with; As may
appear by the diligent search some have made for a flaw and Objection against
the parties, who, after all, they confess, must needs appear perfectly
uninteressed, and impossible to have had from any concerned what they have
delivered. But they believe that either Drunkenness or desperate Melancholy did
by chance enable them to light upon greater truths than themselves thought of.
Thus far that excellent person. And it was enough for this noble Lady only to
recite their solution of the Phenomenon into Melancholy and Drunkenness, it
being so trisling and silly, that it wanted to further refutation than the mere
recital.

That Drink may discover the secrets of him that is drunk, as the Poet
observes, is reasonable enough: but that a man by being drunk is better
capacitated to understand the secrets of another man, or of his Family, is so
wild a Paradox, that no sober man can admit it. And what is Melancholy but a
natural Drunkenness when it serments? And moreover, it being but by chance that
Melancholy or Drunkenness enables them to light upon such things, why may not
Sanguine and Sobriety chance as well to do the same, and not rather better, if
there be any betterness in things by chance: But if there be any advantage in
fermenting Melancholy or strong Drink, it is because the Soul is more excited,
and made more ready to discover its own more inward furniture, as men in drink
reveal their own Secrets. But the Soul has no innate Idea's of particular
things, and therefore the greatest estervescency of Drink or Melancholy will
not a jot better dispose her to the knowledge of Particulars, but indispose her
for the reception of them from without. So blindly do these Witlings
Philosophize touching things of this nature.

And yet, I dare say, this was the very best of their Evasions: Which being no
better against these two Stories, and the Stories so sifted and examined (to
say nothing of others) by a person of so quick a Wit, impartial Judgment and
Sagacity, as I know that excellent Lady to have been, I must confess, that to
me it is a confirmation as strong as I can desire for the main strokes of the
Stories, of which I retain some memory, having heard a more particular account
of them from her Ladyship presently upon her return from Ireland some sixteen
years ago. Nor do doubt but Mr. Alcock has approved himself a faithful Reciter
of them as to the main; nor can there any one rightly be deemed more fit and
able, he being present at the Examination of Taverner, and dwelling at Portmore
with the Bishop of Down, whose Servant Hunter was.

RELAT. XXVIII.
The Confessions of certain Scotch Witches, taken out of an authentic Copy of
their Trial at the Assizes held at Paisley in Scotland, Feb. 15. 1678. touching
the bewitching of Sir George Maxwel.

THe Tenor of the Confessions taken before Justices: As first of Annabil
Stuart of the age of Fourteen years, or thereby; who declared that she was
brought in the presence of the Justices for the crime of Witchcraft; and
declared, that on Harvest last, the Devil in the shape of a Black man came to
her Mothers House, and required the Declarant to give her self up to him; and
that the Devil promised her that she should not want any thing that was good.
Declares, that she being enticed by her Mother Jannet Mathie, and Bessie Weir,
who was Officer to their several meetings, she put her Hand to the crown of her
Head, and the other to the sole of her Foot, and did give herself up to the
Devil. Declares, that her Mother promised her a new Coat for doing of it.
Declares, that her Spirits name was Enippa, and that the Devil took her by the
Hand and nipped her Arm, which continued to be sore for half an hour. Declares,
that the Devil in the shape of a black man lay with her in the Bed under the
Clothes, and that she found him cold. Declares, that thereafter he placed her
nearest himself. And declares, she was present in her Mothers house when the
Effigies of Wax was made; and that it was made to represent Sir George Maxwel.
Declares, that the black man, Janet Mathie, the Declarant's Mother (whose
Spirit's name was Landlady;) Bessie Weir, whose Spirit's name is Sopha;
Margaret Craige, whose Spirits name is Rigerum; and Margaret Jackson, whose
Spirit's name is Locas, were all present at the making of the said Effigies;
and that they bound it on a Spit, and turned it before the Fire; and that it
was turned by Bessie Weir, saying, as they turned it, Sir George Maxwel, Sir
George Maxwel; and that this was expressed by all of them, and by the
Declarant. Declares, that this Picture was made in October last. And further
declares, that upon the third day of January Instant, Bessie Weir came to her
Mother's house, and advertised her to come to her Brother John Stuart's upon
the night following. And that accordingly she came to the place, where she
found Bessie Weir, Margery Craige, Magaret Jackson, and her Brother John
Stuart, and a man with black Clothes, a blue Band, and white Hand-cuffs with
hogers, and that his Feet were cloven. And the Declarant sat down by the
Fireside with them, when they made a Picture of Clay, in which they placed
Pins in the Breast and Sides: And declares, that they placed one in every Side,
and one in the Breast. Declared, that the black man did put the Pins in the
Picture of Wax; but is not sure who put in the Pins in the Picture of Clay.
Declares, that the Effigies produced are the Effigies she saw made. Declares,
that the black man's name is Ejoall. This Declaration was emitted before James
Dunlop of Husil, William Gremlaye, etc. Jan. 27. 1677. Ita est. Robertus Park
Notarius Publicus, etc.

The second Confession is of John Stuart, who being interrogate anent this
crime of Witchcraft, declared, That upon Wednesday the third day of January
Instant, Bessie Weir in Pollocton came to the Declarant late at night, who
being without doors near his own house, the said Bessie Weir did intimate to
him, that there was a meeting to be at his house the next day: And that the
Devil under the shape of a black man, Margaret Jackson, Margery Craige, and the
said Bessie Weir, were to be present. And that Bessie Weir required the
Declarant to be there, which he promised. And that the next night, after the
Declarant had gone to bed, the black man came in and called the Declarant
quietly by his name. Upon which he arose from his Bed, and put on his Clothes,
and lighted a Candle. Declares, that Margaret Jackson, Bessie Weir, and Margery
Craige did enter in at a Window in the Gavil of the Declarant's house. And that
the first thing that the black man required, was, that the Declarant should
renounce his Baptism, and deliver himself up wholly to him: Which the Declarant
did, by putting one hand on the crown of his Head, and the other on the sole of
his Foot. And that he was tempted to it by the Devil's promising that he should
not want any pleasure, and that he should get his heart filled on all that
shall do him wrong. Declares, that he gave him the name of Jonas for his
Spirits name. Declares, that thereafter the Devil required every one of their
consents for the making of the Effigies of Clay for the taking away the life of
Sir George Maxwel of Pollock, to revenge the taking of the Declarants Mother
Jannet Mathie. Declares, that every one of the persons above named gave their
consent to the making of the said Effigies, and that they wrought the Clay, and
that the black man did make the figure of the Head and Face and two Arms to the
said Effigies. Declares, that the Devil set three Pins in the same, one in each
side, and one in the Breast: And that the Declarant did hold the Candle to them
all the time the Picture was making. And that he observed one of the black
man's Feet to be cloven: and that the black man's Apparel was black: and that
he had a bluish Band and Handcuffs; and that he had Hogers on his Legs without
Shoes: and that the black man's Voice was hough and goustie. And further
declares, that after they had begun the forming of the Effigies, his Sister
Annabil Stuart, a Child of thirteen or fourteen years of age, came knocking at
the Door, and being let in by the Declarant, she staid with them a considerable
time, but that she went away before the rest, he having opened the Door to her.
Declares, that the rest went out at the Window at which they entered. Declares,
that the Effigies was placed by Bessie Weir in his Bedstraw. He further
declares, he himself did envy against Sir George Maxwel for apprehending Jannet
Mathie his Mother: And that Bessie Weir had great malice against this Sir
George Maxwel; and that her quarrel was, as the Declarant conceived, because
the said Sir George had not entered her Husband to his Harvest-service; and also
declares, that the said Effigies was made upon the fourth day of January
Instant, and that the Devil's name was Ejoall. Declares that his Spirits name
was Jonas, and Bessie Weir's Spirits name, who was Officer, was Sopha; and that
Margaret Jackson's Spirit's name was Locas; and that Annabil Stuart's, the
Declarant's Sister's was Enippa; but does not remember what Margery Craige's
Spirit's name was. Declares, that he cannot write. This Confession was emitted
in the presence of the Witnesses to the other Confession, and on the same day.
Ita est. Robertus Park Notarius Publicus, etc.

The Confession of Margaret Jackson Relict of Tho. Stuart in Shaws, who being
examined by the Justices anent her being guilty of Witchcraft, declares, That
she was present at the making of the first Essigies and Picture that was made
in Jannet Mathie's house in October, and that the Devil in the shape of a black
man, Jannet Mathie, Bessie Weir, Margery Craige, and Annabil Stuart, was
present at the making of the said Essigies, and that it was made to represent
Sir George Maxwel of Pollock, for the taking away his life. Declares, that
forty years ago, or thereabout, she was at Pollockshaw-croft, with some few
sticks on her back, and that the black man came to her, and that she did give
up herself unto the black man from the top of her Head to the sole of her Foot;
and that this was after the Declarants renouncing of her Baptism; and that the
Spirit's name which he designed her was Locas. And that about the third or
fourth of January Instant, or thereby, in the nightime when she awaked, she
found a man to be in bed with her, whom she supposed to have been her Husband,
though her Husband had been dead twenty years or thereby, and that the man
immediately disappeared: and declares that this man who disappeared was the
Devil. Declares, that upon Thursday the fourth of January Instant, she was
present in the house of John Stuart at night when the Effigies of Clay was
made, and that she saw the black man there, sometimes sitting, sometimes
standing with John Stuart; and that the black man's Clothes were black, and
that he had white Handcuffs. And that Bessie Weir in Pollockton, Annabil Stuart
in Shaws, and Margery Craige were at the aforesaid time and place of making the
said Effigies of Clay; and declares, that she gave her consent to the making of
the same; and declares that the Devils name who compeired in the black man's
shape was Ejoall. Sic subscribitur. Ita est. Robertus Park Notarius Publicus,
etc.

Now follow the Depositions of certain persons agreeing with the Confessions of
the abovesaid Witches.

A^dr. Martin Servitour to the Lord of Pollock, of the age of Thirty years or
thereby, Depones, That he was present in the house of Jannet Mathie Pannal when
the Picture of Wax produced was found in a little hole in the Wall at the back
of the Fire. Depones, that Sir George his Sickness did fall upon him about the
eighteenth of October or thereby. Depones, that the Picture of Wax was found on
the ** of December, and that Sir George his Sickness did abate and relent about
the time the Picture of wax was found and discovered in Jannet Mathie's house.
Depones, that the Pins were placed in the right and left sides, and that Sir
George Maxwel of Pollock his pains, as he understood by Sir George's
complaining of these pains, lay most in his right and left sides. And depones,
that Sir George his pains did abate and relent after the finding of the said
Picture of Wax and taking out of the Pins as is said. And depones, that the
Pannal Jannet Mathie has been by fame and brute reputed a Witch these several
years by past. And this is the truth as he shall answer to God. Sic Subscrib.
Andr. Martin.

Laurence Pollock Secretary to the Lord of Pollock, sworn and purged of partial
Counsel, depones as follows, That on the ** day of December he was in the
Pannal Jannet Mathie's house when the Picture was found; and that he did not
see it before it was brought to the Pannal's door. Depones, that Sir George
Maxwel of Pollock's sickness did seize upon him about the fourteenth of October
or thereby, and he did continue in his Sickness or Distemper for six Weeks or
thereby. Depones, that Sir George his Sickness did abate and relent after the
finding of the said Picture of Wax and taking out of the Pins that were in the
Effigies. Depones, that by open bruit and common fame, Jannet Mathie, and
Bessie Weir, and Margery Craige, are brandit to be Witches. Depones, that the
truth is this as he shall answer it to God. Sic Subscrib. Laurence Pollock.

Lodovic Stuart of Auchunhead being sworn and purged of partial Counsel,
depones, That Sir George his Sickness fell upon him the fourteenth or fifteenth
of October or thereby. Depones, that he was not present at the finding of the
Picture of Wax; but that he had seen Sir George Maxwel of Pollock after it was
found; and having seen him in his Sickness oftentimes before, he did perceive
that Sir George had sensibly recovered after the time that the said Picture was
said to be found, which was upon the 11 th or 12 th of December. Depones, that
Jannet Mathie and Margery Craige two of the Pannals are by report of the
Country said to be Witches. Depones, that he having come to Pollock he did see
Sir George Maxwel, whose pains did recur, and that his pains and torments were
greatly increased in respect of what they were before the finding of the
Picture of Wax. Depones, that upon the 8th of January when they left the said
Sir George Maxwel of Pollock, the Deponent James Dunlop of Housil, Allan
Douglace, and several others, did go to the house of John Stuart Warlock in
Pollock-shaw, and there he found a Picture of Clay in the said John Stuart's
Bedstraw. Depones, that there was three Pins in the said Picture of Clay, and
that there was one in each side, and one in the Breast. And depones, that being
returned to Sir George his house, Sir George told the Deponent that he found
great ease of his pains, and that it was before the Deponent Housil and the
rest did reveal to him that they had found the said Picture of Clay; and
further depones, that to his own observation he did perceive that Sir George
had sensibly recovered. Depones, that they took the said John Stuart Pannal
Prisoner with them at the finding of the said Effigies. And depones, that this
is truth as he shall answer it to God. Sic Subscrib. Lodowick Stuart.

There follow more Depositions in the Copy, but these are the most for our
purpose, and enough to discover that the Consession of those Witches are no
Fables nor Dreams.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THese Confessions and Depositions are transcribed out of the Copy in the same
Scottish Dialect that I found them; and several words there are which I profess
I understand not, as those for example concerning the black man's Voice, that it
was hough and goustie: But if the voice of this black man be like that of his
who appeared to the Witches whom Mr. Hunt examined, they may signify a big and
low voice.

There is another Scottish Trial of Witches amongst Mr. Glanvil's Papers, with
the same general subscription that this has, viz. Robert Martin Clerk to the
Justice Court. But that is of too old a date, it being in the year 1590, to
comply with the title of our Stories. But it being a true Copy of Record so
Authentic, though not so fresh, it may happily not be amiss briefly to name some
Effects, Kinds, or Circumstances of Witchcraft therein mentioned; such
especially as have not occurred in the foregoing Stories; as the giving and
taking away power from sundry men's Genitalmembers, For which Jannet Clark was
accused.

That which is observable in John Fiene is, that the Devil appeared to him not
in black, but in white raiment; but proposed as hellish a Covenant to him as
those Fiends that appear in black. As also lying dead two or three hours, and
his Spirit taken, (as the Phrase in the Record is) ^is being carried or
transported to many Mountains, and, as he thought, through the world, according
to his own Depositions. His hearing the Devil preach in a Kirk in the Pulpit in
the night by candlelight, the Candle burning blue. That in a Conventicle of
Witches, whose names are specified in the Record, he with the rest at parting
kissed the Devil's Breech; the Record speaks more broadly. His skimming on the
Sea in a Boat with those of his gang, and his foretelling the leak in the
Queens Ship by the help of the Devil. His raising Winds with the rest at the
King's passage into Denmark, by casting a Cat into the Sea, which the Devil
delivered to them, and taught them to cry Hola when they cast it in. His
raising a Mist at the King's return from Denmark, by getting Satan to cast a
thing like a Football (it appeared to John like a Wisp) into the Sea, which
made a vapor or reek to arise, whereby the King's Majesty might be cast upon
the Coast of England. His hearing the Devil again preach in a Pulpit in black,
who after pointed them to Graves, to open and dismember the Corpse therein;
which done, incontinently they were transported without words. His opening
Locks by Sorcery, as one by mere blowing into a woman's hand while he sa^e by
the Fire. His raising sour Candles on the Luggs of an Horse, and another on the
top of the Staff of his Rider in the night, that he made it as light as day;
and how the man sell down dead at the entering within his house at his return
home. His embarquing in a Boat with other Witches, and sailing over Sea, and
entering within a ship, and drinking good Wine and Ale there, and sinking the
Ship when they had done, with the persons in it. His kissing Satan's Breech
again alter another Conventicle. His being swistly carried above in the chasing
of a Cat to catch her to cast into the Sea, thereby to raise Winds, according
to the prescription of Satan. His pretending to tell any man how long he should
live if he told him but the day of his birth.

There are also several things in Agnes Sympson's Witchcrast, such as there
scarce occur the like in the foregoing stories. As her skill in Diseases. That
the sickness of Will. Black was an Elf-shot. Her heating also of them by
Sorcery, and foretelling the party whether he should live or die, and others
how long they should live. Her taking the sick parties pains and sickness upon
herself for a time, and then translating it to a third person. Her use of long
scriptural Prayers and Rhymes containing the main points of Christianity, so
that she may seem to have been not so much a white Witch as an holy woman. And
yet it is upon Record that she made a Covenant with the Devil in the shape of a
man, and in suchlike hellish manner as other Witches do. But when she sought
for answers from the Devil upon any occasion, he appeared to her in the shape
of a Dog; but the formula of her dismissing of him, was, The charging him to
depart on the Law he lives on, as she did when she dismissed him after her
consulting him about the old Lady Edmonston's sickness; but her invocation was,
Elva, come and speak to me, who came in the likeness of a Dog. Her sailing with
her fellow-Witches in a Boat to a Ship, where the Devil caused her to drink
good Wine, she neither seeing the Mariners, nor the Mariners her. But after
all, the Devil raised a Wind whereby the ship perished. Her baptizing, and
using other Ceremonies upon a Cat, with other Witches, to hinder the Queen's
coming into Scotland. Her raising of a Spirit to conjure a Picture of Wax for
the destroying of Mr. John Moscrope.

Hitherto I have brought but small shreds out of this ancient Record, but I
will conclude with a full Paragraph, it containing the Confession of Agnes
Sympson to King James then King of the Scots: Which is this.

Item, Fyled and convict for sameckle as she confessed before his Majesty, that
the Devil in man's likeness met her going out in the Fields from her own house
at Keith betwixt five and six at Even, being alone, and commandit her to be at
North-bervick-Kirk the next night. And she past then on Horseback, conveyed by
her good-son called John Couper, and lighted at the Kirk-yard, or a little
before she came to it, about eleven hours at Even. They danced along the
Kirk-yard, Geilie Duncan played to them on a Trump, John Fien mussiled led all
the rest; the said Agnes and her Daughter followed next. Besides, there were
Kate Gray, George Moilis Wife, Robert Greirson, Katharine Duncan, Bessie Right,
Isabel Gilmore, John Graymaill, Duncan Buchanan, Thomas Barnhil and his Wife,
Gilbert Macgil, John Macgil, Katharine Macgil, with the rest of their Accomplices
above an hundred persons, whereof there were six Men, and all the rest Women.
The Women made first their homage, and then the Men. The Men were turned nine
times widdershins about, and the Women six times. John Fien blew up the Doors
and blew in the Lights, which were like mickle black Candles sticking round
about the Pulpit. The Devil startit up himself in the Pulpit like a mickle
black man, and every one answered Here. Mr. Robert Greirson being named, they
ran all hirdie girdie, and were angry: for it was promised he should be called
Robert the Comptroller, alias Rob the Rowar, for expriming of his name. The
first thing he demandit was, if they keept all promise, and been good Servants,
and what they had done since the last time they had conveined. At his command
they opened up three Graves, two within and ane without the Kirk, and took off
the joints of their Fingers, Toes, and Neise, and parted them amongst them: and
the said Agnes Sympson got for her part a Winding Sheet and two Joints. The
Devil commandit them to keep the Joints upon them while they were dry, and then
to make a powder of them to do evil withal. Then he commandit them to keep his
Commandments, which were to do all the evil they could. Before they departed
they kissed his Breech; the Record speaks more broad, as I noted before. He had
on him ane Gown and ane Hat, which were both black: and they that were
assembled part stood and part sat: John Fien was ever nearest the Devil at his
left Elbock, Graymaill kept the door.

I have retained the Scotch Dialect here also, for the more Authentickness of
the matter, and have adjoined this large Paragraph, the Confession therein
contained being in all probability a more special occasion of King James his
changing his opinion touching the Existence of Witches, which he was, as is
reported, inclinable to think to be but a mere conceit before. For he was then
but young, not passing five or six and Twenty years of age when this
Examination was had before him. And part of the Third Chapter of his Second
Book of his Daemonologie seems to be a Transcript of this very Confession.
Wheresore this being so considerable an occurrence touching a business of such
moment, the bringing in here so old a Story amongst those of fresher memory,
will, I hope, bring along with it its own excuse.

Thus have we contrived all the Relations in Mr. Glanvil's Papers which were
thought considerable, into this second Part of his Saducismus Triumphatus. He
once intended to subjoyn thereto an Answer to Webster, Wagstaff, and the Author
of the Doctrine of Devils, as you may observe from the first Section of his
Proof of Apparitions, etc. from holy Scripture: but partly by bringing in
already the chief things in that rude draught begun, into what is here
published, and partly by stating the Question truly and with right judgment,
he has prevented himself, and made that labor needless. As indeed in a manner
it ever was, their Objections against Mr. Glanvil's Opinion on these points,
being wondrous weak, sorry and sophistical, and such as it were pity that any
man of parts who can bestow his time better should squander it away in
confuting such trisles.

There is nothing that makes any least show of strength, but that touching the
palpability of the consistency of the Bodies of the Familiars of Witches, as if
it weakened our Savior's Argument to his Disciples for his Resurrection, where
he bids them handle him and see, for a Spirit has not Flesh and Bones as they
see him have. And he bids Thomas thrust his Hand into his Side, that they might
be sure he was no Spectre or Spirit, but the very Christ with his Flesh, Blood,
and Bones as he had before his Crucifixion; and they were as well ascertained
of this, as sense, nay the surest sense, that of Touch or Feeling, could make
them, that he had really Flesh and Bones, and such a temperament as humane
Bodies have. Nor can any cavil avail against this from the Familiars of
Witches, that will not as well weaken the assurance that we converse with such
or such a Friend, but with some Spectre like him; So that the Allegation is as
weak as peevish and malicious. And if he should doubt whether it was his real
Friend, or some Spectre, if his Friend should offer himself, as our Savior
did, to be touched, searched and felt, would not any body think it were
sufficient assurance? But for a perverse Caviller or crazy Sceptick, what is it
that will satisfy them?

But it may be it will be said, that there be concomitant considerations that
will assure the party it is his Friend and not a Spectre. And are there not
concomitant considerations here also? The ancient Prophecies, and Christ's own
Prediction that he should rise from the dead out of the Grave. And that God is
a God of truth, and not of unfaithfulness and imposture: Which assurance is of
a more high and divine Tenor than that of feeling his Body. And therefore our
Savior says to Thomas; THOMAS, because thou have seen me thou have believed,
Blessed are they that have not seen and yet have believed: For it is a sign
that a more noble and heavenly principle is awakened in them, that dispels that
thick Mist of Skeptical stupor and dullness. It is a sign they are of a more
holy, pure, and refined temper. And besides all this, What Spectre ever
challenged any one to make such a Trial as this, to seel whether he was not
very Flesh and Bone as real men are, when he would impose upon any? Or how is
it proved, though Spirits can bring their Vehicle to a palpable consistency,
that they can turn it into such as shall seel of the same articulate
palpableness of Flesh and Bone and Temperament that are in living men? Till
this appear by confessed experience to be in the palpable consistency of
Familiars or Spirits that transact with Witches, the Allegation is infinitely
weak upon that account also, as weak as spightful and perverse. But the
Hag-Advocates will allege any foolish thing, rather than seem to be able to
say nothing.

In the mean time I think it here seasonable to declare, that though this
intended Edition of Saducismus Triumphatus had not the happiness to be
perfected by the ingenious Author's own hand before his death, yet such
Materials he left behind him, and the work in such a forwardness, that things
being put together in that order and distinctness which they are, the Discourse
may prove as useful for the reclaiming men from Saducism, though perhaps not
altogether so delightful, as if his own hand had had the last polishing of it.
And the publishing of it will also do him that right in the eyes of the world,
that (whereas he was suspected happily for some complaisance toward some persons
that were over-inclinable to Hobbianism, to have shrunk from the sense of such
noble Theories, with which his mind was enlightened in the morning of his days)
it from hence may appear that these things stuck close to him, and that he
entertained them with a sincere warmth all along, as is evident from these
Papers then private within his own Study-walls. As the profession of them broke
out from him most expressly when he lay on his Deathbed, as his intimate friend
Mr. Thomas Alcock largely sets down in a Letter written to Dr. H. More. And I
think that is the time, if ever that men will speak their thoughts freely, as
the Poet has observed in the like case, Nam vere voces tum demum pectore ab imo
Ejiciuntur, and eripitur persona, manet res.


To this Sense, Then it is men from their Hearts their Mind declare,
Cast off their Vizards, show their faces bare.


AN ACCOUNT Of what happened in the KINGDOM OF SWEDEN In the Years 1669, and
1670.

In Relation to the Persons that were accused For Witches: AND TRIED and
EXECUTED By the King's Command.

Printed at first in the Swedish Dialect by Authority, and then Translated into
diverse other Languages; and now, upon the requost of some Friends, done into
English.

By Anthony Horneck Preacher at the Savoy.

LONDON: Printed, 1681.

THE TRANSLATORS PREFACE TO THE READER.
Showing, what Credit may be given to the Matter of Fact related in the ensuing
Narrative.
THat we are to believe nothing but what we have seen, is a rule so false, that
we dare not call our selves rational Creatures, and avouch it; yet as
irrational as the Maxim is, is become modish with some men, and those no ^ery
mean Wits neither, to make use of it; and though they will hardly own it in its
full Latitude, yet when it comes to Particulars, let the Reasons to the
contrary be never so pregnant or convincing, they will hugg it as their sacred
Anchor, and laugh at all those credulous Wretches that, without seeing, are so
easily choused into an imprudent Confidence. And this pitiful Stratagem we find
practiced in no affair so much as that of Spirits and Witches, and Apparitions,
which must all be Fancies, and Hypocondriack Dreams, and the effects of
distempered Brains, because their own are so dull as not to be able to pierce
into those Mysteries. I do not deny but the Imagination may be, and is
sometime, deluded; and melancholy People may fancy they hear Voices, and see
very strange things, which have no other foundation but their own weakness, and
like Bubbles break into Air, and nothing, by their own vanity.

Yet as no man does therefore take unpolisht Diamonds to be Pebbles, because
they do look like them, so neither must all passages of this nature we hear or
read of, be traduced as self-conceit, or derided as Old Wives Fables, because
some smell strong of Imposture and Sophistication. We believe men of Reason and
Experience, and free from Fumes, when a person of ordinary Intellectuals finds
no great credit with us; and if we think our selves wise for doing so, why
should any man so much forget himself, as to be an Infidel in point of such
Phaenomena's, when even the most judicious men have had experience of such
passages? It seems (...) me no less than madness to contradict what both wise
and unwise men do unanimously agree in; and how Jews. Heathens, Mahometans, and
Christians, both learned and unlearned, should come to conspire into this
Cheat, as yet seems to me un accountable. If some few melancholy Monks, or Old
Women had seen such Ghosts and Apparitions, we might then suspect that what
they pretend to have seen might be nothing, but the effect of a disordered
Imagination; but when the whole World, as it were, and men of all Religions,
men of all Ages too, have been forced, by strong evidences, to acknowledge the
truth of such occurrences, I know not what strength there can be in the
Argument drawn from the consent of Nations in things of a sublimer nature, if
here it be of no efficacy. Men that have attempted to evade the places of
Scripture which speak of Ghosts and Witches, we see how they are forced to turn
and wind the Texts, and make, in a manner, Noses of Wax of them, and rather
squeeze than gather the sense, as if the holy Writers had spoke like
Sophisters, and not like men who made it their business to condescend to the
capacity of the Common people. Let a man put no force at all on those passages
of holy Writ, and then see what sense they are like to yield. It Is strange to
see how some men have endeavored to elude the story of the Witch of Endor; and
as far as I can judge, they play more Hocus-Pocus tricks in the explication of
that passage, than the Witch herself did in raising the deceased Samuel. To
those Straits is Falsehood driven, while Truth loves Plains, and undisguised
Expressions; and Error will seek out Holes and Labyrinths to hide itself,
while Truth plays above board, and scorns the subterfuges of the Sceptick
Interpreter. Men and Brethren, Why should it seem a thing incredible with you
that God should permit Spirits to appear, and the Devil to exert his Power
among men on Earth? Has God ever engaged his word to the contrary; or is it
against the nature of Spirits to assume airy Vehicles and Bodies of condensed
Air, or to animate grosser substances to show themselves to mortals upon
certain occasions?

I am so much a Prophet as to foresee what will be the fate of the ensuing
story, nor can I suppose that upon the reading of it, men's verdicts will be
much changed from what they were, if they have set up this resolution, to
believe nothing that looks like the shadow of an Apparition, though the things
mentioned here cannot be unknown to any that have been conversant with foreign
affairs of late years. And though there cannot be a greater evidence than the
testimony of a whole Kingdom, yet your nicer men will think it a disparagement
to them to believe it; nor will it ever extort Assent from any that build the
reputation of their wit upon contradicting what has been received by the
vulgar.

The passages* here related wrought so great a Consternation, not only on the
Natives, but Strangers too, that the Here Christian Rumpf, then Resident for
the States General at Stockholm, thought himself obliged to send away his
little Son for Holland, lest he should be endangered by these villainous pra^es,
which seemed to threaten all the Inhabitants of the Kingdom. And a friend of
mine in Town, being then in Holstein, remembers very well that the Duke of
Holstein sent an Express to the King of Sweden to know the truth of this famous
Witcheraft: To whom the King modestly replied, That his Judges and
Commissioners had caused diverse Men, Women, and Children to be Burnt and
Executed upon such pregnant Evidences a^ were brought before them; but whether
the Actions they confessed, and which were proved against them, were real, or
only effects of strong Imagination, he was not as yet able to determine.

Add to all this, that the Circumstances mentioned in the ensuing Narrative,
are at this day to be seen in the Royal Chancery at Stockholm; and a person of
my acquaintance offered me ^o procure a Copy of them under the hands of public
Registers, if I desired it: Not to mention that in the year 72. Baron Sparr,
who was sent Ambassador from the Crown of Sweden to the Court of England, did
upon his word aver the matter of Fact recorded here to be undoubtedly true, to
several persons of Note and Eminency, with other particulars, stranger than
those set down i^ these Papers. And to this purpose diverse ^ters were sent from
Sweden and H^urgh to several persons here in London: (...) much, that should a
man born in, or acquainted with those parts, hear any person dispute the truth
of it, he would wonder where people have lived, or what sullen humor does
possess them, to disbelieve that which so many thousands in that Kingdom have
felt the sad effect of.

That a Spirit can lift up Men and Women, and grosser Bodies, into the Air, I
question no more, than I doubt that the Wind can overthrow Houses, or drive
Stones upward from their Center. And though I cannot comprehend the Philosophy
of her committing Venereal acts, and having Children, and those Children
bringing forth Toads and Serpents; yet I can very rationally conceive that he
can animate dead Bodies, and by the help of them commit those villainies which
modesty bids us to conceal; and he that was permitted, as we see in the Gospel,
to possess and actuate living men, and do with them almost what he pleased, why
may not he commit wickedness by such Instruments, and cast Mists before the
Witches eyes, that they may not know who they are? And he that could in Egypt
produce Frogs, either real or counterfeit ones, Why may not he be supposed to
be able to produce such Toads and Serpents out of any misshapen Creatures, and
of his own making? Spirits that know the nature of things better than man, and
understand better how things are joined and compounded, and what the
Ingredients of terrestrial Productions are, and see things in their first
principles, and have power over the Air, and other Elements, and have a
thousand ways of shaping things and representing them to the sensual minds of
men, what may not they be supposed to be able to do, if they have but God's
permission to exert their power? and that God does sometimes permit such
things, we have reason to believe, that see men sink into most sottish
wickedness, which very often produces that fatal Sentence we read of in the
Evangelist; He that is filthy, let him be filthy still. And certainly there is
such a Judgment, that men are given up to believe a Lie, and that God sends
them strong Delusions as punishments for their wilful obstinacy and resisting
of the Truth. Spirits by being Devils do not lose their nature; and let any man
in sober sadness consider what Spirits are said to be able to do in Scripture,
and what they have done, and compare them with what is said in the following
Relation, and he will not think those things the Witches confessed altogether
impossible.

I could add a known passage that happened in the year 1659. at Crassen in
Philesia, of an Apothecarie's Servant, one Christopher Manigh, who after his
death returned to his Master's Shop, and seemed to be mighty busy there,
walked about in the open Streets, but spoke to no creature but to a
Maidservant, and then vanished; a thing which abundance of people, now living,
will take their Oath upon, that they saw him after his decease, at least his
shape, and which occasioned public Disputations in the University of
Wittemberg: but it is needless. If the Stories related in the foregoing Book are
not sufficient to Convince men. I am sure an Example from beyond sea will gain
no Credit. It Is enough that I have shown Reasons which may induce my Reader to
believe, that he is not imposed upon by the following Narrative, and that it is
not in the nature of those Pamphlets they cry about the Streets, containing
very dreadful News from the Country of Armies fighting in the Air.

Farewell.

A Relation of the strange Witchraft discovered in the Village Mohra in
Swedeland, taken out of the public Register of the Lords Commissioners
appointed by His Majesty the King of Sweden to examine the whole business, in
the years of our Lord 1669. and 1670.
THE news of this Witchraft coming to the Kings ear, his Majesty was pleased to
appoint Commissioners, some of the Clergy, and some of the Laity, to make a
Journey to the Town aforesaid, and to examine the whole business; and
accordingly the Examination was ordered to be on the 13th of August; and the
Commissioners met on the 12th instant, in the said Village, at the Parsons
House, to whom both the Minister and several people of fashion complained with
tears in their eyes, of the miserable condition they were in, and therefore
begged of them to think of some way whereby they might be delivered from their
Calamity. They gave the Commissioners very strange Instances of the Devils
Tyranny among them; how by the help of Witches, he had drawn some Hundreds of
Children to him, and made them subject to his power; how he has been seen to
go in a Visible shape through the Country, and appeared daily to the people;
how he had wrought upon the poorer sort, by presenting them with Meat and
Drink, and this way allured them to himself, with other circumstances to be
mentioned hereafter. The Inhabitants of the Village added, with very great
lamentations, that though their Children had told all, and sought God very
earnestly by Prayer, they were carried away by him; and therefore begged of the
Lords Commissioners to root out these Witches, that they might regain their
former rest and quietness; and the rather, because the Children which used to
be carried away there in the County or District of Elfdale, since some Witches
had been burnt there, remained unmolested.

That day being the last Humiliation day Instituted by Authority for the
removing of this judgment, the Commissioners went to Church, where there
appeared a considerable Assembly both of young and old: the Children could read
most of them, and sing Psalms, and so could the Women, though not with any
great zeal or fervor. There were preached two Sermons that day, in which the
miserable case of those people that suffered themselves to be deluded by the
Devil, was laid open; and these Sermons were at last concluded with very
ferverit prayer.

The Public Worship being over, all the people of the Town were called
together to the Parsons House, near three thousand of them. Silence being
commanded, the Kings Commission was read publicly in the hearing of them all,
and they were charged under very great penalties to conceal nothing of the
truth, and to say nothing but the truth; those especially who were guilty, that
the Children might be delivered from the Clutches of the Devil. They all
promised obedience; the guilty feignedly, but the guiltless weeping and crying
bitterly.

On the 14th of August the Commissioners met again, consulting how they might
withstand this dangerous flood; after long deliberation, an Order also coming
from his Majesty, they did resolve to execute such, as the matter of sact could
be proved upon, Examination being made; for there were discovered no less than
Threescore and ten in the Village aforesaid, Three and twenty of which freely
confessing their Crimes, were condemned to dye; the rest, one pretending that
she was with Child, and the other denying and pleading not guilty, were sent to
Fahluna, where most of them were afterward Executed.

Fifteen Children which likewise confessed that they were engaged in this
Witchery, died as the rest; six and thirty of them between nine and sixteen
years of age, who had been less guilty, were sorced to run the gantlet; twenty
more, who had no great inclination, yet had been seduced to those Hellish
Enterprises, because they were very young, were condemned to be lashed with
Rods upon their hands, for three Sundays together at the Church-door; and the
aforesaid six and thirty were also deemed to be lashed this way once a week for
a whole year together. The number of the Seduced Children was about three
hundred.

On the twenty fifth of August, Execution was done upon the notoriously guilty,
the day being bright and glorious, and the Sun shining, and some thousands of
people being present at the spectacle. The Order and Method observed in the
Examination was thus:

First, the Commissioners and the Neighboring Justices went to prayer; this
done, the Witches, who had most of them Children with them, which they either
had Seduced, or attempted to Seduce, from four years of age to sixteen, were
set before them. Some of the Children complained lamentably of the misery and
mischief they were forced sometime to suffer of the Witches.

The Children being asked whether they were sure that they were at any time
carried away by the Devil; they all declared they were, begging of the
Commissioners that they might be sreed from that intolerable yoke.

Hereupon the Witches themselves were asked, whether the Confessions of these
Children were true, and admonished to confess the truth, that they might turn
away from the Devil unto the living God. At first, most of them did very
stiffly, and without shedding the least tear, deny it, though much against their
will and inclination.

After this, the Children were Examined every one by themselves, to see whether
their Confessions did agree or no; and the Commissioners found that all of
them, except some very little ones, who could not tell all the Circumstances,
did punctually agree in the confession of particulars.

In the mean while the Commissioners that were of the Clergy examined the
Witches, but could not bring them to any Confession, all continuing steadfast in
their denyals, till at last some of them burst out into tears, and their
Consession agreed with what the Children had said. And these expressed their
abhorrency of the fact, and begged pardon; adding, that the Devil, whom they
called Loeyta, had stopped the Mouths of some of them, and stopped the Ears of
others; and being now gone from them, they could no longer conceal it, for they
now perceived his Treachery.

The Confession which the Witches made in Elfdale, to the Judges there, agreed
with the Consession they made at Mohra: and the chief things they confessed,
consisted in these three points.

1. Whither they used to go. 2. What kind of place it was they went to, called
by them Blockula, where the Witches and the Devil used to meet. 3. What evil or
mischief they had either done or designed there.
1. Of their Journey to Blockula. The Contents of their Confession.
WE of the Province Elfdale, do confess that we used to go to a gravel-pit
which lay hard by a cross-way, and there we put on a garment over our heads,
and then danced round, and after this ran to the crossway, and called the Devil
thrice, first with a still voice, the second time somewhat louder, and the
third time very loud, with these words, Antecessor come and carry us to
Blockula. Whereupon, immediately he used to appear, but in different Habits;
but for the most part we saw him in a gray Coat, and red and blue Stockings: he
had a red Beard, a high-crown'd Hat, with Linen of diverse colors wrapped about
it, and long Garters upon his Stockings.

Then he asked us whether we would serve him with Soul and Body. If we were
content to do so, he set us on a Beast which he had there ready, and carried us
over Churches and high walls; and after all, we came to a green Meadow where
Blockula lies. We must procure some shavings of Altars, and Church-Clocks; and
then he gives us a horn with a Salve in it, wherewith we do anoint our selves;
and then he gives us a Saddle, with a Hammer and a wooden nail, thereby to fix
the Saddle; whereupon we call upon the Devil, and away we go.

Those that were at the Town of Mohra, made in a manner the same Declaration:
being asked whether they were sure of a real personal Transportation, and
whether they were awake then when it was done; they all answered in the
Affirmative, and that the Devil sometimes laid something down in the place that
was very like them. But one of them confessed, that he did only take away her
strength, and her body lay still upon the ground; yet sometimes he took even
her body with him.

Being asked how they could go with their Bodies through Chimneys and broken
panes of Glass, they said, that the Devil did first remove all that might
hinder them in their flight, and so they had room enough to go.

Others were asked how they were able to carry so many Children with them; and
they answered, that when the Children were asleep they came into the Chamber,
laid hold of the Children, which straightway did awake, and asked them whether
they would go to a Feast with them; to which some answered, Yes, others No; yet
they were all forced to go. They only gave the Children a Shirt, a Coat and a
Doublet, which was either red or blue, and so they did set them upon a beast of
the Devils providing, and then they rid away.

The Children confessed the same thing; and some added, that because they had
very fine clothes put upon them, they were very willing to go.

Some of the Children concealed it from their Parents, but others discovered it
to them presently.

The Witches declared moreover, that till of late they never had that power to
carry away Children, but only this year and the last, and the Devil did at
this time force them to it; that heretofore it was sufficient to carry but one
of their Children, or a strangers Child with them, which yet happened seldom, but
now he did plague them and whip them if they did not procure him Children,
insomuch that they had no peace nor quiet for him; and whereas formerly one
journey a week would serve turn, from their own Town to the place aforesaid,
now they were forced to run to other Towns and places for Children, and that
some of them did bring with them some fifteen, some sixteen Children every
night.

For their journey they said they made use of all so^ts of Instruments, of
Beasts, of Men, of Spits and Posts, according as they had opportunity: if they
do ride upon Goats, and have many Children with them, that all may have room,
they stick a spit into the backside of the Goat, and then are anointed with the
aforesaid ointment. What the manner of their Journey is, God alone knows. Thus
much was made out, That if the Children did at any time name the Names of those
that had carried them away, they were again carried by force either to
Blockula, or to the Cross way, and there miserably beaten, insomuch that some
of them died of it: and this some of the Witches consessed; and added, That now
they were exceedingly troubled and tortured in their minds for it.

The Children thus used looked mighty bleak, wan, and beaten. The marks of the
Lashes the Judges could not perceive in them, except in one Boy, who had some
wounds and holes in his Back that were given him with Thorns; but the Witches
said they would quickly vanish.

After this usage the Children are exceeding weak; and if any be carried
overnight, they cannot recover themselves the next day; and this happens to
them by fits: And if a fit comes upon them, they lean on their Mothers Arms,
who sit with them up sometimes all night; and when they observe the Paleness
coming, they shake the Children, but to no purpose.

They observe further, that their Childrens Breasts grow cold at such times;
and they take sometimes a burning Candle and stick it in their Hair, which yet
is not burnt by it. They swoun upon this paleness, which Swoun lasts
sometimes half an hour, sometimes an hour, sometimes two hours; and when the
Children come to themselves again, they mourn, and lament, and groan most
miserably, and beg exceedingly to be eased: This two old men declared upon Oath
before the Judges, and called all the Inhabitants of the Town to witness, as
persons that had most of them experience of this strange Symptom of their
Children.

A little girl of Elfdale confessed, That naming the name of Jesus as she was
carried away, she fell suddenly upon the Ground, and got a great hole in her
Side, which the Devil presently healed up again, and away he carried her; and
to this day the girl confessed she had exceeding great pain in her side.

Another Boy confessed too, That one day he was carried away by his Mistress,
and to perform the Journey he took his own Father's Horse out of the Meadow
where it was, and upon his return she let the Horse go in her own ground.

The next morning the Boys Father sought for his Horse, and not finding it,
gave it over for lost; but the Boy told him the whole story, and so his Father
fetched the Horse back again; and this one of the Witches confessed.

2. Of the place where they used to assemble, called Blockula, and what they
did there.
THey unanimously confessed that Blockula is situated in a delicate large
Meadow whereof you can see no end. The place or house they met at, had before
it a Gate painted with diverse colors; through this Gate they went into a
little Meadow distinct from the other, where the Beasts went that they used to
ride on: But the Men whom they made use of in their Journey, stood in the House
by the Gate in a slumbering posture, sleeping against the wall.

In a huge large Room of this House, they said, there stood a very long Table,
at which the Witches did sit down: And that hard by this Room was another
Chamber where there were very lovely and delicate Beds.

The first thing they said they must do at Blockula was, That they must deny
all, and devote themselves Body and Soul to the Devil, and promise to serve him
faithfully, and confirm all this with an Oath. Hereupon they cut their Fingers,
and with their blood writ their Name in his Book. They added, that he caused
them to be Baptized too by such Priests as he had there, and made them confirm
their Baptism with dreadful Oaths and Imprecations.

Hereupon the Devil gave them a Purse, wherein there were shavings of Clocks
with a Stone tied to it, which they threw into the Water, and then were forced
to speak these words; As these Shavings of the Clock do never return to the
Clock from which they are taken, so may my Soul never return to Heaven. To
which they add Blasphemy and other Oaths and Curses.

The mark of their cut Fingers is not found in all of them: But a Girl who had
been slashed over her Fingers, declared, That because she would not stretch out
her Fingers, the Devil in anger had so cruelly wounded it.

After this they sat down to Table; and those that the Devil esteemed most,
were placed nearest to him; but the Children must stand at the door, where he
himself gives them meat and drink.

The diet they did use to have there, was, they said, Broth with Colworts and
Bacon in it, Oatmeal, Bread spread with Butter, Milk and Cheese. And they
added, that sometimes it tasted very well, and sometimes very ill. After meals
they went to Dancing, and in the mean while Swear and Curse most dreadfully,
and afterward they went to fighting one with another.

Those of Elfdale consessed, That the Devil used to play upon an Harp before
them, and afterward to go with them that he liked best into a Chamber, where
he committed venereous Acts with them; and this indeed all confessed, That he
had carnal knowledge of them, and that the Devil had Sons and Daughters which
he did marry together, and they did couple, and brought forth Toads and
Serpents.

One day the Devil seemed to be dead, whereupon there was great lamentation at
Blockula; but he soon awaked again. If he has a mind to be merry with them, he
lets them all ride upon Spits before him; takes afterward the Spits and beats
them black and blue, and then laughs at them. And he bids them believe that the
day of Judgment will come speedily, and therefore sets them on work to build a
great House of Stone, promising, that in that House he will preserve them from
God's Fury, and cause them to enjoy the greatest delights and pleasures: but
while they work exceeding hard at it, there falls a great part of the Wall down
again, whereby some of the Witches are commonly hurt, which makes him laugh,
but presently he cures them again.

They said they had seen sometimes a very great Devil like a Dragon with fire
round about him, and bound with an Iron Chain; and the Devil that converses
with them tells them, that if they confess any thing, he will let that Great
Devil loose upon them, whereby all Swedeland shall come into great danger.

They added, That the Devil had a Church there, such another as is in the Town
of Mohra. When the Commissioners were coming, He told the Witches, they should
not fear them; for he would certainly kill them all. And they confessed, that
some of them had attempted to murder the Commissioners, but had not been able
to effect it.

Some of the Children talked much of a white Angel which used to forbid them
doing what the Devil had bid them do, and told them that those doings should
not last long: what had been done, had been permitted because of the wickedness
of the People, and the carrying away of the Children should be made manifest.
And they added, that this white Angel would place himself sometimes at the Door
betwixt the Witches and the Children; and when they came to Blockula he pulled
the Children back, but the Witches they went in.

3. Of the Mischief or Evil which the Witches promised to do to Men and Beasts.
THey confessed that they were to promise the Devil that they would do all
that is Ill; and that the Devil taught them to milk, which was in this wise:
They used to stick a Knife in the Wall, and hang a kind of a Label on it, which
they drew and stroaked; and as long as this lasted, the persons that they have
power over were miserably plagued, and the Beasts were milked that way, till
sometimes they died of it.

A Woman confessed, That the Devil gave her a wooden Knife, wherewith, going
into houses, she had power to kill any thing she touched with it; yet there
were few that would confess that they had hurt any man or woman.

Being asked whether they had murdered any Children, they confessed, that they
had indeed tormented them, but did not know whether any of them had died of
those plagues. And added, That the Devil had showed them several places where
he had power to do mischief.

The Minister of Elfdale declared, That one night these Witches were, to his
thinking, upon the crown of his Head, and that from thence he had had a long
continued pain of the Head.

One of the Witches confessed too, that the Devil had sent her to torment that
Minister: and that she was ordered to use a Nail and strike it into his head,
but it would not enter very deep; and hence came that Headache.

The aforesaid Minister said also, That one night he felt a pain as if it were
torn with an Instrument that they cleanse Flax with, or a Flax-comb; and when
he waked he heard somebody scratching and scraping at the Window, but could
see nobody. And one of the Witches confessed, that she was the person that did
it, being sent by the Devil.

The Minister of Mohra declared also, that one night one of these Witches came
into his house, and did so violently take him by the Throat, that he thought he
should have been choked; and waking, he saw the person that did it, but could
not know her; and that for some Weeks he was not able to speak, or perform
Divine Service.

An Old woman of Elfdale confessed, that the Devil had helped her to make a
Nail, which she struck into a boys Knee, of which stroke the Boy remained lame
a long time. And she added, that before she burnt or was Execut^d by the hand
of Justice, the boy would recover.

They confessed also, that the Devil gives them a Beast about the bigness and
shape of a young Cat, which they call a Carrier; and that he gives them a Bird
too as big as a Raven, but white. And these two creatures they can send any
where; and wherever they come, they take away all sorts of Victuals they can
get, Butter, Cheese, Milk, Bacon, and all sorts of Seeds whatever they find,
and carry it to the Witch. What the Bird brings they may keep for themselves;
but what the Carrier brings they must reserve for the Devil, and that is brought
to Blockula, where he does give them of it so much as he thinks fit.

They add likewise, that these Carriers fill themselves so full, sometimes,
that they are forced to spew by the way, which spewing is found in several
Gardens whereColworts grow, and not far from the houses of those Witches. It is
of a yellow color like Gold, and is called Butter of Witches.

The Lords Commissioners were indeed very earnest, and took great pains to
persuade them to show some of their Tricks, but to no purpose; for they did all
unanimously confess, that since they had confessed all, they found that all
their Witchcraft was gone, and that the Devil at this time appeared to them
very terrible, with Claws on his Hands and Feet, and with Horns on his Head,
and a long Tail behind, and showed to them a Pit burning, with a Hand put out;
but the Devil did thrust the person down again with an Iron-fork; and suggested
to the Witches, that if they continued in their Confession, he will deal with
them in the same manner.

The abovesaid Relation is taken out of the Public Register, where all this is
related with more Circumstances. And at this time through all the Country there
are Prayers weekly in all Churches, to the end that Almighty God would pull
down the Devils Power, and deliver those poor Creatures which have hitherto
groaned under it.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THe Swedish Narrative with the Preface being Printed in the Translator's
absence, several gross Errata's have crept in, which the Reader is entreated to
pardon, and to Correct with his Pen.

Preface, page 3. lin. 25. read, plain. pres. p. 6. l. 6. r. His committing.
pres. p. 7. l. 17. r. Crossen in Silesia. l. 18. r. Mon^gk. p. 312. l. 9. r.
yet they were carried. l. 14. r. carried away in the County. p. 313. l. 17. r.
Examination being made, there. p. 317. l. 8. r. of the Town. p. 322. l. 13. r.
singer. p. 326. l. 7. r. as if he were. p. 328. l. 1. r. he would deal

ERRATA sic corrige.
In Part the First.
Page 16. l. 4. r. Grammar. p. 43. l. 9. r. (...). p. 53. l. 29. r. (...). l.
30. r. (...). p. 57. l. 4. r. Imposture.

Considerations about Witchcraft.
P. 13. l. 9. r. showing. p. 86. l. 19. r. silaments. p. 107. l. 17. r.
trifling. p. 112. l. 3. r. Marsilius, p. 142. l. 30. r. Being as Being is. p.
143. l. 30. r. Genus. p. 179. l. 12. r. so solemnly.

In the Second Part.
P. 128. l. 21. r. Father the Examinant. p. 132. l. 14. r. wrest. p. 164. l.
22. r. She says. p. 164. l. 28. r. fide. p. 202. l. 20. r. aversation. p. 275.
l. 2. r. saying. p. 286. l. 17. r. Ban-water. p. 303. l. 10. r. healing. p.
310. l. 18. r. verae.


