PHILOSOPHIA PIA; OR, A DISCOURSE OF THE Religious Temper, and Tendencies OF
THE Experimental Philosophy, Which is professed By the ROYAL SOCIETY.

To which is annexed

A Recommendation, and Defense of Reason in the Affairs of Religion.

By Jos. Glanvill Rector of Bath, and Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY.

LONDON, Printed by J Macock for James Collins at the Kings-Arms in Ludgate
street near the West end of S. Paul's, and at his Shop at the King's Head in
WestminsterHall. 1671.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in God SETH Lord Bishop of Sarum.
My Lord,
I Expect that this Discourse which I here offer to your Lordship should meet
with A^madverters; as soon as it peeps into the World; And if it be not
encountered with rude, and Ruffian-like oppositions, it will fare better than
some other Papers of mine whose designs were as harmless, and inoffensive. But
whatever befalls these sheets, my Assailants shall sind, that I am none of those
mean Spirits that will so easily be Hectored into a Nonplus: No, but since my
engaging in such a Cause, makes them angry; I shall yet provoke them more; for
I laugh at their vain boastings, and despise their feeble malice. I invoke not
your Lordships Patronage by this Address; If I be in the right, Truth will
defend it self; If not, it is in vain to solicit Patrons. But, my Lord, I
prefix your Name, that those may blush, who suspect the Practical Philosophy to
be an Enemy to Religion; And since custom has made this a Testimony of
Respect, I do it also to declare that I am,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Honourer and Servant, Jos. Glanvill.

TO THE READER.
THe following Discourse was first sent abroad incognito, and I had thoughts
that it should so have continued; But my Bookseller desiring another
Impression of it, has persuaded me to let it be annexed to the former
Discourse; to which I was the easier induced, because the Subjects, and Designs
are of kin. In the other Treatise I now, and then refer to this, and quore some
things from it, which need not have been done, if I had thought of putting them
abroad together, as I did not, when I writ that Essay.

This, that follows, was a Visitation Sermon; I printed it for a reason I would
mention, but then I must write more than I am disposed to do at present* It
found better Acceptance among wise, and considering men, than I expected: If my
Reader bring capacity to it, I desire he would consider it attentively too, for
I would not have it looked on as a loose Harangue to be run over in haste; but
as a Discourse that contains some thoughts, and such as I fancy may serve
many purposes of Religion.

THE GLORY of GOD IN HIS WORKS.
Introduction.
IT is the perverse opinion of hasty, inconsiderate Men, that the study of
Nature is prejudicial to the interests of Religion; And those that are very
zealous, and little wise, endeavor to render the Naturalist suspected of
holding secret correspondence with the Atheist: which things, if really they
were so, 'twere fit that the writings of Philosophers should be sent after the
Books of curious Arts, that were voted to Destruction by Apostolic Authority
and Zeal; and then were they all laid together in a fired heap, and one Drop
from my Finger would quench the Flames, I would not let fall that Drop. But
it is to be hoped there is no such guilt, or danger in the case; we may suppose
rather, that those unkind surmisals concerning natural wisdom, are the effects
of super^ious ignorance; yea, I doubt they are some of the relics of that
Barbarism, that made Heresy of Greek and Hebrew, and Magic of all
Mathematical endeavors.

And now, were this gross conceit about the Knowledge of Nature* only the fear,
and fancy of the mere vulgar, it were to be pardoned easily, and lightly to be
considered; but the worst is, the infection of the weak jealousy has spread
it self among some of those whose Lips should preserve knowledge; and there
are, I doubt, diverse of the Instructors of the people, who should endeavor to
deliver them from the vain images of fancy, that foment those fears in their
own imaginations, and theirs. For the sake of such, and those others, who are
capable of Conviction, I shall endeavor to justisie sober Inquisitions into
Gods Works; and to show, that they are not only innocent, but very useful in
most of the affairs wherein Religion is concerned. This I shall do under these
four General Heads.

(I.) That God is to be praised for his Works. (II.) That his Works are to be
studied by those that would praise him for them. (III.) That the study of
Nature, and Gods Works, is very serviceable to Religion. (IV) That the
Ministers and Professors of Religion ought not to discourage, but promote the
knowledge of Nature and the Works of it is Author.
I shall speak of these in their order.

CHAP. I.
That God is to be praised, and particularly for his Works. (I.) He directs to
his Works, for demonstrations of his Magni^icence and Glory. (II.) Holy men
gather instances of acknowledgment from the Creatures, when they would praise
their Creator. (III) God sanc^ed a day for the Celebration of his Works. That
Gods Works are to be studied by those that would praise him for them. That the
study of nature, and Gods Works, is very s^viceable to Religion.

SECT. I.
THe FIRST contains two things, viz. That God is to be praised; and
particularly for his Works. The former is the constant voice of Scripture, and
Universal Nature; He is wor^y to be praised, says the Kingly Prophet, 2 Samuel
xxii. 4. Greatly to be praised, says the same Royal Saint, 1 Chronicles. xvi. 25.
We are to offer him the sacrifice of praise, Heb. xiii. 15. And are encouraged
to do so, because, It is good to sing praises; and praise is comely for the
upright, Psalm cxlvii. and Psalm xxxiii. To recite all the particular
recommends and commands of this duty were endless, I only mention the next to
my thoughts, and add,

That Nature says the same, That praise is the tribute that is due to the
Author of our beings; And we can offer him nothing less, and in a manner
nothing else. All the world have been unanimous in this, and the rudest part of
mankind, have owned the dueness of praise and devout acknowledgment.

And (II.) the other branch is as clear, That God is to be praised particularly
for his Works; For in these we have very full discoveries of his Perfections,
and his Mercies, the most proper subjects for our praises. But here I must be
more large, and therefore propose the following things to be considered.

(I.) When God himself would represent his own Magnificenc^ and Glory, he
directs us to his Works. He illustrates his Greatness to Job, by instancing the
wonders of his Creatures: Among whom we are sent to the Earth, and Ocean, to
the Clouds, and rain, to the light, and heavenly influence, to Behemoth, and
Leviathan, to the Ostrich, and the Eagle; and the other furniture of Land, and
Air, and Seas, in the 4 last Chapters of that Book; in all these are the marks
of his Glory, and his Greatness, and they are no less so of his Wisdom, and his
Goodness; For in wisdom he has made them all, Psalm. civ. and the Earth is full
of his goodness, Psalm. cxix. 54.

SECT. II.
AND again (II.) when devout and holy men would quicken their own souls, and
those of others, to praise him, they use the same method, and send abroad their
thoughts among the Creatures to gather instances of acknowledgment. Thus Elihu
in Job magnifieth his Power by the lightning, and Thunder, by the Snow, and
Rain, by the whirlwinds of the North, and Cold of the South, and calls upon his
afflicted friend to remember to magnify his Works that men behold; and again
bids him stand still, and consider the wondrous Works of God, Job xxxvi. and
xxxvii. Chapters. And the Psalmist upon the same account urges his soul to
bless his Maker for his Majesty, and Honor disclosed in the natural wonders of
the heavens, and earth, the winds, and waters, the springs, and grass, the
Trees, and Hills, Psalm civ. throughout, and he gives particular thanks again,
cxxxvi. Psalm, for the discoveries of the Divine wisdom, and mercy in the same
instances of his providence and power; which he further celebrates by calling
upon the noblest of inanimates to praise him. Psalm. cxlviii. Praise him Sun and
Moon, praise him o ye Stars and Light; which creatures of his, though they are
not able to sing Hallelujahs, and so vocally to rehearse his praise, yet they
afford glorious matter for grateful and triumphant songs, and by their beauty,
and their order excite those that study, and observe them, to adore, and
glorify their Maker. And therefore the Prophet runs on further into an
aggregation of more particulars, of Fire, and Hail, Storms, and Vapors,
Mountains, and Cedars, Beasts, and Fouls, and creeping things; all which in the
same Divine Canticle are summoned to praise him, that is, we are required to
use them as the matter, and occasions of holy Eucharist, and thanksgiving. To
these I add,

(III.) That God was pleased to sanctify a solemn day for the celebration of
his Works. He appointed a Sabbath for rest, and contemplation to himself, and
for praise and acknowledgment to us; and his making Heaven, and Earth, the Sea,
and all that in them is, is intimated in the Commandment, as the reason of the
consecration of that Day; which was observed upon that account among the Jews;
and the devout Christians of eldest times kept the same in memory of Gods
Creation after the institution of the other Sabbath. This I take to be enough
for the first Proposition, viz. That God is to be praised for his Works. I
descend to the second, which is,

SECT. III.
(II.) THat his Works are to be studied by those that would praise him for
them. We are commanded to sing praises with understanding, Psalm. xl. 7. and the
offering he requires, is that of a reasonable service. His Works receive but
little glory from the rude wonder of the ignorant; and there is no wise man
that values the applauses of a blind admiration. No one can give God the Glory
of his Providence, that lets them pass by him unobserved; nor can he render
due acknowledgments to his word, that does not search the Scriptures: It Is
alike impossible to praise the Almighty, as we ought, for his Works, while we
carelessly regard them. We are commanded to search for wisdom, as for hidden
Treasure. It lies not exposed in the common ways; and the chief wonders of
divine art, and goodness are not on the surface of things, laid open to every
careless eye. The Tribute of praise that we owe our Maker, is not a formal,
slight confession that his works are wonderful, and glorious; but such an
acknowledgment as proceeds from deep observation, and acquaintance with them.
And though our profoundest study, and inqu^ies cannot unriddle all the
mysteries of Nature, yet do they still discover new motives to devout
admiration, and new objects for our loudest praises. Thus briefly of the second
Proposition also, viz. That Gods Works are to be studied by those that would
praise him for them. From these I now advance to the Third, which will require
more thoughts, and it is,

SECT. IV.
(III.) THat the study of nature and Gods works is very serviceable to
Religion. We commonly believe that the glory of God is the end of this; we say
it is his, and we know it is ours; and the divine glory is writ upon his
Creatures; the more we study them, the better we understand those characters,
the better we read his Glory, and the more fit are we to celebrate, and
proclaim it. Thus the knowledge of God's Works promotes the end of Religion.

And it disposes us to it, by keeping the soul under a continual sense of God.
He that converseth with his works, finds in all things the clear stamps of
infinite benignity, and wisdom; he perceives the divine art in all the
turnings, and varieties of nature, and divine goodness in that. He observes God
in the color of every flower, in every fi^re of a plant, in every limb of an
insect, in every drop of dew. He meets him in all things, and sees* all things
are his, and has an advantage hereby to be instructed how to use them, as our
Makers, not ours, with reverence, and thanksgiving, with an eye to his glory,
and an aim at his enjoyment. This is the genuine tendency of the knowledge of
nature; if it be abused to different, and contrary purposes, Natural wisdom is
not in fault, but he that turns this excellent instrument of Religion, upon it
self. But that better use may be made of it; and by some is, will appear by
considering particularly how acquaintance with nature assists RELIGION against
its greatest Enemies, which are Atheism, Sadducism, Superstition, Enthusiasm,
and the Humor of disputing.

CHAP. II.
Philosophy serves Religion against Atheism, by showing the wonderful Art, and
Contrivance that is in the contexture of the effects of Nature. It Is to be
suspected that he is an Atheist, that says Philosophy tends to Atheism. No
Philosophy does so much assist Religion against Atheism, as the experimental
and mechanic.

SECT. I.
FOr the First, Atheism, I reckon thus, the deeper insight any man has into
the affairs of nature, the more he discovers of the accurateness, and Art that
is in the contexture of things. For the works of God are not like the
compositions of fancy, or the Tricks of Juglers, that will not bear the light
of a strict scrutiny; but their exactness is honored by severity of
inspection; and he admires most, that knows most; since the insides and
remotest recesses of things have the clearest strokes of inimitable wisdom on
them, and the artifice is more in the wheel-work, then in the case. For if we
look upon any of the works of Nature through a magnifying glass that makes deep
discoveries, we find still more beauty, and more uniformity of contrivance;
whereas if we survey the most curious piece of humane ingenuity by that glass,
it will discover to us numerous flaws, deformities and imperfections in our
most elegant mechanics: Hence I gather, That the study of God's works showing
us more of the riches of nature, opens there by a fairer prospect of those
treasures of wisdom that are lodged within it; and so furnishes us with deeper
senses, and more arguments, and clearer convictions of the existence of an
infinitely intelligent being, that contrived it in so harmonious, and
astonishing an order.

So that if any are so brutish, as not to acknowledge him upon the view of the
mere external frame of the Universe, they must yet fall down before the
evidence, when Philosophy has opened the cabinet, and led them into the
Jewelhouse, and shown them the splendid and artful variety that is there. Thus
though the obvious Firmament, and the motions of the Sun, and Stars, the
ordinary vicissitudes of seasons, and productions of things, the visible beauty
of the great world, and the appearing variety, and fitness of those parts that
make up the little one, our selves, could scarce secure Galen from the danger
of being an A^st: Yet when he pryed further by ^mical enquiries, and sa^ the
wonderful diversity, ap^ness, and order of the minutest strings, pipes, and
passages that are in the inward fabric; He could not ab^ain from the
devoutness of an anthem of acknowledgment. And that the real knowledge of
nature leads us by the hand to the cons^ of its Author, is taught us by the
Holy Penman, who says, that the visill^ things of the Creation declare him.
The plebeian and obvious world no doubt does, but the Philosophical much more.
So that whosoever says, that inquiry into nature, and Gods works leads to any
degree of Atheism, gives great ground of suspicion that himself is an Atheist;
or that he is that other thing, that the Royal Psalmist calls him, that says
in his heart there is no God. For either he acknowledges the art, and
exactness of the works of nature; or he does not; if not, he disparageth the
divine Architect, and disables the chief argument of his existence: If he does,
and yet assirms that the knowledge of it leads to Atheism, he says he knows
not what, and in ^ct this, That the sight of the order, and method of a regular
and beautiful contrivance tends to persuade that chance, and fortune was the
Author.

SECT. II.
BUt I remember I have discoursed of this elsewhere, and what I have said for
Philosophy in general from it is tendency to devout acknowledgments, is not so
true of any as of the experimental and mechanic. For the Physiology of the
modern peripatetick schools creates notions, and turns nature into words of
second intention, but discovers little of its real beauty, and harmonious
contrivance; so that God has no Glory from it; nor men any argument of his
wisdom, or existence. And for the Metaphysical proofs, they are for the most
part deep, and nice, subject to evasions, and turns of wit, and not so
generally persuasive, as those drawn from the plain, and sensible Topics,
which the experimental Philosophy inlargeth, and illustrates.

This then gives the grand, and most convictive assurance of the being of God,
and acquaintance with this kind of learning furnishet^ us with the best weapons
todefend it. For the modern Atheists are pretenders to the mechanic
principles, and their pretensions cannot be shamed, or defeated by any so well,
as by those who thoroughly understand them. These indeed perceive sometimes that
there is only nature in some things that are taken to be supernatural and
miraculous, and the shallow naturalist sees no further, and therefore rests in
nature; But the deep Philosopher shows the vanity, and unreasonableness of
taking up so short; and discovers infinite wisdom at the end of the chain of
causes. I say, if we know no further then occult Qualities, Elements, Heavenly
Influences, and Forms, we shall never be able to disprove a Mechanic Atheist,
but the more we understand of the Laws of matter and motion, the more shall we
discern the necessity of a wise mind to order the blind, and insensible matter,
and to direct the original motions; without the conduct of which, the universe
could have been nothing but a mighty Chaos, and mis^n mass of everlasting
confusions, and disorders. This of the FIRST, viz. That the knowledge of nature
serves Religion against Atheism, and that it does also,

CHAP. III.
Philosophy Helps Religion against Sadducism, in both its branches, viz. As it
denies the existence of spirits; and immortality of humane souls. None so well
able to disprove the Sadduce, as those that understand the Philosophy of
Matter, and motion. The Hypothesis of substantial Forms, prejudicial to the
Doctrine of the Immortality of the soul.

SECT. I.
(II.) AGainst Sadducism. It Is well known that the Sadduces denied the
existence of Spirits, and Immortality of souls; And the Heresy is sadly
received in our days.

What a Spirit is; and whether there be Spirits, or not; are questions that
appertain to the disquisition of Philosophy. The Holy Scripture, that
condescends to the plain capacities of men, uses the word spirit commonly for
the more subtle, and invisible bodies, and 'twil be difficult from thence to
fetch a demonstrative proof of Spirits, in the strict notion. That there are
Angels, and Souls which are purer then these gross bodies, may no doubt be
concluded from thence; But whether these are only a finer sort of matter, or a
different kind of beings, cannot, I think, be determined by any thing delivered
in the divine Oracles. The Inquiry therefore belongs to Philosophy, which, from
diverse operations in our own Souls concludes, That there is a sort of beings
which are not matter or body, viz. being self-motive, penetrable, and
indivisible; Attributes directly contrary to those of matter, which is
impenetrable, divisible, and void of self-motion. By these properties,
respectively, the distinct nature of spirit and body is known, and by the same,
that there are spirits, in the strictest since, as well as corporal beings.

Now by stating the nature, and proving the existence of spirits a very
considerable service is done to Religion: For hereby our notion of the adorable
Deity is freed from all material grosness, in which way those must conceive
him, that acknowledge nothing but body in the world, which certainly is a very
great dis-interest to his Glory, and suggests very unbecoming thoughts of him.
And by the due stating of the Notion of a spirit, that silly conceit of the
Souls Traduction is over^hrown, which either arises from direct Sadducism, or
a defect in Philosophy. Hereby our Immortality is undermined, and dangerously
exposed. But due Philosophical disquisition will set us ^ight in the Theory.

For the former of the mentioned errors, the Anthropomorphite doctrines, that
make God himself a corporeal substance, they cannot be disproved but by the use
of the principles of Philosophy; since let us bring what Arguments we can from
the Scriptures, which speak of the Perfection, Infinity, Immensity, Wisdom, and
other Attributes of God, all these no doubt will be granted; but the Quaery
will be whether all may not belong to a material Being; a question which
Philosophy resolves; and there is no other way to search deep into this matter,
but by it is aids.

So likewise as to the Traduction of the Soul; The Arguments from Scripture
against it are very general, yea many exp^ions there, (...) at first ^ght to
look that way. And therefore this other help, Philosophy, must be used here
also; and by the distinct representation which it gives of the nature of
spirit, and matter, and of the operations that appertain to each, this error
is effectually confuted; which it cannot be by any other course of procedure.

This Philosophy befriends us against Sadducism in the first branch of it, as
it explodes the being of Spirits.

SECT. II.
THE other is, the denial of the Immortality of our Souls; The establishment of
this likewise, the Students of Philosophy and Gods Works in all Ages have
attempted, and they have proved it by the Philosophical considerations of the
nature of sense; the quickness of imagination; the spirituality of the
understanding; the fredom of the will, from these they infer, that the Soul is
immaterial, and from thence, that it is immortal; which Arguments are some of
the most demonstrative and cogent that the mere reasons of men can use; but
cannot be managed, nor understood but by those, that are instructed in
Philosophy, and Nature.

I confess there are other demonstrations of our Immortality, for the plain
understandings that cannot reach those heights. The Scripture gives clear
evidence, and that of the resurrection of the holy Jesus, is palpable: But yet
the Philosophical proofs are of great use, and serve for the conviction of the
Infidel, with whom the other inducements are nothing; and the deeper knowledge
of things is necessary to defend this great Article of Religion against these,
since they allege a sort of reason to prove the soul to be mortal, that cannot
be confuted but by a reason instructed in the Observations of nature.

For the modern Sadduce pretends that all things we do, are performed by mere
matter, and motion, and cons^quently that there is no such thing as an
immaterial being: and therefore that when our bodies are dissolved, the man is
lost, and our Souls are nothing; which dismal conclusion is true, and certain,
if there be nothing in us but matter, and the results of motion; and those that
converse but little with nature, understand little what may be done by these;
and so cannot be so well assured that the elevations, mixtures, and
combinations of them cannot be at last improved so far, as to make a sensible,
reasoning being; nor are they well able to disprove one, that affirms that they
actually are so: whereas be that has much inquired into the works of God, and
nature, gains a clear sight of what matter can perform, and gets more, and
stronger Arguments to convince him, that it is modifications, and changes cannot
amount to perception and sense; since in all it is varieties, and highest
exaltations he ^inds no specimens of such powers.

And though, I confess, that all Mechanic inquirers make not this use of their
inquisitions and discoveries; yet that is not the fault of the method, but of
the men; and those that have gone to the greatest height in that way, have
receded furthest from the Sadducean Principles. Among such, I suppose, I may be
allowed to reckon the noble Renatus Descartes; And his Metaphysics and
notions of Immaterial beings, are removed at the greatest distance from all
Corporeal affections; which I mention not to signi^ie my adherence to those
Principles; but for an Instance, to show, how that deep converse with matter,
and knowledge of its operations, removes the mind far off from the belief of
those high effects which some ascribe to Corporeal motions; and from all
suppositions of the Souls being bodily, and material.

SECT. III.
THus Philosophy is an excellent Antidote against Sadducism, in both the main
branches of it. But then I must confess also, that the Philosophy of the late
Peripatetick Writers does rather contribute assistance to it, then overthrow
this dangerous Insidelity, I mean in what it teaches concerning substantial
Forms, which I fear tends to the dis-abling all Philosophical evidence of the
Immortality of our Souls. For these Peripateticks make their Forms, a kind of
medium between Body, and Spirit; Beings, that depend upon matter, are educed
from it, and perish when they cease to inform it; But yet ^rm, that they are
not material in their constitution and Essence. Such Forms those Philosophers
assign to all bodies, and teach, that the noblest sort of them are sensitive,
and perceptive, which are the Souls of Brutes.

If this be so, that Beings which are not spirits, but corruptible dependants
upon matter, may be endowed with animadversion, and sense; what Arguments then
have we to show, that they may not have Reason also, which is but an
improvement, and higher degree of simple perception? It Is as hard to be
apprehended how any of the re^s of matter, should perceive; as how they should
join their perceptions into reasonings, and the same Propositions that prove
the possibility of one, prove both; so that those who a^rm that beasts also are
in a degree reasonable, speak very consonantly to those Principles.

If then, such material, corruptible Forms as the Peripateticks describe, are
sufficient for all the actions and perceptions of beasts, I know not which way
to go about to demonstrate that a more elevated sort of them may not suffice
for the reasonings of men. To urge the Topics of proof I mentioned, from
Notions, Compositions, Deductions, and the like, which are alleged to prove
our Souls Immaterial; I say to plead these, will signi^e nothing, but this,
That humane Souls are no portions of matter, nor corporeal in their make, and
formal Essence; But how will they evince, that they are not educed from it,
depend not on matter, and shall not perish in the ruins of their bodies.
Certainly all those Arguments that are brought for our Immortality, are in this
way perfectly disabled. For all that we can say, will prove but this, That the
Soul is no body, or part of m^; but this will amount to no evidence, if there
are a middle kind of Essences, that are not corporeal, and yet mortal.

So that when I say, that Philosophy serves Religion against Sadducism, I would
not be understood to mean the Peripatetick ^ypotheseis; but that Philosophy
which is grounded upon acquaintance with real Nature. (...), ^y leaving this
whole (...) (...) of beings out of it*s accounts, ((...) ^ings for which there
is no shadow of ground from Reason, or Nature, but plentiful evidence of their
nonexistence from both) disappoints the Sadduce of the advantage he has from
this needless, and precarious principle. And by dividing all substances into
body and spirit, without the admission of middle natures, the Real Philosophy
gives demonstrative force to those Arguments for our Immortality, that prove
our souls are not bodies; and so Sadducism is ruined by it.

These things I have thought fit to advertise, not out of design to carp at any
particular way of Philosophy, but for the security of my discourse. And though
I have made a little bold with the Peripateticks here, yet the great name of
Aristotle, to which they pretend, is not concerned; for I am convinced that he
taught no such doctrine of substantial Forms, as his later Sectators, and
Interpreters have put upon him; who indeed have depraved, and corrupted his
sense, almost in the whole body of his Principles; and have presented the world
with their own fancies, instead of the genuine doctrines of that Philosopher.

But I proceed.

CHAP. IV.
Philosophy assists Religion against Superstition, both as it expresses it
self in fond overvalue of things in which there is no good and panick fear of
those, in which there is no hurt. It inlargeth the mind, and so cures
Superstition by bett'ring the intellectual Crasis. It removes the causless
fears of some extraordinary effects in nature, or accident. It is an Antidote
against the Superstition of vain Prodigies. It Is Antipathy to Superstition, one
cause of the charge of Atheism against it.

SECT. I.
(III.) THE Real Philosophy, that inquires into Gods Works, assists Religion
against Superstition, another of its mortal Enemies. That I may prove this, it
must be premised,

That Superstition consists, either in bestowing Religious valuation on things,
in which there is no good; or fearing those, in which there is no hurt. So that
this Folly expresses it self one while in doting upon opinions, as
Fundamentals of Faith; and Idolizing the little models of fancy, for divine
institutions. And then it runs away afraid of harmless, indi^erent
appointments, and looks pale upon the appearance of any unusual effect of
nature. It tells ominous stories of every meteor of the night; and makes sad
interpretations of each unwonted accident. All which are the products of
ignorance, and a narrow mind, which defeat the design of Religion that would
make us of a free, manly, and generous spirit; and indeed represent
Christianity as if it were a fond, sneaking, weak, peevish thing, that
emasculates men's understandings, makes them amorous of toys, and keeps them
under the servility of childish ^ars; so that hereby it is exposed to the
distrust of larger minds, and to the scorn of Atheists; These and many more are
the mischiess of Superstition, as we have sadly seen.

Now against this evil Spirit, and its Influences, the Real, experimental
Philosophy is one of the be^ securities in the world. For by a generous, and
open inquiry in the great Field of nature, men's minds are enlarged, and taken
off from all fond adherences to their private sentiments. They are taught by
it, that certainty is not in many things; and that the most valuable knowledge
is the practical; By which means they will find themselves disposed to more
indifferency toward those petty notions in which they were before apt to place
a great deal of Religion; and so to reckon, that that which will signify lies
in the few, certain, operative principles of the Gospel; and a life suitable to
such a Faith; not in doting upon questions, and speculations that engender
strife; and thus the Modern, experimental Philosophy of Gods Works, is a remedy
against ^he notional superstition (as I may call it) which has been, and is so
fatal to Religion, and the peace of mankind.

Besides which, by making the mind great, this knowledge delivers it from
fondness on small circumstances, and imaginary models; and from little
scrupulosities about things indifferent, which usually disquiet in narrow and
contracted minds. And I have known diverse, whom Philosophy, and not disputes,
has cured of this malady. And indeed that remedy is the best, and most
effectual, that alters the Crasis and disposition of the mind; For it is
suteableness to that, which makes the way to men's judgments, and setles them in
their persuasions. There are few that hold their opinions by Arguments, and dry
reasonings, but by congru^y to the understanding, and consequently by relish in
the a^ctions: so that seldom any thing (...) our intellectual diseases
thoroughly, but what changes these. This I dare affirm, that the Free,
experimental Philosophy will do to purpose, by giving the mind another
tincture, and introducing a sounder habit, which by degrees will at last
absolutely repel all the little malignities, and setle it in a strong and manly
temperament, that will master, and cast out idle dotages, and effeminate Fears.

The Truth is, This world is a very Bedlam, and he that would cure Madmen, must
not attempt it by reasoning, or endeavor to show the absurdity of their
conceits; but such a course must be taken, as may restore the mind to a right
Crasis, and that when it is essected, will reduce, and rectisie the
extravagances of the distempered brain, which disputes, and oppositions will
but inslame, and make worse. Thus for instance, when frantic persons are fond
of Feathers, and mightily taken with the employment of picking Straws, 'twould
signisie very little, to represent to them the vanity of the objects of their
delights; and when the Melancholido was afraid to sit down for fear of being
broken, supposing himself made of Glass, it had been to little purpose to have
declared to him the ridiculousness of his fears; the disposition of the head
was to be altered, before the particular frenzy could be cured.

It Is too evident how just this is in the application to the present Age;
Superstitions fondness, and fears are a real degree of madness. And though I
cannot say that Philosophy must be the only Catholic way of cure (for of this,
the far greatest part of men is absolutely incapable) yet this I do, that it is
a remedy for those that are strong enough to take it: And the rest must be
helped by that, which changes the genius, which cannot ordinarily be done by
any thing that opposes the particular fancy.

SECT. II.
HOwever I must say, that the sort of Superstition which is yet behind in my
account, and consists in the causless fear of some extraordinaries, in
accident, or nature, is directly cured by that Philosophy which gives fair
likely-hoods of their causes; and clearly shows that there is nothing in them
supernatural; the light of the day drives away the Mormo's, and vain images
that fancy forms in obscure shades, and darkness. Thus particularly the modern
doctrine of Comets, which have been always great bugs to the guilty, and
timorous world, has rescued Philosophers from the trouble of dreadful
presages, and the mischievous consequences that arise from those superstitious
abodings. For whatever the casual coincidencies may be between those
Phenomenon, and the direful events, that are sometimes observed closely to
attend them (which, as my Lord Bacon truly notes, are observed when they hit,
not when they miss) I say, notwithstanding these, the real, experimental
Philosophy makes it appear, that they are heavenly Bodies, far above all the
regions of vapors, in which we are not concerned; and so they are neither the
signs, nor the causes of our mischiefs.

For the other little things which afford matter for the Tales about Prodigies,
and other ominous appearings, the knowledge of nature, by exciting worthy, and
magnificent conceptions of the God of Nature; cures that blasphemous abuse of
the adorable majesty, whereby foolish men attribute every trivial ev^nt that
may serve their turns against those they hate, to his immediate, extraordinary
interposal. For it is ignorance of God and his works that disposes men to
absurd, ridiculous surmises, uncharitable censures, seditious m^chinations; and
so, to thoughts that are prejudicial to the Glory of God, the interests of
Religion, and the security of Government; to that justice and charity we owe to
others, and the happiness, and the love of our selves. To which I add,

That this kind of Superstition is a relic of Pagan ignorance, which made men
look on Thunder, Eclipses, Earthquakes, and all the more terrifying Phenomenon
of nature, as the immediate effects of powers supernatural; and to judge events
by flights of birds, and garbages of cattle, by the accidental occursions of
this creature, and another, and almost every casual occurrence. But these
particulars have been most ingeniously represented, and reproved in a late very
elegant discourse about Prodigies; And though I do not acquiesce in the design
of that excellently penned Book, which is to discredit, and take away all kinds
of presages. Yet I think it has done rarely well, so far as it discovers the
folly and mischiefs of that ignorant, and superstitious spirit, that mak^s
every thing a Prodigy. And with such apprehensions as these the knowledge of
nature sills the mind that is instructed in it.

And there is no doubt but that the Antipathy the Real P^ilosophy has to all
the kinds of Superstition, is one cause why zealous ignorance brands those
researches wi^h the mark of A^heism. For Superstitious folly adop^s those
paultry trifles, which Philosophy contemns and reproves, into the Family of
Religion, and therefore stigmatizeth those that despise them, as enemies to
Faith and Piety. So it fared with some of the bravest spirits of ancient times,
who have had the black character ^ixt upon their great and worthy names only
for their oppositions of the foolish Rites and Idolatries of the vulgar
Heathen. We know the case of Socrates. And as to the interest of their names,
that of Anaxagoras, Theodorus, Protagoras, and Epicurus, was much worse; the
cau^ess insamy coming down the stream as far as the last Ages. Since then, we
know who was an Hereti^k for saying there were Ant^podes; and a Pope was taken
for a Conjurer for being a Mathematician; yea those noble Sciences were counted
diabolical; and even the sacred language could searce escape the suspicion. In
later times Galilaeo fell into the Inquisition for the discoveries of his
Telescopes; and Campanella could not endeavor to assert, and vindicate the
Freedom of his mind, without losing that of his external person. I might come
nearer to our days, and knowledge: Gothic barbarity, and the spirit of the
Inquisition is not quite worn out of the Reformation; Though the best on it is,
it ordinarily remains but among the scum, and dregs of men: And no one is
either less Religious, or less wise for being accounted an A^eist by the
Rabble. But where ever the knowledge of Nature, and Gods works has in any
degree ob^ain'd, those vile Superstitions have been despised, and put to an
infamous flight. But to take another s^ep.

CHAP. V.
Philosophy serves Religion against Enthusiasm. Enthusiasm hurts Religion two
ways. (I.) By crying up diseases and excesses of fancy, for heights of
Godliness. (II.) By the disparagement of Reason. Philosophy discovers that
there is nothing but nature, in the high pretensions of the Enthusiast. The
mischiefs of decrying Reason. Philosophy removes the fancy of it is enmity to
Religion: It improves Reason, and fits it for the service of Religion. Religion
has received many services from Philosophical Writers; who have labored to
prove it is Truth and certainty. Philosophy assists Reason to defend Religion.

SECT. I.
(IV.) THE Real Philosophy, and knowledge of Gods works, serves Religion
against Enthusiasm, another of its deadly enemies. Now Enthusiasm is a false
conceit of inspiration; and all the bold and mistaken pretensions to the Spirit
in our days, are of this sort. What particularly Religion has suffered from
it, would be too long to describe upon this occasion; It will be (...) to say,
in an Age that has so much and such sad experience of it, that Enthusiasm,

(I.) By crying up the ex^s, and diseases of Imagination for the greatest
height of godliness.

And (II.) By the disparagement of sober Reason, as an enemy to the Principles
of Faith; I say, by these two ways it has in^oduc'd a Religion that is
Fantastical, and made way for all imaginable follies, and even Atheism it self.

For the ^rst of these in order; The real knowledge of Nature detects the
dangerous imposture, by showing, what strange things may be effected by no
diviner a cause, then a strong fancy impregnated by Heated Melancholy; For this
sometimes warms the brain to a degree that makes it very active, and
imaginative, full of odd thoughts, and unexpected suggestions; so tha^ if the
Temper determine the imagination to Religion, it flies at high things, at
interpretations of derk and Prophetic Scriptures; at predictions of future
events, and mysterious discoveries, which the man expresses fluently, and
boldly, with a peculiar and pathetick eloquence; And now these pregnances being
not ordinary, but much beyond the usual tone, and temper of the Enthusiast; and
he having heard great things of the spirits immediate motions and inspirations,
cannot well fail of believing himself inspired, and of intitling all the
excursions of his fancy to the immediate actings of the Holy Ghost: which
thoughts by the help of natural pride, and self-love, will work also
exceedingly upon the heightened affections, and they upon the body so far, as to
cast it sometimes into raptures, ecstasies, and deliquiums of sense, in which
every dream is taken for a Prophecy, every image of the fancy for a vision, and
all the glarings of the imagination, for new Lights, and Revelations.

Thus have our Modern Prophets been inspired, who yet are not to be reckoned
Hypocritical Impostors, for they infinitely believe themselves, and the
strength of their highly invigorated fancies shuts out the sober light of
Reason that should dis-abuse them, as sleep does that of our external senses in
our dreams. And which is worse, the silly people that understand not nature,
but are apt to take every thing that is vehement to be sacred, are easily
deceived into the belief of those pretensions; and thus diseases have been
worshipped for Religion. This account the Philosophy of humane Nature gives of
that by which the world has been so sadly couzned, as has been largely
represented by a modern Philosophical Divine.

And when we cast our eyes abroad into the wide world, we see, that those
glorious things are no more, then what has been done by the Exstatick Priests
of the Heathen Oracles, and the Madmen of all Religions; by Sybils, Lunaticks,
Poets, Dreamers, and Abreptitious persons of all sorts: And we see daily to
what degrees of elevation excess of drinking will heighten the brain, making
some witty, nimble, and eloquent, much beyond the ordinary siz^ of their parts,
and ingenuity; and inclining others to be hugely devout, who usually have no
great sense of Religion; As I knew one, who would pray rap^urously when he was
drunk, but at other times was a moping sott, and could scarce speak sense.

Thus also some kinds of madness, diseases, accidents, peculiarities of temper,
and other natural things that heat the brain, ^ill men with high, surprising
conceits about Religion, and furnish them with servid devotion, great rea^iness
of expression, and unexpected applications of Scripture to their crasie
conceits; I say, the experimental Philosophy of our natures informs us, that
all this is common in alienations, and singularities of mind, and complexion.
And they were remarkable in the Prop^ets of the Heathen, and the P^iest whom
Saint Austin knew, that would whine himself into an ecstasy; In the wonderful
discourses of the American Bishop, that said he was the Holy Ghost, and the
canting fluency of the German Enthusiasts, some of whose imaginations were as
wild, and extravagant; of such Instances I might make up a much larger
Catalogue, if I should descend to our Domestic Lunaticks, but their temper is
well known, and therefore I only add this more;

That I have often met with a poor Woman in Warwickshire, whose habitual
conceit it was, that she was Mother of God, and of all things living; I was
wont to personate a kind of compliance with her fancy, and a modest desire to
be further informed about it; which gentleness drew from her so many odd
fetches of discourse, such applications of Scripture, and such wonderful
references to things, in which she was never instructed, that looked like
scraps taken out of Hobbs, and Epi^urus* that I have been much amazed at her
talk: And yet when I diverted her to any thing else of ordinary ma^ters, she
spoke usually with as much sobriety and cold discretion, as could well be
expected from a person of her condition; no^ did she use ^o be extravagant in
any thing, but about that particular imagination; which instance among many
others I might produce, very much confirms me in the truth of that observation
of those Philosophers who have given us the best light into the Enthusiastic
t^mper, viz. That there is a sort of madness, which takes men in some
particular things, when they are sound in others: which one Proposition will
assord a good account of many of the Phenomenon of Enthusiasm; and shows that
the extravagants among us may be really distracted in the affairs of Religion,
though their brains are untouched in other matters.

Thus a Philosophical use of observation, and the knowledge of humane nature by
it, helps us to distinguish between the effects of the adorable Spirit, and
those of an hot, distempered fancy; which is no small advantage for the
securing the purity, honor, and all the interests of Religion.

SECT. II.
BUT (II.) there is another mischief of the Enthusiastic spirit behind, and
that is it is bringing Reason into disgrace, and denying the use thereof in the
a^irs of Faith and Religion: This is a mischief that is the sad cause of
insinite more; for it has brought into the world all kinds of Phantastry and
^lly, and exposed Religion to contempt and derision, by making madness, and
diseases sacred: It bewilders men's minds in a maze of confused imaginations,
and leads them into bogs and precipices, and deprives them of their light, and
their Guide, and lays them open to all the Delusions of Satan, and their own
distempered brains: It takes Religion off from it is foundations, and leaves the
interest of eternity in men's Souls, to chance, and the hits of imagination;
teaching those that are del^ded to lay the stress of all upon raptures, (...),
and mysterious notions, (...) they forget, and scorn the plain Christianity
which is an imitation of Christ in Charity, Humility, Justice, and Purity; in
the exercise of all virtue, and command of our selves: It renders men obnoxiou^
to all the Temptations of Atheism, and the blackest Insidelity; and makes it
impossible to convince an Insidel, to setle one that doubts, or to recover one
that is backsliden from the Faith. These evils I am here content to name only,
having represented them more fully in another discourse; and the experience of
our own Age may convince us, with a little consideration upon it; That all
those fatal mischiefs have been the effects of the contempt, and disparagement
of Reason.

But yet though I assirm this, I am not so rash, or so unjust as to believe, or
say, that this spirit has produced all those sad things in every one that
speaks hotly, and inconsiderately against Reason: I am far from the wildness of
such a censure, because I know how much imprudent zeal, customary talk, high
pretensions, and superstitious fears, may work even upon honest minds, who many
times hold bad things in the principle, which they deny in the practice, and so
are upright in their wills, while they are very much confused, and mistaken in
their understandings. This I account to be the case of multitudes of pious
people in reference to Reason. They have heard hotheaded indiscreet men
declaim against it, and many of them, whose opinions will not bear the light,
have an interest to do so; their pretensions were plausible, and their zeal
great; their talk (...), and their (...) bold, and the honest well-meaning
folks are caught in their assections; and these lead bad principles into their
minds, which are neither disposed, nor able to examine: So they believe and
talk after their Teachers; and say, that Reason is a low, dull thing, ignorant
of the spirit, and an enemy to Faith and Religion; while in this, they have no
clear thoughts, nor yet any evil meaning; But let these sancies swim a top in
their imaginations, and upon occasions they run out at the tongues end, though
they are not always improved to deadly practices. For Charity, (...) Caution I
have said this; but yet nothing hinders but that all the forecited evils are
justly said to be the Tendencies, and in too many Instances have been, and are,
the Issues of this Spirit.

And now I doubt not but 'twill be granted readily by all that are con^derate,
that whatever assists Religion against this destructive enemy, does it most
important service; and this the Free and Real Philosophy does in a degree very
eminent.

In order to the proof of this we may consider what I intimated just now, viz.
That men are led into, and kept in this fancy of the enmity of Reason to
Religion chie^ly by two things.

SECT. III.
(I) BY an implicit assent to the Systemes, and dictates of those who first
instructed them; which Teachers came also into the fancy the same way; and both
are held under the power of it by strong prejudice arising from that implicit
Faith. And (II.) By want of clear thoughts and ability, to state things
distinctly, and to understand their dependencies, and sequels. Both which
imperfections the Free Philosophy (...).

For as to the First, (I.) That Philosophy begins with the inlargment of the
mind, and attempts to free it from prejudices and pre-ingagements, which
sophisticate, and pervert our judgments, and render us incapable of discerning
things as they are. Modest, impartial enquiry is the Foundation of the real,
experimental way of Philosophy. Not that it teaches Scepti^ism, and absolute
Neutrality in all things, but so much caution in our disquisitions, that we do
not suddenly give firm assents to things not well understood, o^ examined:
which no doubt is very just, and safe. But as to what concerns those, who
through ignorance, or other occasions are incapable of making due enquiry, I
think they ought not to concern themselves about matters of speculation at all;
or at least not to affirm any thing positively of them It Is enough for such to
^lieve, and practice the plain duties of Religion, which ar^ clear in the holy
Oracles, and with which they may be acquainted without much sagacity, or deep
judgment: For matters of Theory, and dissicult enquiry appertain ^ot to the
vulgar, and lower rank of understandings. But for those who are capable of
s^arch after Truth, and are provided with advantages for it, Freedom of
judgment is necessary in order to their success. With this, I said, the Real
Philosophy ^egins; and in all it is progresses still m^e and more dispo^th the
mind to it, and so delivers it from the vassallage of Customary sayings and
opinions.

Now whoever is so disposed, will not be so ready to believe that Reason is an
Enemy to Religion, till he have considered, and examined the matter with an
impartial judgment. And I dare say, whoever shall do that, will want nothing to
convince him, that such an opinion is false, and groundless, but clear, and
distinct thoughts, and the knowledge of consequence, with which Philosophy will
furnish him.

This is the second way whereby it helps to overthrow this principle of
Enthusiasm, viz.

(II.) By teaching us to state matters clearly, and to draw out those
conclusions that are lodged in them. For it is confusion of notions, and a great
defect in reasoning, that makes dark zeal to rave so furiously against Reason.
Now Philosophy is Reason methodized, and improved by study, observation, and
experiment; and whoever is addicted to these, is exercised frequently in
inquiry after the causes, properties, and relations of things, which will inure
the mind to great intentness, and enable it to define and distinguish, and
infer rightly; And by these the allegations against Reason will be made appear
to be idle Sophis^s, that have no sound sense, or substance in them.

This is shown in a late discourse, called a Vindication and desence of the use
of Reason in the affairs of Faith and Religion; in which also the whole matter
is stated distinctly, and I think right is done both to Reason and Religion.
For it is made evident there, that all the Articles of Faith may either be
proved by Reason, or defended by it; which two particulars we will here touch a
little. That Reason proves the greatest Articles of Religion, is sufficiently
made appear by those Philosophic Reasoners that have do^e it; and to say a
word of this, will be no digression, since it will show, that Philosophy
destroys the conceit of Reasons being an Enemy, and demonstrate that it
improves Reason to many purposes of Religion.

SECT. IV.
(I.) IT is well known, that diverse great men have labored in the Rational
proof of Christian Religion, as the most Learned Hugo Grotius, Duplessis,
Raymond de Sa^undis; The Pious and most Excellent Doctor Hammond, Mr. Baxter,
and others among our selves; and the Immortal Bishop of Down, Doctor Jer.
Tailor, has in ten leaves of his Ductor Dubitantium, given such an invincible
rational Demonstration of Christianity, by a most elegant and judicious
collection of all the most important par^iculars of evidence, that if there had
never been any thing said before, for the Truth and certainty of our Religion;
this alone had been enough to have won upon the most shie, and difficult
assent, and to have confounded all the Infidels under Heaven; this Testimony I
must give to that glorious performance, and it will not I presume be thought
excessive by any one that reads, and is fit to judge in such cases.

I could not omit mention of these worthy Asserters, and Defenders of Religion:
But there is another sort of Reasoners for our Faith, that are more proper for
my present notice, viz. Those that have used the aids of the modern, Free
Philosophy, in proving, and defending some main Articles of Religion. And there
are several Members of the Royal Society, who have imploy^d their ingenious,
and Pious pains this way; The Wise, Learned, and deservedly Celebrated Prelate,
Dr. Seth Ward, the present Lord Bishop of Sarum, has in his Philosophical
Essays, fully (though in a small compass of words) and perspicuously shown,
That the Foundations of Religion are laid in eternal Reason; and by this, has
cleared the Nature, and Attributes of God; the Immortality of our Souls, and
Divine Authority of Scripture, which are the grand Basis of Faith and
Obedience: And the Illustrious Mr. Boil has, in his excellent Treatise of the
Usesulness of Experimental Philosophy, made it appear that Philosophic Reason
gives the strongest evidence of the existence of the Deity, and very glorious
Illustrations of his Attributes; and by it he infinitely shames, and disproves
the Follies of the Epicurean Atheist; which great interests of Faith and Piety,
have also been egregiously promoted by the judicious, Philosophical
performances of the Learned Doctor H. More, who has every where in his Works
discovered to what useful purposes Reason, and the Free Philosophy may be
employed in the services of Religion. And the Noble Sir K. Digby writ a
discourse concerning the Immorta^ty of the Soul, which he proves and defends by
the Principles and reasonings of Philosophy; which design also of making
Philosophy serve the Altar, has been happily undertaken, and as successfully
managed by the Ingenious Mr. Sam. Parker, in his Learned Tentamina; in which he
strenuously proves the Being of God, and explains many difficulties about his
Attributes, by the use of Free Philosophical Reason. These are, and were all
Members of the Royal College of Philosophers. To these I may add the
Instances of the great Descartes, and our worthy and Learned Doctor
Stillingfleet, who have also excellently employed the Free Philosophy for the
advantage, and promotion of the Affairs of Religion.

Thus we see that the Real knowledge and search into Gods works, puts
Philosophers at great distance from that fond Principle of Enthusiasm, That
Reason is an Enemy to Religion; and we may learn from the Discourses cited,
That it may be happily, and pro^itably used in the proof of many of the
greatest Articles of Faith, and that Philosophy does much assist it in that
service. And so it does,

SECT. V.
(II.) IN defending other points of Faith which are purely of Revelation, and
immediately discoverable no other way. For this is a Maxim of Reason, that
whatever God says is to be believed, though we cannot comprehend the manner of
it, or tell how the thing should be. By this Axiom, whoever has proved the
Revelation, may desend the Article, and it is an absurdity in Philosophic
reasoning to argue against the being of a thing, that is well attested, from
the unconceivableness of the manner how it is; According to which principle
even the Trinity, and Incarnation, may be as well defended as the existence of
matter, and motion, and upon the same grounds. In these there are many modes
which are perfectly unaccountable, and full of seeming contradictions; which if
they should be urged against the existence of these most sensible Beings, we
could not make our defense by untying those knots; but may well do it, by
recourse to this Maxim, That what is an evident object of Sense, or clearly
proved by Reason, ought to be believed, though there are many things in the
Theory, and manner of it unconceivable; And by using the same we are safe in
all the Mysteries of Faith, that are well proved to be so. But this I have more
fully handled else where; and shall only add now, That the Free, Experimental
Philosophy begets the deepest persuasion of the truth of this modest
Proposition; by acquainting the Philo^opher every day with innumerable things
in the works of God, o^ which he can give no account, though he know by his
senses that they are really existing. And by this means Reason assisted by
Philosophy cuts off all the Cavils, and silenc^th the Objections of bold
In^idelity, which for the most part are raised from the difficulties that are
in our conception of the Articles of Religion.

And thus the Free Philosophy lays a foundation for defense of the greatest
sublimities of Faith; and common Reason does the best, by showing the
certainty, and divine Original of the Testimony that acquaints us with those
sacred Mysteries. This it does by aggregating those multitudes of circumstances
that show the Infallible truth of Scripture History, and twists such a cord as
is as strong as any thing in Geometry or Nature. And therefore I cannot choose
but wonder what it is that inclines some men, who are otherwise sober enough,
to let slye so lavishly, and indiscreetly against Reason, and Philosophy,
especially in an Age so exceeding prone to Phantastry, and Madness, and that
has been ruined in all its concerns by Enthusiasm, and vain pretenses to the
Spirit.

It Is true, the discourses of some who have talked much of Philosophy, and
Reason, have been bold, and saucy, and no doubt of evil tendency to the
interest of Religion. But true Philosophy, and well managed Reason, vindicate
Religion from those impudent abuses, and show, that there was Sophistry and
imposture in those pretensions: So that they are no more to be blamed for the
insolences, and riots of those that usurp their name; then Religion it self
is, for the Immoralities of those, that cloth themselves in the garments of
external Piety and Saintship. Thus of the services of Philosophy against
ENTHUSIASM. I come now to the last Instance.

CHAP. VI.
Philosophy serves Religion against the Humor of Disputing. Some of the
mischi^fs of that Spirit briefly reci^ed. Six ways whereby Philosophy destroies
the disputing humor. The main things that may be urged in behalf of disputes,
Answered.

SECT. I.
(V.) IT helps Religion against the Humor of Disputing; by which I mean that,
which believes uncertain opinions sirmly, ass^rts them confidently, and
clamorously conte^ds against every different app^ehe si^n. This is that
pestil^nt Spirit that turns Religion into air of notion, and makes it
intricate, and uncertain; subject to eternal quarrels, and obnoxious to
Skepticism, and Infidelity; That which supplants charity, modesty, peace, and
Meekness, and substitutes in their room, Rage, Insolence, Pride, Bitter Zeal,
Clamours, and Divisions, and all the opposites of the Spirit of Christ, and the
Gospel. So that, it depraves Religion, and makes it is sacred name an instrument
to promote the projects of the Kingdom of darkness, by cankring men one against
another, and inflaming their Spirits, and crumbling them into Sects, and
disturbing Societies; and so it hinders the Progress of the Gospel, and lays it
open to the scorns of unbelievers; it turns men from the desire of practicing
to the itch of talking, and abuses them into this dangerous belief, that
Godliness consists more in their beloved Orthodoxy, then in a sober virtue, and
the exercise of Charity; it makes them pert, and pragmatical, busy about the
Reformation of others, while they neglect their own Spirits; fancying a
perfection in the fluency of the tongue, while the worst of passions have the
Empire of their Souls. These are some of the sad effects of the humor of
disputing, which has done deplorable execution upon Religion in all places,
and times; and therefore it is none of the least services that can be afforded
it, to destroy this evil genius; and there is nothing, merely humane, that
contributes more toward the rooting of it out of the world, than the Free, and
Real Philosophy. For,

SECT. II.
(I) COnverse with Gods works gives us to see the v^st difficulties that are to
be met with in the speculation of them; and thereby men are made less con^dent
of their sentiments about Nature, and by many consid^tions and observations of
this kind, are at length brought to such (...) ^itual modesty, that they are
(...) to pass bold judgments upon those opinions in Relig^n, of which there is
no (...) assurance.

And (II) By the freq^t exercises of our minds, we (...) to be made sensible
how (...), and how often we are deceived, through the fallibility of sens^, and
shortness of our und^rstandings; by Education, Authority, Interest, and our
Affections; and so are disposed to a more prudent coldness and d^ffidence in
things of doubtful speculation, by which the disp^ting humor is destroyed at
the bottom. Besides which,

(III.) The Real Philosophy brings men in love with the Practical knowledge;
the more we have employed our selves in notion and Theory, the more we shall be
acquainted with their uncertainty; and our ^steem, and regard of them will
abate, as that sense increases, and by the same Degrees our respect, and love
to operative knowledge will advance and grow; which disposition will incline us
also to have less regard to niceties in Religion, and teach us to lay out our
chief cares and endeavors for that knowledge which is Practical and certain,
and will assist, and promote our virtue, and our happiness; and incline us to
employ our selves in living according to it; which also will be an effectual
means to destroy the humor of contending.

And (IV.) Philosophy gives us a sight of the causes of (...) intellectual
diversities, and so takes us off from expecting an (...) in our apprehensions;
wh^reby it discovers the (...) of making harmony in o^inion, the condition of
Charity and Union; and of being angry, and dividing upon every difference of
judgment; and hereby the h^riful malignities of disputes are qualified, and the
disease it self is undermined.

(V.) It inclines men to reckon (as was intimated before) that the Essential
Principles of Religion lie in the plain, certain Articles. For Philosophers are
disposed to think, by converse with Nature, that certainty is in very few
things; and whoever believes so concerning the tenants of Theology, will not
lay the main stress upon any, but the clear, acknowledged Principles; and he
that does that, serves all the important concernments of Religion. He will not
not wrangle for every conceit; nor divide for every difference; but takes care
to walk in the ways of Charity, Humble Obedience, and Conscionable practice of
the Truths he knows and owns. By such a course the Church is safe, and Schisms
are prevented: Yea Popery is disappointed by it in most of the considerable
things it has to say; which indeed arise from the consideration of the vast
diversities of opinions in Religion, that seem to infer the necessity of a
Judge of Controversies to setle men's minds in the right way, and to rectify
the consequent disorders; whereas if this be stood to, That the necessary
Christian Articles are plain, and acknowledged, There will be no need of a
Judge, and so all the most specious pretensions of the Church of Rome sink to
the ground.

(VI.) The Real Philosophy tends to the ending of disputes, by taking men off
from unnecessary Terms of Art, which very often are occasions of great
contests: If things were stated in clear, and plain words, many Controversies
would be at an end; and the Philosophy I am recommending, inclines men to
define with those that are simplest and plainest, and thereby also very much
p^omotes the interests both of truth and peace.

Thus I have shown briefly how the real Philosophy tends to the overthrow of
the pugnacious disputing humor, which is so hurtful to Religion. To co^firm
which we may observe, that wherever this sort of knowledge prevails, the
Contentious Divinity loses ground, and 'twill be hard to find any of those
Philosophers a zealous Votary of a Sect: which reservedness gives occasion
indeed to those that are so, to accuse them of Atheism, and Irreligion; but it
is really no Argument of less Piety, but of more wisdom, and conduct. And
'twould make much for the advantage of Religion, and their own, if those fierce
men would understand, that Christianity should teach them that, which they rail
against in the Philosophers.

But now I must expect to hear,

SECT. III.
(I.) THAT disputes serve to discover truth; as by the collision of two flints
one against another, those sparks are produced, and excited, that before were
latent in them: So that the real Philosophy upon this account does rather
disserve then promote the concerns of Religion.

To which I answer, (I.) That all the necessary, material truths in Divinity
are already discovered, and we have no need of New Lights there, the Antientest
are truest, and b^st, though in the disquisitions of Philosophy there will be
always occasions of proceeding. But I add, (II.) Disputes are one of the worst
ways to discover Truth; If new things were to be found out in Religion, as well
as Nature, they would scarce be disclosed by this way of enquiry. A calm
judgment, and distinct thoughts, and impartial consideration of many things,
are necessary for the finding truth which lies deep, and is mingled up and and
down with much error, and specious falsehood; and it is hard, if not utterly
impossible, to preserve any one of these in the heat of disputation. In such
occasions the mind is commonly disordered by passion, and the thoughts are
confused, and our considerations tied to those things which give color to our
opinions. We are biast by our affections toward our own conceits, and our love
to them is in^lamed by opposition; we are made incapable of entertaining the
assistance of our opposites suggestions by strong prejudice, and inc^ined to
quarrel with every thing he says by spite, and desire of triumph: and these
are ill circumstances for the discovery of truth: He is a wonderful man indeed
that can thread a needle when he is at Cudgels in a crowd, and yet this is as
easy, as to find truth in the hurry of dispute. The Apo^ intimates, (...) Tim.
VI. 5. That perverse Disputers are destitute of truth, and tells us, that of
the strife of words come envy, railings, evil surmisings, but no discovery of
unknown verities.

But (II.) we are commanded to contend earne^ly for the faith that was once
delivered to the Saints, and hereby Heresies are confuted, and overthrown.

To this pretense I say, That by the Faith we are to contend for, I conceive,
the Essentials, and certain Articles are meant; These we may, and we ought to
endeavor to defend, and promote as there is occasion; and we have seen how the
Real Philosophy will help our Reasons for that service. But pious contentions
for these are not the disputings I meant, for I defined the humor of disputing
in the entrance on this Head, to be that which is stiff in the belief of
uncertain opinions, affirming them with confidence, and quarrelling with every
different sentiment; To dispute about such matters of doubtful Speculation, and
in the manner specified, is no contending for the Faith, but the way to make
shipwreck of it. As for those other Disputes, that are requisite for the
convincing m^n of the Truths of the Gospel, and the great Articles thereof; and
for the disproving Infidelity and Heresy, they are necessary, and Philosophy
is an excellent Instrument in such Contests.

So that those other objections that might be alleged against my Discourse
from the necessity of proving and trying our Faith, and convincing Heretics;
From the example of our Savior's disputing with the Doctors and the Sadduces;
and of S. Paul at Athens with the Jews; These little Cavils, I say, and such
like, can signify nothing to the disadvantage of what I have said against the
humor of disputing about doubtful, and uncertain opinions, to which the Real
Philosophy is destructive.

And thus I have sh^wn under five mat^rial ^ads, That the Knowledge of Nature,
and the Works of God, promotes the greatest interests of Religion; and by the
three last it appears how Fundamentally opposite it is to all Schism and Fana^,
which are made up and occasioned by Superstition, En^siasm, and ignorant,
perverse disputings. So that for Atheists and Sadduces, and Fanatics to rail
against Philosophy, is not at all strange; It Is no more than what may well be
expected from such Cattle; Philosophy is their enemy; and it concerns them to
disparage and reproach it: But for Religious, and sober men to do any thing so
unadvised, and so prejudicial to Religion, is wonde^ul, and deplorable: To set
these right in their Judgment about Philosophical inquiry into Gods Works, is
the principal design of these Papers; and in order to the further promoting of
it, I advance to the last Head of Discourse proposed, viz.

CHAP. VII.
That the Ministers, and Professors of Religion ought not to discourage
Philosophy. The slanders and objections against it, answered, viz. That of
Atheism, and the other of its tending to the lessening our value of the
Scriptures, fully confuted. It teaches no Doctrines contrary to Gods Word;
Those of the motion of the Earth and terrestrial Nature of the Moon,
considered, as they refer to the Scriptures.

SECT. I.
(IV.) THat the Ministers, and Professors of Religion ought not to discourage,
but promote the Knowledge of Nature, and the Works of its Author.

This is the result of the whole matter, and follows evidently from all that
went before, which though it will not infer a necessity of all men's deep search
into Nature, yet this it will, That no Friend or Servant of Religion should
^inder, or discountenance such inquiries. And though most private Christians,
and some public Ministers have neither leisure, nor ability to look into
matters of natural research, and inquisition; yet they ought to think heartily,
and wish well to the endeavors of those that have; and it is a sin, and a folly
either in the one or other to censure, or discourage those worthy undertakings.
Upon which accounts it grieves me to see, how ap^ some are, that pretend much
to Religion, and some that minister in it, to load those that are studious of
Gods Works with all the odious names that contempt, and spig^t can suggest; The
Irreligion of which injurious carriage nothing can ^xcuse, but their ignorance*
And I will rather hope that they neither know what they say, nor what they do,
than believe that they have any direct design against the Glory of their Maker,
or against any la^dable endeavors to promote it.

I know well, what mischief prejudice will do, ev^n upon minds that otherwise
are very honest, and intelligent enough. And there are many common slanders,
and some plausible objections in the mouths of the Zealous against Philosophy,
which have begot an ill opinion of it in well-meaning men, who have never
examined things deeply: For the sake of such, I shall produce the most
considerable allegations of both sorts, and I hope mak^ such returns to them,
as may be ^fficient to sati^ those whose minds are not barred by obstinacy, or
ignorance.

SECT. II.
I Speak first of the bold, and broad slanders, among which, that

(I.) Of Atheism is one of the most ordinary; But certainly it is one of the
most unjust accusations that malice, and ignorance could have invented; This I
need not be industrious to prove here, having made it appear that Philosophy is
one of the best Weapons in the World to defend Religion against it; and my
whole Discourse is a confutation of this spightful, and ridiculous charge. It Is
true ind^ed the men of the Epi^urean sort have left God, and Providence out of
their accounts; But then other Philosophers have shown what fools they are for
doing so, and how absurd their pretended Philosophy is, in supposing things to
have been made and ordered by the casual hits of Atoms, in a mighty void. A d
though their general Doctrine of Matter, and Motion be ^xceeding ancient, and
very accountable, when we suppos^ matter was at first created by almighty
Power, and it is motions ordered, and directed by omniscient Wisdom; Yet the
supposal that they are independent, and eternal, is very precarious, and
unreasonable; And that all the regular motions in Nature, should be from blind
tumultuous jumblings, is the most unphilos^phical pha^e, and ridiculous dotag^
in the world; So that there is no ^ason to accuse Philosophy of a fault, which
Philosophy sufficiently shames, and disproves; and yet I doubt there are many
have great prejudice against it upon this score; and it is a particular brand
upon some of the modern men, that they have revived the Philosophy of Epicurus,
which they think to be in it is whole extent Atheistical, and irreligious.

To which I say, that the opinion of the world's being made by a fortuitous
jumble of Atoms, is impious and abominable. This those of Epicurus his elder
School taught; whereas the late Restorers of the Corpuscularian Hypothesis
hate, and despise the vile Doctrine; But yet they thus far think the Atomical
Philosophy reasonable, viz. as it teaches, That the operations of Nature are
performed by subtle streams of minute bodies, and not by I know not what
imaginary qualiti^s, and forms: They think, That the various motions, and
figures of the parts of matter, are enough for all the Phenomenon, and all
(...) varieties, which with relation to our senses we call such, and such
qualities. But then they suppose, and teach, That God cre^ted matter, and is
the supreme Orderer of its motions, by which all those diversities are made:
And hereby Piety, and the Faith of Providence is secured.

This, as far as we know any thing of elder times, was the ancient Philosophy
of the World, and it does not in the least grate upon any Principle of
Religion. Thus far I dare say I may undertake for most of the Corpuscularian
Philosophers of our times, excepting those of Mr. Hobb's way.

And therefore I cannot but wonder that a person of so much reason, learning,
and inge^ty as Mr. Baxter, should seem to conclude those Modern Philosophers
under the name, and notion of such Somatists, as are for mere matter, and
motion, and exclude immaterial beings; This, I take it, he does in his Defense
of the Souls Immortality, at the end of his Reasons of Religion: whereas those
Philosophers, though they own matter, and motion as the material and formal
causes of the Phenomenon; They do yet acknowledge Gods efficiency, and
Government of all things, with as much seriousness, and contend for it with as
much zeal, as any Philosophers or Divines whatsoever. And it is very hard that
any number of men should be exposed to the suspicion of being Atheists, for
denying the Peripatetick Qualities, and Forms; and there is nothing else
overthrown by the Corpuscularian Doctrines, as they are managed by those
Philosophers. So that methinks that Reverend Author has not dealt so fairly
with the great names of Descartes, and Gassendus, where he mentions them
promiscuously with the mee^ Epicurean and Hobbian Somatists, without any note
to distinguish them from those Sadduces; For both those celebrated men have
labored much in asserting the grand Articles of Religion against the Infidel,
and Atheist.

This inadvertency of that pious Divine I thought sit to take notice of,
because I doubt some may be misled into an undue opinion of those excellent
Persons, and others of their way, by finding their names among those of an
abhorred Character, in an Author of so much note. I say it is for this reason I
have given this hint, and not out of any humor of opposing or carping at that
worthy Man: No, I think he is to be honored much for his stout, rational, and
successful oppositions of the mischievous Antinomian ^ollies, when the current
Systematick Divinity, then called Orthodox, was overgrown with them; for his
frequent asserting, and vindicating the Reasonableness of Religion against the
madness of spreading Enthusiasm; for his earnest endeavors for the promotion
of peace, and universal charity, when 'twas held a great crime not to be ^ierce
in the way of a Sect; For his quick, piercing, and serious practical Writings:
I say I judge the Author, the slip of whose Pen in a thing relating to my
Subject, I have noted, to be a person worthy of great respect; and I can scarce
forbear affirming concerning him as a learned Doctor of our Church did, That he
was the only man that spoke sense in an age of nonsense; He meant the only man
that was reckoned among the people of those times, with the madness of which he
contested. But I am digress'd.

The business of this Section has been to show that the charge of Atheism
against the Real Philo^ophy is a gross, and groundless slander; and I hope I
have made good what I undertook.

SECT. III.
BUT (2.) it is alleged by some, That Philosophy disposes (...) to despise the
Scriptures, or at least to neglect the study of them; and upon that account is
to be exploded among Christians.

To which I say, That Philosophy is the knowledge of Gods works, and there is
nothing in Gods Works, that is contrary to his Word; and how then should the
study of the one incline men to despise the other? Certainly had there been any
such impious tendency in searching into Gods Works to the lessening of our
value of the Scriptures; The Scripture it self would never have recommended
this so much unto us, as we have seen it does. Yea indeed, this is so far from
being ^rue, that on the contrary, the knowledge of Gods Works tends in its
proper nature to dispose men to love, and veneration of the Scriptures; For by
converse with Nature we are made sensible of the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of
God, fresh instances of which we shall still find in all things; And it is one
great design of the Scripture to promote the Glory of these Attributes: How
then can he, that is much affected with them, choose but love, and esteem those
holy Records which so gloriously illustrate the perfections which he admires?

Besides, by inquiry into Gods Works, we discover continually how little we can
comprehend of his ways, and managements; and he that is sensible of this, will
find himself more inclined to reverence the declarations of his Word, though
they are beyond his reach, and though he cannot fathom those Mysteries, he is
required to believe: Such a disposition is necessary for the securing our
reverence to the Divine Oracles, and Philosophy promotes it much.

So that though it is like enough there may be those that pretend to Philosophy
who have less veneration, and respect for the Scripture, than they ought, yet
that impious disesteem of those sacred Writings is no effect of their
Philosophy, but of their corrupt, and evil inclinations. And to remove the
scandal brought upon natural wisdom by those Pretenders, it may be observed,
that none are more earnest, or mo^ ^requent in the proo^, and recommendation of
the Authority of Scripture, than those of Philosophi^al inclination and genius,
who by their public capacity, and profession, have the best opportunities to
give testimony to the honor of that Divine Book.

And besides the many Sermons that are continually preached, (but no further
published) by the Divines that are disposed to this sort of knowledge, I may
for instance mention the excellent performanof those incomparable Philosophers,
the present most learned Bishop of Sarum, and the deservedly famous Mr. Boil:
the former in the Essay before mentioned, and in a late ^lose, smart, and
judicious Sermon against the Antiscripturists; and in another annexed against
Infidelity (newly Printed) has with great perspicuity, strength, and
demonstrative order refuted and shamed the pretensions of the In^, and roundly
proved the Divine Authority of the Holy Volume. And the other excellent
Philosopher Mr. Boil, in a most elegant and learned Discourse concerning the
Style of Scripture, has vindicated those inspired Writings from the cavils,
and exceptions of the nice Wits of men of corrupt minds: which performances of
these two deep and pious Inquirers into Gods Works, may with better reason be
pleaded for the Piety of Philosophy in reference to the Scriptures; then the
irreverences of any that pretend to natural wisdom, can be alleged against it.

SECT. IV.
BUT to justify the imputation of the disservice Philosophy does Religion, and
the Scriptures, it may by some be pleaded,

That Philosophy, viz. that which is called the new, teaches Doctrines that
are contrary to the Word of God, or at least such as we have no ground from
Scripture to believe; as for instance, that the Earth moves, and that the Moon
is of a terrestrial nature, and habitable; which opinions are supposed to be
impious, and Antiscriptural.

In return to this Objection I say,

(1.) In the general, That it is true indeed, that Philosophy teaches many
things which are not revealed in Scripture; for this was not intended to
instruct men in the affairs of Nature, but its design is, to direct Mankind,
and even those of the plainest understandings, in life, and manners, to propose
to us the way of Happiness, and the principles that are necessary to guide us
in it; with the several motives, and encouragements that are proper to excite
our endeavors, and to bear them up against all difficulties and temptations.
This, I say, was the chief design of that Divine Book; and therefore it is
accommodated, in the main, to the most ordinary capacities, and speaks after
our manner, and suitably to sense, and vulgar conception. Thus we ^ind that the
Clouds are called Heaven, the Moon one of the greater Lights, and the Stars
mentioned, as less considerable: and the Stars also, Genesis 1. We read of the
going down of the Sun, and of the ends of the Earth, and of the Heavers, and
diverse other such expressions are in the Scriptures, which plainly intimate
unto us, That they do not concern themselves to rec^ the mistakes of the
vulgar, in Philosophical Theories, but comply with their infirmities, and speak
according as they can understand. So that,

(2.) No Tenent in Philosophy ought to be condemned, and exploded, because
there may be some occasional sayings in the Divine Oracles, which seem not to
comport with it; And therefore the Problems mentioned, concerning the Motion of
the Earth, and terrestrial Nature of the Moon, ought to be left to the
Disquisitions of Philosophy: The Word of God determines nothing about them; for
those expressions, concerning the running of the Sun, and its standing still,
may very well be interpreted as spoken by way of accommodation to sense, and
common apprehension, as it is certain, that those of its going down, and running
from one end of the Heavens to the other, and numerous resembling sayings, are
so to be understood. And when it is else where said, That the foundations of the
Earth are so fixed, that it cannot be moved at any time, or to that purpose;
It Is supposed by Learned men, that nothing else is meant than this, That the
Earth cannot be moved from its Center, which is no prejudice to the opinion of
its being moved upon it.

And for the other Hypothesis of the Moon's being a kind of Earth, the
Scripture has said nothing of it on either hand; nor can its silence be
argumentative here, since we know, That all Mankind believes many things, of
which there is no mention there: As that there are such places as China, and
America, That the Magnet attracts Iron, and directs to the North, and that the
Sea has the motion of Flux, and Reflux, with ten thousand such other things
discovered by Experience, of which there is not the least hint in the Sacred
Volume: And are not these to be believed, till they can be proved from
Scripture? this is ridiculously to abuse the Holy Oracles, and to extend them
beyond their proper business and design. And to argue against this supposal, as
some do, by Queries, What men are in that other Earth? whether fallen? and how
saved? is very childish and absurd. He that holds the opinion may confess his
ignorance in all these things, without any prejudice to his Hypothesis of the
Moon's being habitable; or the supposal of its being actually inhabited. For
that may be, though no living man can tell the nature, and condition of those
Creatures.

But for my part, I assert neither of these Paradoxes; only I have thought fit
to speak thus briefly about them, that they may be le^ to the freedom of
Philosophical Inquiry, for the Scripture is not concerned in such Queries. And
yet besides this, which might suffice to vindicate the Neoterick Methods of
Philosophy from the charge of being injurious to the Scripture in such
instances, I add

(3.) The ^ree, experimental Philosophy which I recommend, does not affirm ever
of those feared propositions. For neither of them have so much evidence, as to
warrant peremptory, and dogmatical assertions. And therefore, though perhaps
some of those Philosophers think that they have great degrees of probability,
and so are sit for Philosophical consideration; Yet there are none, that I
know, that determine they are certainties, and positive Truths. It Is contrary
to the genius of their way to do so: And on the other hand, it is a very
obnoxious folly to conclude, That those opinions are false, when no one can be
certain that they are so. But whether the one, or the other be said, Religion,
and the Scriptures are not at all concerned.

Thus briefly of the slanders that are a^t upon Philosophy, viz. of its
Tendency to Atheism, and disparagement of the Scriptures. The other lesser ones
are answered in the discussion of these.

CHAP. VIII.
Other Objections against Philosophy answered, viz. That there is too much
Curiosity in those Inquiries: That the Apostle gives a Caveat against it: That
the First Preachers of the Gospel knew little or nothing of it. A brief Recital
of some of the Holy Men who are recorded in Scripture to have had skill in
several parts of Philosophy.

SECT. I.
BUT besides those slanderous imputations, there are some little vulgar
plausibilities pretended against it also; It would be endless to recount all of
them. The chief are these that follow.

(I.) There is too much curiosity in those inquiries; and S. Paul desired to
know nothing but Christ, and him crucified. To which I answer, That what is
blameable curiosity in things not worth our pains, or forbidden our scrutiny,
is Duty, and laudable endeavor in matters that are weighty and permitted to
our search. So that nothing can be fastened upon the Philosophical Inquisitions
into Nature on this account, till it be first proved, That a 'diligent
observance of Gods Goodness, and Wisdom in his Works, in order to the using
them to his glory, and the benefit of the world, is either prohibited, or
impertinent.

There is indeed such a depth in nature, that it is never like to be thoroughly
fathomed; and such a darkness upon some of Gods Works, that they will not in
this world be found out to perfection: But however, we are not kept o^f by any
expressness of prohibition; Nature is no Holy Mount that ought not to be
touched; yea, we are commanded, To search after wisdom, and particularly, after
this, when we are so frequently called upon to celebrate our Creator for his
Works, and are encouraged by the success of many that have gone before; For
many shall go to and fro, and science shall be increased. So that our inquiries
into Nature are not forbidden; and he that says they are frivolous, and of no
use, when the Art of the Omniscient is the object, and his glory and the good
of men, the end, asperseth both the Creator and the Creature, and contradicts
his duty to both.

As for the latter clause of the Objection which urges that speech of S. Paul,
of his desiring to know nothing but Christ and him crucified, 1 Cor. II. 2* I
return to it, That he that shall duly consider the discourse of the Apostle in
the verse before, and those that succeed, will perceive, That in this
expression, he only slights the affected eloquence of the Orators, and
Rhetoricians; He spoke in plainness and simplicity, and not in those enticing
words of man's wisdom, which he desired either not to know at all, or not in
comparison with the plain Doctrines of the Gospel. Or, if any should take the
words in the largest sense, then all sorts of humane Learning, and all Arts and
Trades are set at naught by the Apostle; And if so, the meaning can be no more
than this, That he preferred the knowledge of Christ before these; For it is
ridiculous to think that he absolutely slighted all other Science. The
knowledge of Christ is indeed the chiefest, and most valuable wisdom, but the
knowledge of the Works of God has has its place also, and ought not quite to
be excluded and despised: Or, if Philosophy be to be slighted, by this Text,
all other knowledge whatsoever must undergo the same Fate with it.

But it will be urged.

SECT. II.
(II.) THat there is a particular caution given by the Apostle against
Philosophy, Col. II. 8. Beware lest any one spoil you through Philosophy.

To this I have said elsewhere, That the Apostle there means either the
pretended knowledge of the Gnostics, the Genealogies of the Jews, or the
disputing ^earning of the Greeks; and perhaps he might have a respect to all of
them. That the disputing Philosophy of the Greeks is concerned in the caution,
will appear very probable, if we consider, That much of it, was built on mere
notion, that occasioned division into manifold Sects, which managed their
matters by Sophistry, and Disputations, full of nicety and mazes of wit; and
aimed at little, but the pride of mysterious talk of things, that were not
really understood. Such a Philosophy the Apostle might justly condemn, and all
wise men do the same, because it is very injurious to Religion, real Knowledge,
and the Peace of men. But what is this to that, which modestly inquires into
the Creatures of God, as they are; That collects the History of his Works,
raising observations from them for the discovery of Causes, and invention of
Arts, and helps for the benefit of Mankind? What vanity; what prejudice to
Religion can be supposed in this? Is this, think we, that Philosophy, that
wisdom of this world, which the great Apostle censures and condemns? He is bold
that says it, speaks a thing he knows not, and might, if he pleased, know the
contrary; Since the Method of Philosophy I vindicate, which proceeds by
observation and experiment to works, and uses of life, was not, if at all, the
way of those times in which the Apostles lived, nor did it begin to show it
self in many Ages after; and therefore cannot be concerned in S. Paul's Caution
to his Colossians; nor in his smartness against worldly wisdom elsewhere, for
by that we are to understand, the Fetches of Policy, the Niceties of Wit, and
Strains of Rhetoric that were then engaged against the progress of the Gospel:
But what is all this, to the Philosophy of Gods Works; which illustrates the
Divine glory, and comments upon his Perfections, and promotes the great design
of Christianity, which is doing good; and in its proper nature tends to the
disposing o^ men's minds to Virtue, and Religion?

SECT. III.
BUT (III.) If Philosophy be so excellent an Instrument to Religion, it may be
(...) (and the Question will have the force of an Objection) why the Disciples
and first Preachers of the Gospel were not instructed in it; ^ey were plain,
illiterate men, altogether unacquainted with those sublimities; God chose the
foolish things of this world, to confound the wise. So that it seems he did not
value this kind of wisdom so much as our discourse seems to imply.

But this choice that the Divine Wisdom made of the Publishers of the glad
Tidings of Salvation, is no more prejudice, or discredit to Philosophy, than it
is to any other sort of Learning; and indeed it is none at all to either: For
the special reasons of Gods making this choice, seem such as these, viz. That
his power might more evidently appear in the wonderful propagation of the
Religion of Christ Jesus, by such seemingly unqualified instruments; That the
World might not suspect it to be the contrivance of wit, subtilty, and Art,
when there was so much plainness, and simplicity in its first Promot^rs. And
perhaps too it was done in contempt of the vain and pretended knowledge of the
Jews, and Greeks, over which the plainness of the Gospel was made gloriously to
triumph. And to these I add, that it might be to show, That God values
simplicity, and integrity above all natural perfections, how excellent soever.
So that there being such special Reasons for the ^using plain men to set this
grand a^air on foot in the world, it can be no disparagement to the knowledge
of Nature, that it was not begun by Philosophers. And to counter-argue this
Topic, we may consider, That

The Patriarchs, and Holy men of ancient times that were most in the Divine
favor, were well instructed in the knowledge of Gods Works, and contributed to
the good of men by their useful discoveries, and inventions. Adam was
acquainted with the Nature of the Creatures; Noah a Planter of Vineyards,
Abraham (as Grotius collects from ancient History) a great Mystes in the
knowledge of the Stars: Isaac prosperous in Georgicks. Jacob blessed in his
Philosophical Stratagem of the speckled Rods. Moses a great man in all kinds of
natural knowledge. Bezaliel, and Aholiab inspired in Architecture. Solomon a
deep Naturalist, and a Composer of a voluminous History of Plants. Daniel,
Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, skilled in all Learning, and Wisdom; Ten times
better, says the Text, than the Magicians, and Astrologers in Nebuchadnezzar's
Realm; And to accumulate no more instances, the Philosophers of the East made
the first addresses to the Infant Savior.

CONCLUSION.
THus we see upon the whole, That there is no shadow of Reason why we should
discourage, or oppose modest inquiries into the Works of Nature; and whatsoever
ignorant zeal may prompt the common sort to, methinks those of generous
education should not be of so perverse a frame. Especially it becomes not any
that minister at the Altar, to do so great a disservice to Religion, as to
promote so unjust a conceit as that of Philosophy's being an enemy unto it.

The Philosophers were the Priests among the Egyptians, and several other
Nations in ancient times; and there was never more need, that the Priests
should be Philosophers, than in ours; For we are liable every day to be called
out to make good our Foundations against the Atheist, the Sadduce, and
Enthusiast; and it is the knowledge of God in his Works that must furnish us
with some of the most proper Weapons of Defense. Hard names, and damning
sentences; the arrows of bitter words, and raging passions will not defeat
those Sons of An^k; These are not sit Weapons for our warfare. No, they must be
met by a Reason instructed in the knowledge of things, and sought in their own
Quarters, and their Arms must be turned upon themselves; This may be done, and
the advantage is all ours. We have steel, and brass for our defense; and they
have little else than twigs, and bull-rushes for the assault; we have light,
and firm ground* and they are lost in smoke, and mists; They tread among Bogs,
and dangerous Fens, and reel near the Rocks, and Steeps. And shall we despise
our advantages, and forsake them? Shall we relinquish our ground, and our
light, and mu^e our selves up in darkness? Shall we give our enemies the
Weapons, and all the odds; and so endeavor to insure their Triumphs over us?
This is sottishly to betray Religion, and our selves.

If this Discourse chance to meet with any that are guilty of these dangerous
follies, it will, I hope, convince them, That they have no reason to be afraid
of Philosophy, or to despise its aids in the concerns of Religion. And for
those, who never yet thought of this part of Religion to glorify God for his
Works, I wish it may awaken them to more attentive consideration of the wisdom
and goodness that is in them; and so excite their pious acclamations. And to
encourage them to it, I shall adventure to add,

That it seems very probable, that much of the matter of those Hallelujah's and
triumphant Songs, that shall be the joyful entertainment of the blessed, will
be taken from the wonders of Gods Works; and who knows, but the contemplation
of these, and God in them, shall make up a good part of the employment of those
glorified Spirits; who will then have inconceivable advantages for the
searching into those effects of Divine Wisdom, and Power, beyond what are
possible for us mortals to attain. And those discoveries which for ever they
shall make in that immense Treasure of Art, the Universe, must needs sill their
Souls every moment with pleasant astonishment, and inslame their hearts with
the ardors of the highest love, and devotion, which will breathe forth in
everlasting thanksgivings. And thus the study of Gods Works joined with those
pious sentiments they deserve, is a kind of partial anticipation of Heaven; And
next after the contemplations of his Word, and the wonders of his Mercy
discovered in our Redemption, it is one of the best, and noblest employments;
the most becoming a reasonable Creature, and such a one, as is taught by the
most reasonable, and excellent Religion in the World.

FINIS.
(...) OR, A Seasonable Recommendation, and Defense OF REASON* In the Affairs
of RELIGION; AGAINST Infidelity, Skepticism, and Fanaticisms of all sorts.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for James Collins at the Kings^ead in
Westminster Hall. 1670.

AD CLERUM.
Romans XII. the latter part of verse 1. -- Which is your reasonable Service.
THERE is nothing, that I know, has done so much mischief to Christianity, as
the disparagement of Reason, under pretense of respect, and favor to Religion;
since hereby the very Foundations of the Christian Faith have bin undermined,
and the World prepared for Atheism. For if Reason must not be heard, the Being
of a GOD, and the Authority of Scripture can neither be proved, nor defended;
and so our Faith drops to the ground, like a house that has no foundation.
Besides, by this way, those sickly conceits, and Enthusiastic dreams, and
unsound Doctrines, that have poisoned our Air, and infatuated the minds of men,
and exposed Religion to the scorn of Infidels, and divided the Church, and
disturbed the peace of mankind, and involved the Nation in so much blood, and
so many Ruins; I say hereby, all these fatal Follies, that have been the
occasions of so many mischiefs, have been propagated, and promoted. So that I
may affirm boldly, That here is the Springhead of most of the waters of
bitterness, and strife; and here the Fountain of the great Deeps of Atheism,
and Fanaticism, that are broken up upon us.

And now, to damme up this sour^e of mischiefs, by representing the fair
agreement that is between Reason, and Religion, is the most seasonable service
that can be done unto both; since hereby, Religion will be rescued from the
impious accusation of its being groundless, and imaginary: And reason also
defended, against the unjust charge of those, that would make this beam of God,
profane, and irreligious. This I shall endeavor at this tim^; and I think it
proper work for the occasion, now that I have an opportunity of speaking to You
Reverend Fathers, and Brethren of the Clergy; For it is from the Pulpit,
Religion has received those wounds through the sides of Reason; I do not say,
and I do not think, It has from yours; But we know, that indiscreet, and hot
Preachers that had entertained vain, and unreasonable Doctrines, which they had
made an interest, and the badges of a Party; perceiving that their darling
opinions could not stand, if Reason, their enemy, were not discredited; They
set up a loud cry against Reason, as the great adversary of Free Grace, and
Faith, and zealously endeavored to run it down, under the mis-applied names of
Vain Philosophy, Carnal Reasoning, and the Wisdom of this World: And what has
been the issue of those cantings, we have sadly seen, and felt. So that, (...)
think, it is now the duty of all sober, and reasonable men to rise up against
this spirit of Folly, and infatuation: and something I shall attempt at
present, by showing, that Reason is very serviceable to Religion; and Religion
very friendly to Reason; both which are included in these words of the Apostle,

-- WHICH IS YOUR REASONABLE SERVICE. He had proved in the preceding part of
this Epistle, That the Gospel was the only way of happiness, and here, he
enters upon the application of this Doctrine, and affectionately exhorts his
Romans, to conform themselves unto it. I beseech you therefore, brethren, by
the mercies of God, that you present your bodies: By which, no doubt, he means,
their whole persons, For they are to be a living sacrifice; Living, in
opposition to the dead services of the Ceremonial Law; Holy, acceptable unto
God, in opposition to those legal performances, that had no intrinsic goodness
in them, and were not acceptable now that their institution was determin^d. And
the motives whereby he enforces his exh^rtation, are these two, viz. The
mercies of GOD, which the Gospel has brought, and propounded; I beseech you,
brethren, by the mercies of God; And the reasonableness of the thing it self
that he urges them to, -- Which is your reasonable service.

My business is with this latter, and I li^fer from it:

That Religion is a reasonable thing.

IN treating of this Prop^sition, I shall

(I.) State what I mean by Religion, and what by Reason. (II) I shall
demonstrate their harmony, and agreement. (III) Endeavor to disable the main
Objections that are alleged against the use of Reason, in the affairs of
Faith. And (IV.) Improve all by some Inferences, and Advices.
TO BEGIN with the first, the settling the distinct Notions of Religion, and
Reason. We know there is nothing in any matter of enquiry, or debate that can
be discovered, or determin^d till the Terms of the Question are explained, and
their Notions settled. The want of this, has been the occasion of a great part
of those Confusions we find in Disputes, and particularly most of the Clamours,
that have been raised against Reason in the affairs of Religion, have sprung
from men's mistakes of the nature of both. For while groundless opinions, and
unreasonable practices are often called Religion on the one hand; and vain
imaginations, and false consequences are as frequently styled Reason on the
other; It Is no wonder that such a Religion disclaims the use of Reason, or that
such Reason is opposite to Religion. Therefore, in order to my showing the
agreement between true Religion, and genuine Reason, I shall, with all the
clearness that I can, represent the just meaning of the one, and of the other.

FOR Religion First; the name signifies Binding, and so imports duty; and all
duty is comprised under these two Generals, Worship, and Virtue; Worship
comprehends all our duties toward God; Virtue all those, that relate to our
Neighbor, or our selves. Religion then primarily consists in these, which are
the sum of the Law, and the Prophets. But duty cannot be performed, without
knowledge, and some Principles there must be, that must direct these Practices;
And those that discover, and direct men in those actions of du^y, are called
Principles of Religion. These are of two sorts, viz. Some are (1.) Fundamental,
and Essential; others (2.) (...), and assisting. Fundamental (...) Metaphor
taken from the found^ of a building; upon which the Fabric stands, and without
which, it must sink to the ground: So that Fundamental Principles are such, as
are supposed to the duties of Religion, one or more; and such as are absolutely
necessary to the performance of them respectively: Of this sort I mention four,
viz.

(I.) That there is a God of infinite perf^ction. The b^lief of this i^ (...)
nec^ssary to all the par^s o^ Religion. (II.) That we are sinners and exposed
to his displeasure. This is necessary to confession of sins, and repentance;
parts of Worship. (III.) That God is our Maker, and the Author of all our
blessings. This is necessary to the Duties of Prayer, Praise, and Adoration.
(IV.) That there is Moral Good, and Evil. Without this there can be no Charity,
Humility, Justice, Purity; or the rest.
These Propositions, I say, are Fundamentals of Religion, for it supposes, and
stands upon them. There are others, which are not so absolutely necessary as
these, but yet very encouraging, and helpful; I reckon Four here also: Viz.

(1.) THAT God will pardon us, if we repent. (2.) THAT he will assist us, if we
endeavor. (3.) THAT he will accept of Services that are imperfect, if they are
sincere. (4.) THAT he will reward, or punish, in another world according ^o
what we have done in this.
This I count to be the sum of Religion general: and Christianity* takes in all
those Duties; and all the Principles; advancing the Duties to nobler measures;
and encouraging them by new motives, and assistances, and superadding two other
instances, Baptism, and the Lords Supper. And for the Principles, it confirms
those of natural Religion; and explains them further, and discovers some few
new ones; And all these, both of the former, and the latter sort, are contained
in the Creed. Here are all the Fundamentals of Religion, and the main assisting
Principles also. And I call nothing else Religion, but plain Duties, and these
acknowledged Principles. And though our Church require our assent to more
Propositions; yet those are only Articles of Communion, not Doctrines
absolutely necessary to Salvation. And if we go beyond the Creed for the
Essentials of Faith; who can tell where you shall stop? The sum is, Religion
primarily is Duty; And duty is All that which God has co^ded to be done by his
Word, or our Reasons; and we have the substance of these in the Commandments:
Religion also in a secondary sense consists in some Principles relating to the
Worship of God, and of his Son, in the ways of devo^t, and virtuous living; and
these are comprised in that Summary of belief called the Apostles Creed.

This I take to be Religion; and this Religion I shall prove to be reasonable:
But I cannot undertake for all the Opinions some men are pleased to call
Orthodox; nor for all those that by many private persons, and some Churches are
counted essential Articles of Faith, and Salvation. Thus I have stated what I
mean by Religion.

THE OTHER thing to be determined, and fixed, is, the proper Notion of Rea on.

For this you may please ^o consider, that Reason is sometimes taken for Reason
in the Faculty, which is the Understanding; and at other times, for Reason in
the object, which consists in those Principles, and Conclusions by which the
Understanding is informed. This latter is meant in the dispute concerning the
agreement, or disagreement of Reason, and Religion. And Reason in this sense,
is the same with natural truth, which I said is made up of Principles, and
Conclusions. By the Principles of Reason we are not to understand the Grounds
of any man's Philosophy; nor the Critical Rules of Syllogism; but those imbred
fundamental notices, that God has implanted in our Souls; such as arise not
from external objects, nor particular humors, or imaginations; but are
immediately lodged in our minds; independent upon other principles or
deductions; commanding a sudden assent; and acknowledged by all sober mankind.

Of this sort are these.

That God is a Being of all perfection.

That nothing has no Attributes.

That a thing cannot be, and not be.

That the whole is greater than any of its parts. And such like others, which
are unto Us, what instincts are to other Creatures. These I call the Principles
of Reason. The Conclusions are those other notices, that are inferred rightly
from these; and by their help from the observations of sense; And the remotest
that can be conceived, of all these, if it be rightly inferred from the
Principles of Reason, or duly circumstantiated sense, is as well to be
reckoned a part and branch of Reason, as the more immediate Conclusions, that
are Principles in respect of those distant truths. And thus I have given an
account also of the proper notion, and nature of Reason.

I AM to show next (2) That Religion is reasonable; and this implies two
things, viz. That Reason is a friend to Religion; and that Religion is so to
Reason. From these two, results their correspondence, and agreement.

I begin with the FIRST: and here I might easily show the great congruity that
there is between that light, and those Laws, that God has placed in our Souls;
and the duties of Religion that by the expressness of his written Word he
requires from us; and demonstrate that Reason teaches All those, excepting
only the two Positives, Baptism, and the holy Eucharist. But there is not so
much need of turning my discourse that way; and therefore I shall confine it to
the Principles of Religion, which are called Faith, and prove that Reason
mightily befriends these.

It does this (I.) By proving some of those Principles; and (II.) By defending
all. For the clearing both these, you may consider, That the Principles of
Religion are of two sorts: Either (1.) such as are presupposed to Faith; or
such as (2.) are formal Articles of it. Of the first sort are; The Being of a
God; and the Authority of the Scripture. And of the second, such as are
expressly declared by Divine Testimony; As the Attributes of God; the
Incarnation of his Son, and such like.

(I.) For the former ^ey are proved by Reason; and by Reason only. The others
we shall consider after.

(I.) That the Being of a God, the foundation of all, is proved by Reason, the
Apostle acknowledges, when he says, That what was to be known of God, was
manifest; and to the Heathen, Romans I. XIX. and he adds, verse. XX. That the
invisible things from the Creation of the World, are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made. And the Royal Psalmist speaks to the
like purpose, Psalm. XIX. The Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the
Firmament shows his handy works. And again, Psalm. 14. 8. 3. Praise him Sun
and Moon, praise him ye Stars, and Light; which intimates, that these Works of
his afford matter to our reasons for religious acknowledgments. And Reason
proves the existence of God, from the beauty, and order, and ends, and
usefulness of the Creatures; for these are demonstrative Arguments of the being
of a wise, and omnipotent mind, that has framed all things so orderly, and
exactly; and that mind is God. This Article then, Reason proves, which was the
first branch of the particular; and I add, that it is Reason only that can do
it; which was the other. This you will see when you consider, that there are
but three things from whence the existence of any Being can be concluded, viz.
Sense, Revelation, or Reason.

For Sense, it has no more to do here but to present matter for our Reasons to
work on; and Revelation supposes the Being of a God, and cannot prove it; for
we can have no security that the Revelation is true, till we are assured it is
from God; or from some Commissioned by him. The knowledge of his Being
therefore, must precede our Faith in Revelation; and so cannot be deduced from
it. Thus Reason befriends Religion by laying its corner stone.

And the next to this is the other Principle mentioned.

(II.) The Divine Authority of Scripture. This also is to be proved by Reason,
and only by It. The great Argument for the truth of Scripture is the Testimony
of the Spirit in the Miracles wrought by Christ, and his Apostles. Our Savior
himself uses this Argument to gain credit to his Doctrines, Believe me for the
works sake; The works that I do bear testimony of me; and if I had not done
among them the works that no other man did, they had had no sin, Joh. XV. 24.
And the Apostles continually urge that great Miracle, the Resurrection of
Christ from the dead for the conviction both of the Jews, and Gentiles, That he
was the Son of God; and his Doctrines true. Now Miracles are an Argument to our
Reasons, and we reason from them thus: Miracles are Gods Seal, and they are
wrought by his Power, and He is true, and good, and would not lend these to
Impostors to cheat, and abuse mankind. Therefore whoever works real Miracles
for the confirmation of any Doctrine, it is to be believed that He is taught of
God, and Commissioned to teach us. And that Christ, and his Apostles did those
things which are recorded of them, is matter of Testimony; and Reason clears
the validity of this, by the aggregation of multitudes of Circumstances, which
show, that the first Relators could not be deceived themselves, and would not
deceive us; nor indeed could in the main matters, if they had designed it. And
the certainty of the conveyance of these things to us is evinced also by
numerous convictive Reasons: So that, the matter of fact is secure; and that
such Doctrines were taught, as are ascribed to those divine persons; and those
persons inspired that penned them, are proved the same way: And so it follows
from the whole, that the Gospel is the Word of God; and the Old Testament is
confirmed by that. Thus Reason proves the Divine Authority of Scripture; and
those other Arguments that use to be produced for it, from Its style, and Its
influence upon the Souls of men; from the excellency of its design; and the
Providence of God in preserving it; are of the same sort, though not of the
same strength. Reason then proves the Scriptures; and this only; For that they
are from God, is not kn^wn immediately by sense; and there is no distinct
Revelation that is certain, and infallible to assure us of it; and so Reason
only remains to de^onstrate this other Fundamental Article.

These two great Truths, The existence of God; and Authority of Scripture, are
the first in our Religion; and they are Conclusions of Reason, and Foundations
of Faith. Thus briefly of those Principles of Religion that are Fundamentally
such; We have seen how Reason serves them, by demonstrating their Truth, and
certainty.

I COME now to the SECOND sort of Principles, viz. those that are formally so;
They are of two sorts, mixed and pure: The mixed are those that are discovered by
Reason, and declared by Revelation also; and so are Principles both of Reason,
and Faith: Of this kind are the Attributes of God; Moral good, and evil; and
the Immortality of humane Souls. The Principles of pure Faith, are such as are
known only by Divine Testimony, as the Miraculous Conception, the Incarnation,
and the Trinity. The first sort Reason proves as well as Scripture, this I show
briefly in the alleged instances.

(1.) That the Divine Attributes are revealed in the Holy Oracles, it is clear;
and they are deduced from Reason also; For it is a general Principle of all
Mankind, That God is a Being absolutely perfect; And hence Reason concludes all
the particular Attributes of his Being; since Wisdom, Goodness, Power, and the
rest are perfections, and imply nothing of imperfection, or defect; and
therefore ought to be ascribed to the infinitely perfect Essence.

(2.) That there is moral good, and evil, is discoverable by Reason, as well as
Scripture. For these are Reasons Maxims; That every thing is made for an end;
and every thing is directed to its end by certain Rules: these Rules in
Creatures of understanding, and choice, are Laws, and the transgressing these,
is Vice and Sin.

(3.) The Immortality of our Souls is plain in Scripture, and Reason proves it,
by showing the Spirituality of our natures; and that it does from the nature of
Sense; and our perception of spiritual Beings, and Universals; Of Logical,
Metaphysical, and Mathematical Notions; From our compounding Propositions; and
drawing Conclusions from them; From the vastness, and quickness of our
Imaginations; and Liberty of our Wills, all which are beyond the powers of
matter, and therefore argue a Being that is spiritual, and consequently
immortal, which inference, the Philosophy of Spirits proves. Also, the Moral
Arguments of Reason from the goodness of God, and his Justice in distributing
rewards and punishments; the nature of virtue, and tendencies of religious
appetites, conclude, I think, strongly, That there is a life after this. Thus
in short of the Principles, I called mixed, which Reason demonstrates.

BUT for the others, viz. (II.) Those of pure Revelation, Reason cannot prove
them immediately; nor is it to be expected that it should: For they are matters
of Testimony; and we are no more to look for immediate proof from Reason of
those things, than we are to expect, that abstracted Reason should demonstrate,
That there is such a place as China; or, that there was such a man as Julius
Caesar. All that it can do here, is to assert, and make good the credibility,
and truth of the Testimonies that relate such matters: and that it does in the
present case, proving the Authority of Scripture; and thereby in a remoter way,
It demonstrates all the Mysteries of Faith, which the Divine Oracles
immediately discover. And it is no more disparagement to our Reasons, that they
cannot evince those Sacred Articles by their own unaided force, than it is a
disgrace unto them, that they cannot know that there are such things, as
Colors, without the help of our eyes; or that there are Sounds, without the
faculty of hearing. And if Reason must be called blind upon this account,
because it cannot know of it self such things as belong to Testimony to
discover; the best eyes in the world may be so accounted also, because they are
not sagacious enough to see sounds; and the best Palate dull, and dead, because
it cannot taste the Sunbeams.

But though I have said, that Reason cannot of it self, immediately prove the
truths of pure Revelation; Yet (1.) it demonstrates the divine Authority of the
Testimony that declares them; and that way proves even these Articles. If this
be not enough,

I add the second Assertion, (II.) That Reason defends all the Mysteries of
Faith and Religion: and for this, I must desire you to take notice, that there
are two ways, whereby any thing may be defended, viz. Either (1) By showing the
manner how the thing is; or, if that cannot be done, by showing (2) That it
ought to be believed, though the manner of it be not known: For instance, if
any one denies all sorts of Creatures were in the Ark, under pretense, that it
is impossible they should be contained within such a space; He that can show
how this might be, by a distinct enumeration of the kinds of Animals, with due
allowance for the unknown Species, and a computation of the particular capacity
of the Ark; he defends the Sacred History the first way: But if another denies
the conversion of Aaron's Rod into a Serpent, upon the same account, of the
unconceivableness of the manner, how it was done; this cannot indeed be
defended the former way: But then it may, by representing that the power of God
is infinite; and can easily do what we cannot comprehend, how it is effected;
and that we ought to believe upon the credit of the Testimony ( that being well
proved to us) though the manner of this miraculous performance, and such others
as it relates, be unknown. And a^ it is in this last case, so it is in all the
mysteries of Faith, and Religion; Reason cannot defend them indeed the first
way: But then it does the second, by showing, that the Divine Nature is
insinite, and our Concep^ions very shallow, and sinite; that it is therefore
very unreasonable in us to endeavor to pry into the secrets of his Being, and
actions; and to think that we can measure, and comprehend them: That we know
not the Essence, and ways of acting of the most ordinary, and obvious things of
Nature, and therefore must not expect thoroughly to understand the deeper things
of God; That God has revealed those holy Mysteries unto us; and that it is the
highest reason in the world to believe, That what He says is true, though we
do not know how these things are. These are all considerations of Reason, and
by the proposal of them, it sufficiently defends all the Mysteries, that can be
proved to be contained in the Sacred Volume; and shows that they ought to be
received by us, though they cannot be comprehended. Thus if any one should ask
me, How the Divine Nature is united to the Humane? and declare himself
unwilling to believe the Article till he could be satisfied how; My answer
would be in short, That I cannot tell; and yet I believe it is so; and he ought
to believe the same, upon the credit of the Testimony, though we are both
ignorant of the manner. And I would suggest, that we believe innumerable things
upon the evidence of our senses, whose nature, and properties we do not know.
How the parts of matter cohere; and how the soul is united to the body; are
questions we cannot answer; and yet that such things are, we do not doubt: And
why, says Reason, should we not believe Gods revelation of things we cannot
comprehend; as well as we do our senses about matters as little understood by
us? It Is no doubt reasonable that we should, and by proving it is so, Reason
defends all the Propositions of Faith, and Religion. And when some of These are
said to be Above Reason, no more is meant, than that Reason cannot conceive how
those things are; and in that sense many of the affairs of nature are above it
too.

Thus I have shown how serviceable Reason is to Religion. I am next to prove,

(II.) That Religion befriends it: and here I offer some Testimonies from the
holy Oracles to make that good; and in them we shall see, how GOD himself, and
CHRIST, and his APOSTLES, do own, and acknowledge Reason.

(...) consider then that GOD, Isa. 1. 18. calls the rebellious Israelites to
reason with him; Come now, and let us reason together, says the Lord; and by
Reason he convinces the people of the vanity of Idols, Isa. 44. 9. And he
expos^ulates with their Reasons, Ez^k. 18. 31. Why will ye die, ye house of
Israel? And Mich. 6. 3. O my people, what have I done unto thee? And wherein
have I wearied thee? Testisie against me. He appeals unto their Reasons, to
judge of his proceedings. Isa. 5. 3. And now, O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and
men of Judah, judge I pray you be^ween me, and my vineyard; are not my ways
equal? and are not your ways unequal? In this he intimates the competency of
their Reasons to judge of the equity of his ways, and the iniquity of their own.

And OUR SAVIOR commands the Disciples of the Pharisees to give unto Caesar
the things that are Caesar's, and to God the the things that are Gods; implying
the ability of their Reasons to distinguish between the things, that belonged
to God, and those, that appertained to Caesar. And he in diverse places argues
from the Principles, and Topics of Reason. From that which we call, a majori
ad minus, from the greater to the less, John 13. 14* He shows it to be the duty
of his Disciples to serve their brethren in the meanest Offices, and to wash
one another feet, because he had washed theirs, Verse. 14. in^cing it by this
consideration of Reason; for the Servant is not greater than his Lord; Verse.
16. and uses the same, John 15. 20. to show, that they must expect
persecution, because He, their Lord, was persecuted. And Luke 12. 23. He
endeavors to take them off from carking care and solicitude about meat and
raiment, by this consideration from Reason, that the life is more than meat,
and the body than raiment; intimating that God having given them the greater,
there was no doubt, but he would bestow the less, which was necessary for the
preservation of that. To these instances I add some few from the Topic a
minori ad majus, from the less to the greater, in the arguings of our Savior.
Thus Mat. 7. 11. If ye being evil know how to give good gifts to your children,
how much more shall your Father which is in Heaven give good things to those
that ask him? The ground of the Consequence is this Principle of Reason, That
God is more benign, and gracious than the tenderest, and most affectionate of
our earthly Parents. So Luke 12. 24. He argues, that God will provide for Us,
because he does for the Ravens, since we are better than they; How much more
are ye better than the sowls? Which arguing supposes this Principle of Reason,
that that wisdom, and goodness which are indulgent to the viler Creatures, will
not neglect the more excellent. He proceeds surther in the same Argument by the
consideration of Gods clothing the Lillies, and makes the like inference from
it, Verse. 28. If God so cloth the grass, how much more will he cloth you? And
Mat. 12. He reasons that it was lawful for him to heal on the Sabbath day, from
the consideration of the general mercy that is due even to brute Creatures;
What man shall there be among you that shall have one sheep, and if it fall
into a pit on the Sabbath day, will he not lay hold of it, to lift it out? How
much more then is a man better than a sheep? Verse. 12. Thus our Savior used
Arguments of Reason.

And the APOSTLES did so very frequently. S. Paul disproves Idolatry this way,
Acts 17. 29. Forasmuch then as we are the Offspring of God, we ought not to
think, that the Godhead is like unto gold, or silver, or stone graven by Art.
And the same Apostle proves the Resurrection of the Dead by the mention of
seven gross absurdities that would follow the denial of it, 1 Cor. 1. 15. viz.
If the dead rise not, Then 1. Christ is not risen; And then 2. our Preaching is
vain, and we false Apostles; And if so, 3. your Faith is vain; And then 4. you
are not justified, but are in your sins; And hence it will follow 5. That those
that are departed in the same Faith are perished; And then 6. Faith in Christ
profits only in this life; And if so, 7. we are of all men the most miserable,
Because we suffer all things for this Faith; From Verse. 14. to verse. 19* And
the whole Chapter contains Philosophical Reasoning either to prove, or
illustrate the Resurrection; or to show the difference of glorified bodies,
from these. And S. Peter, in his second Epistle, Chap. 2. shows, that sinful
men must expect to be punished, because God spared not the Angels that fell.
Instances in this case, are endless; these may suffice. And thus of the Second
thing also which I proposed to make good, viz. That Religion is friendly to
Reason, and that appears, in that God himself, our Savior, and his Apostles
own it; and use Arguments from it, even in a^fairs of Faith and Religion.

BUT Scripture; the Rule of Faith is pretended against it; and other
Considerations also: These therefore come next to be considered; and the
dealing with those pretensions was the

(III.) General I proposed to discuss.

AS for Arguments from Scripture against the use of Reason, It Is alleged (1.)
From 1 Cor. 1. where it is said, That God will destroy the wisdom of the wise,
verse. 19. And the world by wisdom knew not God, verse. 21. And not many wise men
after the flesh are called, verse. 26. And God chose the foolish things of this
world to confound the wise, verse. 27. By which Expressions, of wisdom and wise,
it is presumed that Humane Reason, and rational men, are meant. But these
Interpreters mistake the matter much, and as they are wont to do, put arbitrary
Interpretations upon Scripture, without ground. For by Wisdom here, there is no
cause to understand the Reason of men; but rather the Traditions of the Jews;
the Philosophy of the disputing ^reeks; and the worldly Polrey of the Romans,
who were the (...), The Rulers of that World. That the Jewish learning in their
Law is meant, the Apostle intimates, when he a^ks in a way of Challenge, verse.
20. Where is the Scribe? And the word (...) signifies one that was skilled in
their Laws, and Customs. And that the Philosophy of the Greeks is to be
understood likewise, we have ground to believe from the other question in the
same verse; Where is the Disputer of this World? Which, though some refer, to
the Doctors among the Jews also, yet I humbly think, it may more properly be
understood of the Philosophers among the Grecians; For the Apostle writes to
Greeks, and their Philosophy was notoriously contentious. And lastly, that the
worldly Policies o^ the Romans are included also, in this Wisdom of this World,
which the Apostle vilisies, there is cause to think from the sixth verse of the
second Chapter, where he says, He spoke not in the Wisdom of the Princes of
this World; And it is well known that Policy was their most valued Wisdom; (...)
regere imperio -- To govern the Nations, and promote the grandeur of their
Empire, was the great design, and study of those Princes of this World. Now all
these the Apo^le sets at naught, in the beginning of this Epistle; Because they
were very opposite to the simplicity, and holiness, selfde^al, and meekness of
the Gospel. But what is this to the disadvantage of Reason, to which indeed
those sorts of Wisdom are as contrary, as they are to Religion? And by this I
am enabled,

(2.) To meet another Objection urged from 1 Cor. 2. 14. But the natural man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto
him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. Hence
the Enthusiast argues the Universal inability of Reason in things of Religion;
and its Antipathy to them. Whereas I can apprehend no more to be meant by the
words, than this, viz. That such kind of natural men as those Scribes, and
Disputers, and Politicians, having their minds depraved, and prepossessed with
their own wisdom* were indisposed to receive this, that was so contrary unto
it. And they could not know those things of God, because they were spiritual,
and so would require a mind that was of a pure, and spiritual frame, viz. free
from that earthly Wisdom of all sorts, which counts those things foolishness;
and which by God, is counted so it self. 1 Cor. 3. 19. which place

(3.) Is used as another (...) against Reason. The Wisdom of this World is
foolishness with God: But it can signi^e nothing to that purpose, to one, that
understands, and considers the Apostles meaning. What is meant by the Wisdom of
this World here, I have declared already; And by the former part of my
Discourse it appears, that whatever is to be understood by it, our Reason
cannot; since that either proves, or defends all the Articles of Religion.

(4.) And when the same Apostle elsewhere, viz. 2 Cor. 1. 12. says, that They
had not their conversation in fleshly wisdom; we cannot think he meant humane
Reason by that; Reason directs us to live in simplicity, and godly sincerity,
which he opposes to a life in fleshly wisdom. By this therefore, no doubt, he
means the Reason of our Appetites, and Passions, which is but sense and
imagination (for these blind guides are the directors of the Wicked) but not
the Reason of our minds, which is one of those lights that illuminate the
Consciences of good men, and help to guide their actions. And whereas it is
objected,

(5.) From Col. 2. 8. Beware lest any spoil you through Philosophy. I answer,
there is nothing can be made of that neither, for the disgrace of Reason; for
the Philosophy the Apostle cautions against, is the same which he warns Timothy
of, 1 Timothy 1. 4. Neither give heed to Fables and endless Genealogies that
minister Questions; calling these, profane, and vain bablings, and oppositions
of Science falsely so called, 1 Timothy 6. 20. By all which, learned Interpreters
understand the pretended knowledge, of which the Gnostics boasted, which
consisted in the fabulous pedigrees of the Gods under the name of Aeones; and
it may be the Genealogies of which the Jews were so fond, and the disputing
Philosophy among the Greeks, which was properly, Science falsely so called, and
did minister Questions, and endless strife; I say it is very probable these
might be comprehended also: But Reason is no otherwise concerned in all this,
but as condemning, and reproving these dangerous follies.

THUS we see the pretensions from Scripture against Reason are vain. But there
are Other Considerations by which it uses to be impugned, as,

(1.) OUR Reason is corrupted, and therefore is not sit to meddle in spiritual
matters.

To this I say, That Reason, a^ it is taken for the faculty of understanding,
is very much weakened, and impaired; It sees but little, and that very dully,
through a glass darkly, as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 13. And it is very liable
to be misled by our senses, and affections, and interests, and imaginations; so
that we many times mingle errors, and false conceits with the genuine dictates
of our minds, and appeal to them, as the Principles of Truth, and Reason, when
they are but the vain Images of our Phansies, or the false Conclusions of
ignorance, and mistake. If this b^ meant by the corruption of Reason, I grant
it; and all that can be inferred from it will be; That we ought not to be too
bold, and peremptory in defining speculative, and difficult matters; especially
not those, that relate to Religion, nor set our Reasonings against the
Doctrines of Faith and Revelation. But this is nothing to the disreputation of
Reason in the object, viz. Those Principles of Truth which are written upon our
Souls; or any Conclusions that are deduced from them: These are the same that
they ever were, though we discern them not so clearly as the Innocent state
did: They may be mistaken, but cannot be corrupted. And as our understandings,
by reason of their weakness, and liableness to error, may take fals^oods for
some of those; or infer falsely from those that are truly such; so we know,
they do the same by the Scriptures themselves, viz. they very often
mis-interpret, and very often draw perverse conclusions from them; And yet we
say not, That the Word of God is corrupted, nor is the use of Scripture decryed
because of those abuses. But here advantage will be taken to object again,

(2.) That since our natural understandings are so weak, and so liable to
mistake, they ought not to be used in the affairs of Religion; and 'twill
signify little to us that there are certain Principles of eternal Reason, if
we either perceive them not, or cannot use them.

To this I answer, That if on this account we must renounce the use of our
natural understandings, Scripture will be useless to us also; For how can we
know the meaning of the words that express Gods mind unto us? How can we
compare one Scripture with another? How can we draw any Consequence from it?
How apply General Propositions to our own particular cases? How tell what is to
be taken in the Letter; what in the Mystery, what plainly; what in a Figure?
What according to strict, and rigorous truth? What by way of accommodation to
our apprehensions? I say, without the exercise of our understandings, using the
Principles of Reason, none of these can be done, and without them Scripture
will signify either nothing at all, or very little, to us. And what can
Religion get this way? This inference therefore is absurd, and impious. All
that can justly be concluded from the weakness of our understandings, will be
what I intimated before, that we ought to use them with modesty, and caution;
not that we should renounce them. He is a madman, who, because his eyes are
dim, will therefore put them out.

But it may be objected further,

(3.) That which men call Reason is infinitely various, and that is reasonable
to one, which is very irrational to another; Therefore Reason is not to be
heard. And, I say, Interpretations of Scripture are infinitely various, and one
calls that Scriptural, which another calls Heretical; Shall we conclude
therefore, That Scripture is not to be heard? Reason in it self, is the same
all the World over, though men's apprehensions of it are various, as the light
of the Sun is one, though colors, its reflexes, are infinite. And where this
is, it ought not to be denied, because follies, and falsehoods pretend relation
to it; or call themselves by that name. If so, farewell Religion too.

But (4.) ' It Is Socinianism to plead for Reason in the affairs of Faith, and
Religion.

And I answer, It Is gross ^ticism to plead against it. This ^me is properly
applicable to the enemies of Reason; But the other of Socinianism is
groundlesly applied to those that undertake for it; and it absurdly supposes
that Socinians are the only rational men; when as diverse of their Doctrines,
such as, The Sleep, and natural mortality of the Soul, and utter extinction,
and anni^ilation of the wicked after the day of Judgment, are very ob^oxious to
Philosophy, and Reason. And the Socinians can never be confuted in their other
opinions without using Reason to maintain the sense, and interpretation of
those Scriptures that are alleged against them. It Is an easy thing, we know,
to give an ugly name to any thing we dislike; and by this way the most
excellent, and sacred things have been made contemptible, and vile. I wish such
hasty Censurers would consider before they call names; No truth is the worse,
because rash ignorance has thrown dirt upon it. I need say no more to these
frivolous Objections. Those that allege Atheism, and tendency to Infidelity
against the reverence and use of Reason, are disproved by my whole Discourse:
Which shows that the enemies of Reason most usually serve the ends of the
Infidel, and the Atheist; when as a due use of It, destroys the pretensions of
both.

I COME now (IV.) to the Inferences that may be raised from the whole.

1. Reason is certain, and in^; This follows from the state I gave of the
Nature, and notion of Reason in the beginning. It consists in First Principles,
and the Conclusions that are raised from them, and the observations of sense.
Now first Principles are certain, or nothing can be so; for every p^ssible
Conclusion must be drawn from those, or by their help, and every Article of
Faith supposes them. And for the Propositions that arise from those certain
Principles, they are certain likewise; For nothing can follow from truth, but
truth in the longest series of deduction. If error creep in, there is ill
consequence in the case. And the sort of Conclusions that arise from the
observations of sense, if the sense be rightly circumstantiated, and the
inference rightly made, are certain also. For if our senses in all their due
circumstances deceive us, All is a delusion, and we are sure of nothing: But we
know that first Principles are certain, and that our senses do not deceive us,
because God, that bestowed them upon us, is true, and good. And we are as much
assured that whatever we duly conclude from either of them, is as certain,
because whatever is drawn from any Principle, was vertually contained in it.

((...).) (...), That Reason is, in a sense, the Word of God. viz. that, which
he has written upon our minds, and hearts; as Scripture is that, which is
written in a Book. The former is the Word, whereby he has spoken to all
Mankind; the latter is that, whereby he has declared his Will to the Church,
and his peculiar people. Reason is that Candle of the Lord, of which Solomon
speaks, Prove. 20. 27. That light, whereby Christ has enlightened every one that
comes into the world, John 1. 9. And, that Law whereby the Consciences of the
Heathen either accuse, or excuse one another, Romans 2. 15. So that Hi^rocles
spoke well, when he said, (...) To be persuaded by God and right Reason is one
and the same thing. And Luther called Philosophy, within its own bounds, The
Truth of God.

(3.) The belief of our Reasons is an exercise of Faith, and Faith is an act of
Reason; The former part is clear, from the last particular, and we believe our
Reasons, because we have them from God, who cannot mistake, and will not
deceive. So that relying on them, in things clearly perceived, is trust in Gods
veracity, and goodness, and that is an exercise of Faith. Thus Luke 12. The not
belief of Reason, that suggests from Gods clothing the Lillies, that He will
provide for us, is made by our Savior, a defect of Faith, verse. 28. O ye of
little Faith! And for the other part, that Faith is an act of Reason, that is
evident also: For, It Is the highest Reason to believe in God revealing.

(4.) No Principle of Reason contrad^ts any Articles of Faith. This follows
upon the whole. Faith befriends Reason; and Reason serves Religion, and
therefore They cannot clash. They are both certain, both the truths of God; and
one truth does not interfere with another, (...) says Aristotle, Truth agrees
with all things that are. Whatsoever contradicts Faith, is opposite to Reason;
for it is a fundamental Principle of that, That God is to be believed. Indeed
sometimes there is a seeming contradiction between them; But then, either
something is taken for Faith, that is but Fancy; or something for Reason,
that is but Sophistry; or the supposed contradiction is an error, and mistake.

(5.) When any thing is pretended from Reason, against any Article of Faith, we
ought not to cut the knot, by denying Reason; but endeavor to untye it by
answering the Argument, and it is certain it may be fairly answered. For all
Heretics argue either from false Principles, or fallacio^ly conclude from true
ones: So that our Faith is to be defended, not by declaiming against Reason in
such a case (which strengthens the enemy, and, to the great prejudice of
Religion, allows Reason on his side) But we must endeavor to defend it, either
by discovering the falsehood of the Principles he uses in the name of Reason;
or the ill consequence, which he calls, proof.

(6.) When any thing is offered us for an Article of Faith that seems to
contradict Reason, we ought to see that there be good cause to believe that
this is divinely revealed, and in the sense propounded. If it be, we may be
assured from the former Aphorisms, that the contradiction is but an appearance;
and it may be discovered to be so. But if the contradiction be real, This can
be no Article of Revelation, or the Revelation has not this sense. For God
cannot be the Author of Contradictions; and we have seen that Reason, as well
as Faith, is his. I mean, the Principles of Natural Truth, as well as those of
Revelation. (...) says Aristotle, Truth is throughout contrary to falsehood;
and what is true in Divinity, cannot be false in Reason. It Is said indeed in
the Talmud, If two Rabbis disfer in Contradictories, yet both have their
Opinions from Moses, and from God. But we are not obliged to such a
non-sensi^al kind of Faith; And ought not to receive any thing a^ an Article in
a sense, that palpably contradicts Reason, no more than we may receive any in a
sense that contradicts other Scriptures. Faith, and Reason accord as well as
the Old Iestament, and the New; and the Analogy of Reason is to be ^ded also,
because even that i^ Divine and Sacred.

(7.) There is nothing that God has revealed, to oblige our Faith, but he has
given us reason to believe that he has revealed it. For though the thing be
never so clearly told me, If I have not reason to think, that God is the
Revealer of what is so declared, I am not bound to believe, except there be
evidence in the thing it self. For it is not Faith, but vain credulity to
believe every thing that pretends to be from God. So that we ought to ask our
selves a Reason, why we believe the Scripture to be the Revelation of Gods
Will, and ought not to assent to any sense put upon it, till we have ground to
think, that that sense is his mind? I say, we must have ground, either from our
particular Reasons, or the Authority of the Church; otherwise our Faith is vain
credulity, and not Faith in God.

(8.) A man may hold an erroneous opinion from a mistaken sense of Scripture,
and deny what is the truth of the proposition, and what is the right meaning of
the Text; and yet not err in Faith. For Faith is belief of God revealing: And
if God have not so revealed this, or that, as to give us certain ground to
believe this to be his sense, he has not sufficiently revealed it to oblige
our Faith. So that, though I deny such, or such a sense, while I believe, it is
not from God; his veracity, and Authority is not concerned, since I am ready
however to give a cheerful assent to whatever is clearly, and sufficiently
revealed. This Proposition follows from the former, and must be understood only
of those Doctrines that are difficult, and obscurely delivered: And that many
things are so delivered in Scripture, is certain; For some are only hinted, and
spoken occasionally; some figuratively, and by way of Parable, and Allegory;
some according to men's conceptions; and some in ambiguous, and Aenigmatical
Phrases; which obs^urities may occasion mistake in those, who are very ready to
believe whatever God says; and when they do, I should be loath to say that such
err in Faith; Though those that wrest plain Texts to a compliance with their
interests, and their lusts, Though their affections may bring their judgments
to vote with them; yet theirs is error in Faith with a witness; and capable of
no benefit from this Proposition.

(9.) In searching after the sense of Scripture we ought to consult the
Principles of Reason, as we do other Scriptures. For we have shown, That Reason
is another part of Gods Word. And though the Scripture be suf^icient to Its
end, yet Reason must be presupposed unto It; for without this, Scripture cannot
be used, nor compared, nor applied, nor understood.

(10.) The essentials of Religion are so plainly revealed, that no man can miss
them, that has not a mighty corrupt bias in his will and affections to
infatuate and blind his understanding. Those Essentials are contained in the
Decalogue and the Creed: Many (...) remoter Doctrines may be true, but not
Fundamental. For it is not agreeable to the goodness, or justice of God, that
men's eternal interests should d^pend upon things that are difficult to be
understood, and easily mistaken. If they did; No man could be secure, but that,
do what he could, he should perish everlastingly for not believing; or
believing amiss some of those difficult points, that are supposed necessary to
salvation; and all those that are ignorant, and of weak understanding, must
perish without help, or they must be saved by implicit Faith in unknown
Fundamentals.

THESE are some Propositions that follow from my Discourse, and from one
another. The be^ter they are considered, the more their force will be
perceived; and I think they may serve for many very considerable purposes of
Religion, Charity, and the peace of mankind.

AND now give me leave to speak a word to You, my Bre^hren of the CLERGY, (
Those, I mean of the Younger sort, for I shall not pr^sume to teach my Elders.)
You have heard, no doubt, frequent, and earnest declamations against Reason,
during the years of your Education, and Youth, we know, receives impressions
easily; And I shall not wonder if you have been possessed with very hard
thoughts of this pretended terrible enemy of Faith, and Religion: But did you
ever consider deeply since, what ends of Religion, or Sobriety, such vehement
defamations of our faculties could serve? And what Ends of a P^rty they did? I
hope these things you have pondered, as you ought, and discern the consequent
mischie^s: But yet I shall beg leave ^o refresh your thoughts with some
Considerations of the dangerous tendencies and issues of such Preachments.

(1.) To disclaim Reason, as an Enemy to Religion, tends to the introduction of
Atheism, Infidelity, and Scep^icism; and has already brought in a flood of
these upon us. For what advantage can the Atheist, and Insidel expect greater,
than this, That Reason is against Religion? What do they pretend? What can they
propose more? If so, there will be no proving, That there is a God; or, That
the Scripture is his Word; and then we believe gratis; and our Faith hangs upon
humor, and imagination; and that Religion that depends upon a warm Fancy, an
ungrounded belief* stands but, till a disease, or a new conceit alter the Scenc
of imagination; and then down falls the Castle whose soundation was in the Air.
'Twas the charge of Julian the Apostate against the Primitive Christians; (...)
That their wisdom was to believe; as if they had no ground for their Faith. And
those that renounce, and decry Reason, justify Julian in his charge. Thus
Religion will have no bottom, but the Fancy of every one that prosesseth it;
and how various, and inconstant a thing Imagination is, every man knows. These
are the Consequences of the defamations of Reason, on the pretended account of
Religion; and we have seen, in multitudes of deplorable Instances, That they
follow in practice, as well as reasoning. Men of corrupt inclinations, suspect
that there is No Reason for our Faith, and Religion, and so are upon the
borders of quitting it; And the Enthusiast, that pretends to know Religion
best, tells them, that these Suspicions are very true; and thence the Debauchee
gladly makes the desperate Conclusion. And when others also hear Reason
disparaged as uncertain, various, and fallacious, they deny all credit to their
Faculties, and become confounded Scepticks, that settle in nothing. This I take
to have been one of the greatest, and most deadly occasion of the Atheism of
our days; and he that has rejected Reason, may be one when he pleases, and
cannot reprehend, or reduce any one, that is so already.

(2.) The Denial of Reason in Religion has been the principal Engine, that
Heretics, and Enthusiasts have used against the Faith; and that which lays us
open to in^inite follies, and impostures. Thus the Arrians quarrelled with
(...) because it was deduced by consequence, but not expressed in Scripture.
The Apollinarists would by no means allow of Reason; And St. Austin says of
the Donatists, that they did calumniate, and de^ry It, to raise prejudice
against the Catholic Faith; and elsewhere, Doctores vestri Hominem dialecticum
^ugiendum potius, and cavendum, quam refellendum censuerunt. The Ubiquitarians
defend their Errors, by denying the judgment of Reason; and the Macedonians
would not have the Deity of the Holy Ghost proved by Consequence. The later
Enthusiasts in Germany, and other places, set up loud, and vehement out cries
against Reason; and the Lunaticks among us, (that agree in nothing else) do yet
sweetly accord in opposing this Carnal Reason; and this indeed is their common
Interest. The impostures of men's Phansies must not be seen in too much light;
and we cannot dream, with our eyes open. Reason would discover the nakedness of
Sacred Whimsies; and the vanity of mysterious nonsense; This would disparage
the darlings of the brain, and cool the pleasant heats of kindled Imagination:
And therefore Reason must be decryed, because an enemy to madness; and Fancy
set up, under the Notion of Faith, and Inspiration. Hence men had got the
trick, to call every thing that was Consequent, and Reasonable, Vain
Philosophy; and every thing that was Sober, Carnal Reasoning. Religion is set
so far above Reason, that at length it is put beyond Sobriety, and Sense; and
then 'twas fit to be believed, when 'twas impossible to be proved, or
understood. The way to be a Christian is first to be a Brute; and to be a true
Believer, in this Divinity, is to be fit ^or Bedlam. Men have been taught to
put out their eyes, that they might see; and to hoodwink themselves, that they
might avoid the Precipices. Thus have all extravagancies been brought into
Religion beyond the Imaginations of a Fever, and the Conceits of Midnight:
Whatever is phancied, is certain; and whatever is vehement, is Sacred; every
thing must be believed, that is dreamed; and every thing that is absurd, is a
Mystery. And by this way, men in our days have been prepared to swallow every
thing, but what is sober: whatever is wild, will be sucked in, like the Air;
but what is reasonable, will be fled like infection. So that if a man would
recommend any thing, for his life, to those enemies of Reason, it must be some
odd nonsense, in the clothing of Imagination; and he that can be the Author
of a new kind of madness, shall lead a Party. Thus has Religion, by the
disparagement of Reason, been made a medley of Fantastic trash, spiritualized
into an heap of vapors, and formed into a Castle of Clouds; and exposed to
every wind of humor, and Imagination.

(3.) By the same way great advantage is given to the Church of Rome: Which
those of that Profession know very well; and therefore Perronius, Gonterius,
Arnoldus, Veronius, and other Jesuits, have loudly declaimed against Reason;
and the last mentioned, Veronius, presented the World with a Method to
overthrow Heretics, (meaning those of the Protestant Faith) which promised
more than ordinary; And that was, to deny, and renounce all Principles of
Reason in affairs of Faith absolutely, and roundly; and not to vouchsafe an
Answer to any Argument against Transubstantiation, or any other Article of
their new Faith; but point blank to deny whatever Reason says, in such
matters. And he a^irms that even these Principles of Reason, viz. Non entis non
sunt Attributa; at omne quod est, quando est, necesse est esse; and such like
which are the foundations of all reasoning, are dangerous to the Catholic
Faith; and therefore not to be heeded. This man speaks out, and affirms
directly, and boldly, what the other enemies of Reason imply; but will not
own. This is a Method to destroy Heretics in earnest; but the mischief is,
all Christians, and all other Religions, and all other reasonings are cut off
by the same Sword. This Book, and Method of Veronius was kindly received by the
Pope, privileged by the King of Spain, approved by Cardinals, Archbishops,
Bishops, and all the Gallick Clergy, as solid, and for the advantage of Souls;
and the Sorbone Doctors gave it their approbation, and recommended it as the
only way to confute Heretics. Did these know what they recommended? And did
they, think we, understand the Interest of the Roman Church? If so, we kindly
serve their ends, and promote their Designs in the way, which they account
best, while we vili^ie, and disparage Reason? If This be renounced in matters
of Religion, with what face can we use it against the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, or any other Points of the Roman Creed? Would it not be
blameless, and irreproveable for us to give up our und^rstandings implicitly to
the Dictates, and Declarations of that Church? May we not follow blindly
whatever the Infallible Man at Rome, and his Councils, say? And would it not be
vain self-contradiction to use Arguments against their Decrees, though they are
never so unreasonable? Or to allege Consequences from Scripture against any of
their Articles, though never so contrary to the Holy Oracles? How easily may
They rejoyn, when we dispute against them; You argue from Reason, and by
Consequences; But Reason is dull, and carnal, and an enemy to the things of the
Spirit, and not to be heard in the high matters of Religion? And what can we
say next, if we consent to the Accusation? I say, by this way, we perfectly
disable, or grossly contradict our selves in most of our Disputes against the
Romanists: And we are very d^ingenuous in our dealings, while we use Reason
against them, and deny It, when it is urged against our selves by another sort
of Adversaries: which implies, that when we say, Reason is not to be heard, we
mean, It Is not to be heard against us; But It must, against the Church of Rome;
or any others we can oppugn by It. Thus, I say, our denying Reason in Religion
is either very humoursom, and partial; or, it is a direct yielding up our selves
to our enemies, and doing that our selves, which is the only thing They desire,
to undo us, and to promote their own interests upon our Rui^es.

And thus, my Brethren, I have represented some of the mischiefs, that arise
from the disparagement of Reason; and they are great ones, and big of many
others, and such, as are destructive to all Government, and all the Interests
of the sober part of mankind: And I hope I need not entreat You not to
contribute to the promoting, and continuance of so false and dangerous a
conceit. The assertion of this is properly Fanaticism; and all that we call so,
grows upon it. Here the enemies of our Church, and Government began; upon this
they insisted still; and filled their Books, and Pulpits, and private corners
with these Cantings. This was the Engine to overthrow all sober Principles, and
Establishments; with This the people were infatuated, and credit was reconciled
to Gibberish, and Folly; Enthusiasms, and vain Impulses. This is the food of
Conventicles to this day; the root of their matter, and the burden of their
Preachments. Let Reason be ^eard, and tie them to sense, and most of their
Holdersforth have no more to say. Their spirituality, for which they are
admired, is besides Reason, and against It, rather than above it; And while
this Principle of the enmity between Reason, and Religion stands, the people
will think Them the more Spiritual Preachers, because they are the less
reasonable: And while they are abused by such a belief, 'twill be impossible
for sober men to have any success in their endeavors to convince them.

These things I doubt not but you dis^rn, and know; and therefore I add no
more, for I am sensible to whom I speak.

But, there are another sort, and those Conformists too, who are made Divines
by the Notes they formerly took from those Canters against Reason; To such, I
should not tell what to say, They will whine on, and vent their Jargon; to
persuade them to speak better sense, is to desire them to hold their peace;
which of all things they hate most. But I hope there ar^ none of Those here;
and I could wish the Government would take special care of them, where they
are; For they are the most dangerous enemies the Church of England has; They
keep alive the Principles of Fancy, and Faction, which otherwise would go out
of themselves. But I let them pass, and conclude with a short Advice to the
People.

I HAVE in the foregoing Discourse shown, with all the plainness, and perspi^y,
that I could, the fair agreement between Reason, and Religion; and the
mischiefs that arise from the opinion that sets them at odds. If what I have
said be not clear to your minds, it is because I could not help it: All Subjects
are not c^pable of being made alike plain to all Capacities; I have all along
designed distinct speaking, and (...) (as much as I could) avoided mixture of
Languages, and Terms of Art, that so you might apprehend that, in which I take
you to be much concerned, though I chie^ly intended the Discourse for my
Reverend Brethren the Clergy, who I doubt not apprehend it fully.

What I have more to say to YOU is, That you would beware of those Teachers
that rail against Reason; For ^ither they know not what they say; or have a
design to a^use you. Inst^ad of hearkening to such, endeavor to be informed of
the Reason of your Faith, and Hope: For we are fallen into times, in which you
will have frequent occasion to use it: And that Faith which is reasonable will
not make you ashamed; and that Hope which is well grounded will not disappoint
you; But the end of such an Hope, will be the satisfaction of your de^res, in
the day of your expectations; And the end of such a Faith, the Salvation of
your Souls in the day of the Lord Jesus. To whom, with God the Father, and God
the Holy Ghost, be ascribed all Glory, and Adoration henceforth, and for ever.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
I Thought once to have annexed a brief Answer to Mr. Stubbe' s late ridiculous
Pamphlet, called Campanella revived; But I have considered, That part of my
former Discourse is a Confutation of the most plausible pretenses of that idle
Paper; and every Reader, for whose good thoughts any one need be concerned, is
able to answer the other li^le vain things which those Considerations of mine
will not reach: I therefore thought I might save my self the trouble of
particular Refl^ctions; and indeed I forbore prin^ipally for this reason,
Because (...) not proper to have to do with Mr. Stubbe in a Discourse, which
ha^ any relation to Religion.

Errata.
Page 26. lin. 3. for received read revived, p. 27. l. ^ for being r. Beings,
p. 30. l. 4. for this r. thus, p. 45. l. 7. for disquiet it r. disquiet, p. 47.
l. 10. for ^ncholidor. m^lancholico.

The sheets toward the end of the first Discourse, and those of the second, I
did not s^ till they were published, and therefore must leave those Errata to
the Readers corr^ctions.

Books Printed for James Collins.
A (...) Answ to Mr. Henry (...), the Doctor of W^wick; wherein the Malignity
o^ his T^mper, (...) Hypocri^ of his Pr^, the (...) of his R^ports, and the
(...) o^ hi^ Arguings, and Quotations, in (...) An^ns on Plus Ultra, are di^.
By (...). (...), (...).

Ob^s on Mi^y and Political (...): W^n by the most ^nourable George Duk^ o^
Al^, ^l.

Pr^s M^* o^ the univ^ Practice of Physic: Wri^ by (...) ^mous Doctor Br^ell,
Qu^.

The Christian m^ns Victory ov^r Death. A S^ (...) of the mos^ Honorable
George D^ of Al^. By S^h Lord Bishop of S^m. Pr^d and published by the Kings
sp^ Comm^nd, Qu^.

A priv^ Con^nce made public, between a ri^h A^an and a poor Country Vicar;
wh^in is discoursed the Obligation of Oaths which h^ve been imposed on the
Subjects of England, with other ma^rs relating to the present state of Affairs,
O^.


