LOGOY THPSKEIA: OR, A Seasonable Recommendation, and Defense OF REASON, In the
Affairs of RELIGION; AGAINST Infidelity, Skepticism, and Fanaticisms of all
sorts.

LONDON, Printed by E. C. and A. C. for James Collins at the King's Head in
Westminster Hall. 1670.

AD CLERUM.
Romans XII. the latter part of verse 1. -- Which is your reasonable Service.


THERE is nothing, that I know, has done so much mischief to Christianity, as
the disparagement of Reason, under pretense of respect, and favor to Religion;
since hereby the very Foundations of the Christian Faith have been undermined,
and the World prepared for Atheism. For if Reason must not be heard, the Being
of a GOD, and the Authority of Scripture can neither be proved, nor defended;
and so our Faith drops to the ground, like a House that has no foundation.
Besides, by this way, those sickly conceits, and Enthusiastic dreams, and
unsound Doctrines, that have poisoned our Air, and infatuated the minds of
men, and exposed Religion to the scorn of Infidels, and divided the Church, and
disturbed the peace of mankind, and involved the Nation in so much blood, and
so many Ruins; I say hereby, all these fatal Follies, that have been the
occasions of so many mischiefs, have been propagated, and promoted. So that I
may affirm boldly, That here is the Springhead of most of the waters of
bitterness, and strife; and here the Fountain of the the great Deeps of
Atheism, and Fanaticism, that are broken up upon us.

And now, to damme up this source of mischiefs, by representing the fair
agreement that is between Reason, and Religion, is the most seasonable service
that can be done unto both; since hereby, Religion will be rescued from the
impious accusation of its being groundless, and imaginary: And Reason also
defended, against the unjust charge of those, that would make this beam of God,
profane, and irreligious. This I shall endeavor at this time; and I think it
proper work for the occasion, now that I have an opportunity of speaking to You
Reverend Fathers, and Brethren of the Clergy; For it is from the Pulpit,
Religion has received those wounds through the sides of Reason; I do not say,
and I do not think, It has from yours; But we know, that indiscreet, and hot
Preachers that had entertained vain, and unreasonable Doctrines, which they had
made an interest, and the badges of a party; perceiving that their darling
opinions could not stand, if Reason, their enemy, were not discredited; They
set up a loud cry against Reason, as the great adversary of Free Grace, and
Faith, and zealously endeavored to run it down, under the misapplied names of
Vain Philosophy, Carnal Reasoning, and the wisdom of this world: And what has
been the Issue of those cantings, we have sadly seen, and felt. So that, I
think it is now the duty of all sober, and reasonable men to rise up against
this spirit of Folly, and infatuation: and some thing I shall attempt at
present, by showing, that Reason is very serviceable to Religion; and Religion
very friendly to Reason; both which are included in these words of the Apostle.

-- WHICH IS YOUR REASONABLE SERVICE. He had proved in the preceding part of
this Epistle, That the Gospel was the only way of happiness, and here, he
enters upon the application of this Doctrine, and affectionately exhorts his
Romans, to conform themselves unto It. I beseech you therefore Brethren by the
mercies of God, that you present your bodies: By which no doubt he means, their
whole persons, For they are to be a living sacrifice; Living; in opposition to
the dead services of the Ceremonial Law; Holy, acceptable unto God; in
opposition to those legal performances, that had no intrinsic goodness in
them, and were not acceptable now that their institution was determined. And
the motives whereby he enforces his exhortation are these two, viz. The
Mercies of GOD, which the Gospel has brought, and propounded; I beseech you
Brethren by the mercies of God; And the Reasonableness of the thing it self
that he urges them to, -- Which is your Reasonable Service.

My business is with this latter, and I infer from it:

That Religion is a reasonable thing.

IN treating of this Proposition I shall (I.) State what I mean by Religion,
and what by Reason. (II.) I shall demonstrate their harmony, and agreement.
(III.) Indeaveur to disable the main Objections that are alleged against the
use of Reason, in the affairs of Faith. And (IV.) Improve all by some
Inferences, and Advices.


TO BEGIN with the first, the settling the distinct Notions of Religion, and
Reason. We know there is nothing in any matter of enquiry, or debate that can
be discovered, or determined 'till the Terms of the Question are explained, and
their Notions settled. The want of this, has been the occasion of a great part
of those Confusions we find in Disputes, and particularly most of the Clamours,
that have been raised against Reason in the affairs of Religion, have sprung
from men's mistakes of the nature of both. For while groundless opinions, and
unreasonable practices are often called Religion on the one hand; and vain
imaginations, and false consequences are as frequently styled Reason on the
other; It Is no wonder that such a Religion disclaims the use of Reason, or that
such Reason is opposite to Religion. Therefore, in order to my showing the
agreement between true Religion, and genuine Reason, I shall, with all that
clearness that I can, represent the just meaning of the one, and of the other.

FOR Religion First; the name signifies Binding, and so imports duty; and all
duty is comprised under these two Generals, Worship, and Virtue; Worship
comprehends all our duties toward God; Virtue all those, that relate to our
Neighbor, or our selves. Religion then primarily consists in these, which are
the sum of the Law, and the Prophets. But duty cannot be performed, without
knowledge, and some Principles there must be, that must direct these Practices;
And those that discover, and direct men in those actions of duty, are called
Principles of Religion. These are of two sorts, viz. Some are (1.) Fundamental,
and Essential; others (2.) accessory and assisting. Fundamental is a Metaphor
taken from the foundation of a building; upon which the Fabric stands, and
without which, it must sink to the ground: So that Fundamental Principles are
such, as are supposed to the duties of Religion, one or more; and such as are
absolutely necessary to the performance of them respectively: Of this sort I
mention four, viz. (I.) That there is a God of infinite perfection. The belief
of this, is absolutely necessary to all the parts of Religion. (II.) That we
are sinners and exposed to his displeasure. This is necessary to confession of
sins, and repentance; parts of Worship. (III.) That God is our Maker, and the
Author of all our blessings. This is necessary to the Duties of prayer, praise,
and adoration. (IV.) That there is Moral Good, and Evil: Without this there can
be no Charity, Humility, Justice, Purity; or the rest.


These Propositions I say are Fundamentals of Religion, for It supposes, and
stands upon them. There are others, which are not so absolutely necessary, as
these, but yet very encouraging, and helpful; I reckon Four here also: Viz.
(1.) THAT God will pardon us, if we repent. (2.) THAT he will assist us, if we
endeavor. (3.) THAT he will accept of Services that are imperfect, if they are
sincere. (4.) THAT he will reward, or punish, in another world according to
what we have done in this.


This I count to be the sum of Religion general: and Christianity takes in
all those Duties; and all the Principles; advancing the Duties to nobler
measures; and encouraging them by new motives, and assistances, and superadding
two other instances, Baptism, and the Lords Supper. And for the Principles, It
confirms those of natural Religion; and explains them further, and discovers
some few new ones; And all these, both of the former, and the latter sort, are
contained in the Creed. Here are all the Fundamentals of Religion, and the main
assisting Principles also. And I call nothing else Religion, but plain Duties,
and these acknowledged Principles, And though our Church require our assent to
more Propositions; yet those are only Articles of Communion, not Doctrines
absolutely necessary to salvation. And if we go beyond the Creed for the
Essentials of Faith; who can tell where we shall stop? The sum is, Religion
primarily is Duty; And duty is All that which God has commanded to be done by
his Word, or our Reasons; and we have the substance of these in the
Commandments: Religion also in a secondary sense consists in some Principles
relating to the Worship of God, and of his Son, in the ways of devout, and
virtuous living; and these are comprised in that Summary of belief called the
Apostles Creed.

This I take to be Religion; and this Religion I shall prove to be reasonable:
But I cannot undertake for all the Opinions some men are pleased to call
Orthodox; nor for all those that by many private persons, and some Churches are
counted essential Articles of Faith, and Salvation. Thus I have stated what I
mean by Religion.

THE OTHER thing to be determined, and fixed, is, the proper Notion of Reason.

For this you may please to consider, that Reason is sometimes taken for Reason
in the Faculty, which is the Understanding; and at other times, for Reason in
the object, which consists in those Principles, and Conclusions by which the
Understanding is informed. This latter is meant in the dispute concerning the
agreement, or disagreement of Reason, and Religion. And Reason in this sense,
is the same with natural truth, which I said is made up of Principles, and
Conclusions. By the Principles of Reason we are not to understand the Grounds
of any man's Philosophy; nor the Critical Rules of Syllogism; but those imbred
fundamental notices, that God has implanted in our Souls; such as arise not
from external objects, nor particular humors, or imaginations; but are
immediately lodged in our minds; independent upon other principles or
deductions; commanding a sudden assent; and acknowledged by all sober mankind.
Of this sort are these.

That God is a being of all perfection. That nothing has no Attributes. That a
thing cannot be, and not be. That the whole is greater than any of its parts.
And such like others, which are unto Us, what instincts are to other Creatures.
These I call the Principles of Reason. The Conclusions are those other notices,
that are inferred rightly from these; and by their help from the observations
of sense; And the remotest that can be conceived, of all these, if it be
rightly inferred from the Principles of Reason, or duly circumstantiated sense,
is as well to be reckoned a part, and branch of Reason as the more immediate
conclusions, that are principles in respect of those distant truths. And thus I
have given an account also of the proper notion, and nature of Reason.
I AM to show next (2.) That Religion is reasonable; and this implies two
things, viz. That Reason is a friend to Religion; and that Religion is so to
Reason. From these two, results their correspondence, and agreement.

I begin with the FIRST: and here I might easily show the great congruity that
there is between that light, and those Laws, that God has placed in our Souls;
and the duties of Religion that by the expressness of his written Word he
requires from us; and demonstrate that Reason teaches All those, excepting
only the two Positives, Baptism, and the holy Eucharist. But there is not so
much need of turning my discourse that way; and therefore I shall confine it to
the Principles of Religion. which are called Faith, and prove that Reason
mightily befriends these.

It does this (I.) By proving some of those Principles; and (II.) By defending
all. For the clearing both these, you may consider, That the Principles of
Religion are of two sorts: Either (1.) such as are praesupposed to Faith; or
such as (2) are formal Articles of it. Of the first sort are; The Being of a
God; and the Authority of the Scripture. And of the second, such as are
expressly declared by divine Testimony; As the Attributes of God; the
Incarnation of his Son, and such like.

(I.) For the former they are proved by Reason; and by reason only. The others
we shall consider after.

(I.) That the Being of a God, the foundation of all, is proved by reason, the
Apostle acknowledges, when he says, That what was to be known of God, was
manifest; and to the Heathen, Romans I.XIX. and he adds, ver. XX. That the
invisible things from the Creation of the World, are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made. And the Royal Psalmist speaks to the
like purpose, Psalm. XIX. The Heavens declare the Glory of God, and the
Firmament shows his handy works. And again, Psalm. 148.3. Praise him Sun, and
Moon, praise him ye Stars, and Light; which intimates, that these Works of his
afford matter to our reasons for religious acknowledgments. And reason proves
the existence of God, from the beauty, and order, and ends, and usefulness of
the Creatures; for these are demonstrative arguments of the being of a wise,
and omnipotent mind, that has framed all things so orderly, and exactly; and
that Mind is God. This Article then, Reason proves, which was the first branch
of the particular; and I add, that it is Reason only that can do it; which was
the other. This you will see when you consider, that there are but three things
from whence the existence of any being can be concluded, viz. Sense,
Revelation, or Reason.

For Sense, it has no more to do here but to present matter for our Reasons to
work on; and Revelation supposes the being of a God, and cannot prove it; for
we can have no security that the Revelation is true, 'till we are assured it is
from God; or from some Commissioned by him. The knowledge of his Being
therefore, must precede our Faith in Revelation; and so cannot be deduced from
it. Thus Reason befriends Religion by laying its corner stone.

And the next to this is the other Principle mentioned.

(II.) The divine Authority of Scripture. This also is to be proved by reason,
and only by It. The great argument for the truth of Scripture is the Testimony
of the Spirit in the miracles wrought by Christ, and his Apostles. Our Savior
himself uses this argument to gain credit to his Doctrines, Believe me for the
works sake; The works that I do bear testistimony of me; and if I had not done
among them the works that no other man did they had had no sin, Joh. 15.24. And
the Apostles continually urge that great miracle, the Resurrection of Christ
from the dead for the conviction both of the Jews, and Gentiles, That he was
the Son of God; and his Doctrines true. Now Miracles are an Argument to our
Reasons, and we reason from them thus: Miracles are Gods Seal, and they are
wrought by his Power, and He is true, and good, and would not lend these to
Impostours to cheat, and abuse mankind. Therefore whoever works real miracles
for the confirmation of any doctrine, it is to be believed that He is taught of
God, and Commissioned to teach us. And that Christ, and his Apostles did those
things which are recorded of them, is matter of Testimony; and Reason clears
the validity of this, by the aggregation of multitudes of Circumstances, which
show, that the first Relators could not be deceived themselves, and would not
deceive us; nor indeed could in the main matters, if they had designed it. And
the certainty of the conveyance of these things to us is evinced also by
numerous convictive Reasons: So that, the matter of fact is secure; and that
such doctrines were taught, as are ascribed to those divine persons; and those
persons inspired that penned them, are proved the same way: And so it follows
from the whole, that the Gospel is the Word of God; and the Old Testament is
confirmed by that. Thus Reason proves the Divine Authority of Scripture: and
those other Arguments that use to be produced for it, from Its style, and Its
influence upon the Souls of men; from the excellency of its design; and the
Providence of God in preserving it; are of the same sort, though not of the
same strength. Reason then proves the Scriptures; and this only; For that they
are from God, is not known immediately by sense; and there is no distinct
Revelation that is certain, and infallible to assure us of it; and so Reason
only remains to demonstrate this other Fundamental Article.

These two great Truths, The Existence of God; and Authority of Scripture, are
the first in our Religion; and they are Conclusions of Reason; and Foundations
of Faith. Thus briefly of those Principles of Religion that are Fundamentally
such; We have seen how Reason serves them, by demonstrating their Truth, and
certainty.

I COME now to the SECOND sort of Principles; viz. those that are formally so;
They are of two sorts, mixed and pure; The mixed are those that are discovered by
reason, and declared by Revelation also; and so are Principles both of Reason,
and Faith: Of this kind are the Attributes of God; Moral good, and evil; and
the immortality of humane souls. The Principles of pure Faith, are such as are
known only by Divine Testimony, as the Miraculous Conception, the Incarnation,
and the Trinity. The first sort Reason proves as well as Scripture, this I show
briefly in the alleged instances.

(1.) That the Divine Attributes are revealed in the Holy Oracles, it is clear;
and they are deduced from Reason also; For it is a general Principle of all
Mankind, That God is a Being absolutely perfect; And hence Reason concludes all
the particular Attributes of his being; since Wisdom, Goodness, Power, and the
rest are perfections, and imply nothing of imperfection, or defect; and
therefore ought to be ascribed to the infinitely perfect Essence. (2.) That
there is moral good* and evil,s discoverable by Reason, as well as Scripture.
For these are Reasons Maxims; That every thing is made for an end; and every
thing is directed to its end by certain Rules: these Rules in Creatures of
understanding, and choice, are Laws, and the transgressing these, is Vice, and
Sin. (3.) The immortality of our Souls is plain in Scripture, and Reason proves
it, by showing the Spirituality of our natures; and that it does from the
nature of Sense; and our perception of spiritual Beings, and Universals; Of
Logical, Metaphysical, and Mathematical Notions; From our compounding
Propositions; and drawing Conclusions from them; From the vastness, and
quickness of our Imaginations; and Liberty of our Wills, all which are beyond
the powers of matter, and therefore argue a Being that is spiritual, and
consequently immortal, which inference, the Philosophy of Spirits proves. Also,
the Moral Arguments of Reason from the goodness of God, and his Justice in
distributing rewards and punishments; the nature of virtue, and tendencies of
religious appetites, conclude, I think, strongly, That there is a life after
this. Thus in short of the Principles, I called mixed, which Reason
demonstrates.
BUT for the others, viz. (II.) Those of pure Revelation, Reason cannot prove
them immediately; nor is it to be expected that it should: For They are matters
of Testimony; and we are no more to look for immediate proof from Reason of
those things, than we are to expect, that abstracted reason should demonstrate,
That there is such a place as China; or, that there was such a man as Julius
Caesar. All that it can do here, is to assert, and make good the credibility,
and truth of the Testimonies that relate such matters: and that it does in the
present case, proving the Authority of Scripture; and thereby in a remoter way,
It demonstrates all the Mysteries of Faith, which the divine Oracles
immediately discover. And it is no more disparagement to our Reasons, that they
cannot evince those Sacred Articles by their own unaided force, than it is a
disgrace unto them, that they cannot know that there are such things, as
Colors, without the help of our eyes; or that there are Sounds, without the
faculty of hearing. And if Reason must be called blind upon this account,
because it cannot know of it self such things, as belong to Testimony to
discover; the best eyes in the world may be so accounted also, because they are
not sagacious enough to see sounds; and the best Palate dull, and dead, because
it cannot taste the Sunbeams.

But though I have said, that Reason cannot of it self, immediately prove the
truths of pure Revelation; Yet (1.) it demonstrates the divine Authority of the
Testimony that declares them; and that way proves even these Articles. If this
be not enough,

I add the second Assertion, (II.) That Reason defends all the Mysteries of
Faith and Religion: and for this, I must desire you to take notice, that there
are two ways, whereby any thing may be defended, viz. Either (1.) By showing
the manner how the thing is; or, if that cannot be done, by showing (2.) That
it ought to be believed though the manner of it be not known: For instance, if
any one denies all sorts of Creatures were in the Arc under pretense, that it
is impossible they should be contained within such a space; He that can show
how this might be, by a distinct enumeration of the kinds of Animals, with due
allowance for the unknown Species, and a computation of the particular capacity
of the Arc; he defends the Sacred History the first way: But if another denies
the conversion of Aaron's rod into a Serpent, upon the same account, of the
unconceivableness of the manner, how it was done; this cannot indeed be
defended the former way: But then it may, by representing that the power of God
is infinite; and can easily do what we cannot comprehend, how it is effected;
and that we ought to believe upon the credit of the Testimony ( that being well
proved to us) though the manner of this miraculous performance, and such others
as it relates, be unknown. And as it is in this last case, so it is in all the
mysteries of Faith, and Religion; Reason cannot defend them indeed the first
way: But then it does the second by showing, that the Divine Nature is
infinite, and our Conceptions very shallow, and finite; that it is therefore
very unreasonable in us to endeavor to pry into the secrets of his Being, and
actions; and to think that we can measure, and comprehend them: That we know
not the Essence, and ways of acting of the most ordinary, and obvious things of
Nature, and therefore must not expect thoroughly to understand the deeper things
of God; That God has revealed those holy Mysteries unto us; and that it is the
highest reason in the world to believe, That what He says is true, though we
do not know how these things are. These are all considerations of Reason, and
by the proposal of them, It sufficiently defends all the Mysteries, that can be
proved to be contained in the Sacred Volumn; and shows that they ought to be
received by us, though they cannot be comprehended. Thus if any one should ask
me, How the Divine Nature is united to the Humane? and declare himself
unwilling to believe the Article till he could be satisfied how; My answer
would be in short, That I cannot tell; and yet I believe it is so; and he ought
to believe the same, upon the credit of the Testimony, though we are both
ignorant of the manner. And I would suggest, that we believe innumerable things
upon the evidence of our senses, whose nature, and properties we do not know.
How the parts of matter cohere; and how the soul is united to the body; are
questions we cannot answer; and yet that such things are, we do not doubt: And
why, says Reason, should we not believe Gods revelation of things we cannot
comprehend; as well as we do our senses about matters as little understood by
us? It Is no doubt reasonable that we should, and by proving it is so, Reason
defends all the propositions of Faith, and Religion. And when some of These are
said to be Above reason, no more is meant, than that Reason cannot conceive how
those things are; and in that sense many of the affairs of nature are above it
too.

Thus I have shown how serviceable Reason is to Religion. I am next to prove,

(II.) That Religion befriends it: and here I offer some testimonies from the
holy Oracles to make that good; and in them we shall see, how GOD himself, and
CHRIST, and his APOSTLES, do own, and acknowledge Reason.

I consider then that GOD, Isa. 1.18. calls the rebellious Israelites to reason
with him; Come now, and let us reason together says the Lord; and by reason he
convinces the people of the vanity of Idols, Isa. 44 9. And he expostulates
with their Reasons, Ezekiel. 18.31. Why will ye die ye house of Israel? And Mich.
6.3. O my people what have I done unto thee? And wherein have I wearied thee?
Testify against me. He appeals unto their Reasons, to judge of his
proceedings. Isa. 5.3. And now O inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah,
judge I pray you between me, and my vineyard; are not my ways equal? and are
not your ways unequal? In this he intimates the competency of their Reasons to
judge of the equity of his ways, and the iniquity of their own.

And OUR SAVIOR Commands the Disciples of the Pharisees to give unto Caesar
the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things that are Gods; implying the
ability of their Reasons to distinguish between the things, that belonged to
God, and those, that appertained to Caesar. And he in diverse places argues from
the Principles, and Topics of Reason. From that which we call, a Majori ad
Minus, from the greater to the less, John 13.14. He shows it to be the duty of
his Disciples to serve their brethren in the meanest Offices, and to wash one
another feet, because he had washed theirs, Ver. 14. enforcing it by this
consideration of reason; for the Servant is not greater than his Lord; Ver. 16
and uses the same, John 15.20. to show, that they must expect persecution,
because He, their Lord, was persecuted. And Luke 12.23. He endeavors to take
them off from carking care and solicitude about Meat, and Raiment, by this
consideration from reason, that the Life is more than Meat, and the Body than
Raiment; intimating that God having given them the greater, there was no doubt,
but he would bestow the less, which was necessary for the preservation of that.
To these instances I add some few from the Topic A Minori ad Majus, from the
less to the greater, in the arguings of our Savior. Thus Mat. 7.11. If ye
being evil know how to give good gifts to your Children, how much more shall
your Father which is in heaven give good things to those that ask him? The
ground of the Consequence is this Principle of Reason, That God is more benign,
and gracious than the tenderest, and most affectionate of our earthly Parents.
So Luke 12.24. He argues, that God will provide for Us, because he does for the
Ravens, since we are better than they; How much more are ye better than the
Fowls? Which arguing supposes this Principle of Reason, that that wisdom, and
goodness which are indulgent to the viler Creatures will not neglect the more
excellent. He proceeds further in the same Argument by the consideration of
Gods clothing the Lillies, and makes the like inference from it, Ver. 28. If
God so cloth the grass, how much more will he cloth you? And Mat. 12. He
Reasons that it was lawful for him to heal on the Sabbath day, from the
consideration of the general mercy that is due even to brute Creatures; What
man shall there be among you that shall have one sheep, and if it fall into a
Pit on the Sabbath day, will he not lay hold of it, to lift it out? How much
then is a man better than a sheep? Ver. 12. Thus our Savior used arguments of
Reason.

And the APOSTLES did so very frequently. St. Paul disproves Idolatry this way,
Acts 17.29. Forasmuch then as we are the Offspring of God, we ought not to
think, that the Godhead is like unto Gold, or Silver, or Stone graven by Art.
And the same Apostle proves the resurrection of the dead by the mention of
seven gross absurdities that would follow the denial of it, 1 Cor. 1.15. viz.
If the dead rise not, Then 1. Christ is not risen; And then 2. our Preaching is
vain, and we false Apostles; And if so, 3. your Faith is vain; And then 4. you
are not justified, but are in your sins; And hence it will follow 5. That those
that are departed in the same Faith are perished; And then 6. Faith in Christ
profits only in this life; And if so, 7. we are of all men the most miserable,
Because we suffer all things for this Faith; From Ver. 14 to ver. 19. And the
whole Chapter contains Philosophical Reasoning either to prove, or illustrate
the Resurrection; or to show the difference of glorified bodies, from these.
And St. Peter, in his second Epistle, Chap. 2. shows, that sinful men must
expect to be punished, because God spared not the Angels that fell. Instances
in this case, are endless; these may suffice. And thus of the Second thing also
which I proposed to make good, viz. That Religion is friendly to reason, and
that appears, in that God himself, our Savior, and his Apostles own it; and
use arguments from it, even in affairs of Faith and Religion.

BUT Scripture, the Rule of Faith is pretended against it; and other
Considerations also: These therefore come next to be considered; and the
dealing with those pretensions was the

(III.) General I proposed to discuss.

AS for Arguments from Scripture against the use of reason, It Is alleged (1.)
From 1 Cor. 1. where it is said, That God will destroy the wisdom of the wise,
ver. 19. And the world by wisdom knew not God, ver. 21. And not many wise men
after the flesh are called, ver. 26. And God chose the foolish things of this
World to confound the wise, ver. 27. By which Expressions, of wisdom, and wise
it is presumed that Humane Reason, and rational men, are meant. But these
Interpreters mistake the matter much, and as they are wont to do, put arbitrary
interpretations upon Scripture, without ground. For by Wisdom here, there is no
cause to understand the reason of men; but rather the Traditions of the Jews;
the Philosophy of the disputing Greeks; and the worldly Policy of the Romans,
who were the (...), The Rulers of that World. That the Jewish learning in their
Law is meant, the Apostle intimates, when he asks in a way of Challenge, ver.
20. Where is the Scribe? And the word (...) signifies one that was skilled in
their Laws, and Customs. And that the Philosophy of the Greeks is to be
understood likewise, we have ground to believe from the other question in the
same verse; Where is the Disputer of this World? Which, though some refer, to
the Doctors among the Jews also, yet, I humbly think, it may more properly be
understood of the Philosophers among the Grecians, For the Apostle writes to
Greeks, and their Philosophy was notoriously contentious. And lastly, that the
worldly Policies of the Romans are included also, in this wisdom of this World,
which the Apostle vilifies, there is cause to think from the sixth verse of the
second Chapter, where he says, He spoke not in the wisdom of the Princes of
this World; And it is well known that Policy was Their most valued wisdom; Tu
regere imperio -- To govern the Nations, and promote the grandeur of their
Empire, was the great Design, and Study of those Princes of this World. Now all
these the Apostle sets at naught, in the beginning of this Epistle; Because
they were very opposite to the simplicity, and holiness, self-denial, and
meekness of the Gospel. But what is this to the disadvantage of Reason, to
which indeed those sorts of wisdom are as contrary, as they are to Religion?
And by this I am enabled,

(2.) To meet another Objection urged from 1 Cor. 2.14. But the Natural man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto
him; neither can he know them, because they ate spiritually discerned. Hence
the Enthusiast argues the Universal inability of Reason in things of Religion;
and Its Antipathy to them. Whereas I can apprehend no more to be meant by the
words, than this, viz. That such kind of natural men as those Scribes, and
Disputers, and Politicians, having their minds depraved, and prepossessed with
their own wisdom, were indisposed to receive this, that was so contrary unto
it. And they could not know those things of God, because they were spiritual,
and so would require a mind that was of a pure, and spiritual frame, viz. free
from that earthly wisdom of all sorts, which counts those things foolishness;
and which by God, is counted so it self. 1 Cor. 3.19. which place

(3.) Is used as another Scripture against reason. The wisdom of this World is
foolishness with God: But it can signify nothing to that purpose, to one, that
understands, and considers the Apostles meaning. What is meant by the wisdom of
this World here, I have declared already; And by the former part of my
Discourse it appears, that whatever is to be understood by it, our Reason
cannot; since that either proves, or defends all the Articles of Religion.

(4.) And when the same Apostle elsewhere, viz. 2 Cor. 1.12. says, that They
had not their conversation in fleshly wisdom; we cannot think he meant humane
reason by that; reason directs us to live in simplicity, and Godly sincerity,
which he opposes to a life in fleshly wisdom. By this therefore, no doubt, he
means the reason of our Appetites, and Passions, which is but sense and
imagination (for these blind guides are the directors of the Wicked) but not
the reason of our minds, which is one of those lights that illuminate the
Consciences of good men, and help to guide their actions. And whereas it is
objected,

(5.) From Col. 2.8. Beware lest any spoil you through Philosophy. I answer,
there is nothing can be made of that neither, for the disgrace of reason; for
the Philosophy the Apostle cautions against, is the same which he warns Timothy
of, 1 Timothy 1.4. Neither give heed to Fables and endless Genealogies that
minister Questions; calling these, profane, and vain bablings, and oppositions
of Science falsely so called, 2 Timothy 6.20. By all which, learned Interpreters
understand the pretended knowledge, of which the Gnostics boasted, which
consisted in the fabulous pedigrees of the Gods under the name of Aeones; and
it may be the Genealogies of which the Jews were so fond, and the disputing
Philosophy among the Greeks, which was properly, Science falsely so called, and
did minister Questions, and endless strife; I say it is very probable these
might be comprehended also: But Reason is no otherwise concerned in all this,
but as condemning, and reproving these dangerous follies.

THUS we see the pretensions from Scripture against Reason are vain. But there
are other Considerations by which it uses to be impugned, as,

(1.) OUR Reason is corrupted, and therefore is not fit to meddle in spiritual
matters.

To this I say, That Reason, as it is taken for the faculty of understanding,
is very much weakened, and impaired; It sees but little, and that very dully,
through a glass darkly, as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 13. And It is very liable
to be mislead by our senses, and affections, and interests, and imaginations;
so that we many times mingle errors, and false conceits with the genuine
dictates of our minds, and appeal to them, as the Principles of Truth, and
Reason, when they are but the vain Images of our Phancies, or the false
conclusions of ignorance, and mistake. If this be meant by the corruption of
Reason, I grant it; and all that can be inferred from it will be; That we ought
not to be too bold, and peremptory in defining speculative, and difficult
matters; especially not those, that relate to Religion, nor set our Reasonings
against the Doctrines of Faith, and Revelation. But this is nothing to the
disreputation of Reason in the object, viz. Those Principles of truth which are
written upon our Souls; or any Conclusions that are deduced from them: These
are the same that they ever were, though we discern them not so clearly as the
Innocent state did: They may be mistaken, but cannot be corrupted. And as our
understandings, by reason of their weakness, and liableness to error, may take
falsehoods for some of those; or infer falsely from those that are truly such; so
we know, they do the same by the Scriptures themselves, viz. they very often
misinterpret, and very often draw perverse conclusions from them; And yet we
say not, That the Word of God is corrupted, nor is the use of Scripture decried
because of those abuses. But here advantage will be taken to object again,

(2.) That since our natural understandings are so weak, and so liable to
mistake, they ought not to be used in the affairs of Religion; and 'twill
signify little to us that there are certain Principles of eternal Reason if we
either perceive them not, or cannot use them.

To this I answer, That if on this account we must renounce the use of our
natural understandings, Scripture will be useless to us also; For how can we
know the meaning of the words that express Gods mind unto us? How can we
compare one Scripture with another? How can we draw any Consequence from it?
How apply General Propositions to our own particular cases? How tell what is to
be taken in the Letter; what in the mystery, what plainly; what in a Figure?
What according to strict, and rigorous truth? What by way of accommodation to
our apprehensions? I say, without the exercise of our understandings, using the
Principles of Reason none of these can be done, and without them Scripture will
signify either nothing at all, or very little, to us. And what can Religion
get this way? This inference therefore is absurd, and impious. All that can
justly be concluded from the weakness of our understandings will be what I
intimated before, that we ought to use them with modesty, and caution; not that
we should renounce them. He is a madman, who, because his eyes are dim, will
therefore put them out.

But it may be objected further,

(3.) That which men call Reason is infinitely various, and that is reasonable
to one, which is very irrational to another; Therefore Reason is not to be
heard. And, I say, Interpretations of Scripture are infinitely various, and one
calls that Scriptural, which another calls heretical; Shall we conclude
therefore, That Scripture is not to be heard? Reason in itself, is the same all
the world over, though men's apprehensions of it are various, as the light of
the Sun is one, though colors, Its reflexes, are infinite. And where this is,
it ought not to be denied, because follies, and falsehoods pretend relation to
it; or call themselves by that name. If so, farewell Religion too.

But (4.) It Is Socinianism to plead for Reason in the affairs of Faith, and
Religion.

And I answer, It Is gross Phanaticism to plead against it. This name is
properly applicable to the enemies of Reason; But the other of Socinianism is
groundlesly applied to those that undertake for it; and it absurdly supposes
that Socinians are the only rational men; when as diverse of their Doctrines,
such as, The Sleep, and natural mortality of the soul, and utter extinction,
and annihilation of the wicked after the day of judgment, are very obnoxious to
Philosophy, and Reason. And the Socinians can never be confuted in their other
opinions without using Reason to maintain the sense, and interpretation of
those Scriptures that are alleged against them. It Is an easy, thing we know,
to give an ugly name to any thing we dislike; and by this way the most
excellent, and sacred things have been made contemptible, and vile. I wish such
hasty Censurers would consider before they call names; No truth is the worse,
because rash ignorance has thrown dirt upon it. I need say no more to these
frivolous objections. Those that allege Atheism, and tendency to Infidelity
against the reverence, and use of Reason are disproved by my whole discourse:
Which shows that the enemies of Reason most usually serve the ends of the
Infidel, and the Atheist; when as a due use of It, destroys the pretensions of
both.

I COME now (IV.) to the Inferences that may be raised from the whole.

1. Reason is certain, and infallible; This follows from the state I gave of
the nature, and notion of Reason in the beginning. It consists in First
Principles, and the Conclusions that are raised from them, and the observations
of sense. Now first Principles are certain, or nothing can be so; for every
possible Conclusion must be drawn from those, or by their help, and every
Article of Faith supposes them. And for the Propositions that arise from those
certain Principles, they are certain likewise; For nothing can follow from
truth, but truth in the longest series of deduction. If error creep in, there
is ill consequence in the case. And the sort of Conclusions that arise from the
observations of sense, if the sense be rightly circumstantiated, and the
inference rightly made, are certain also. For if our senses in all their due
circumstances deceive us, All is a delusion, and we are sure of nothing: But we
know that first Principles are certain, and that our senses do not deceive us,
because God, that bestowed them upon us, is true, and good. And we are as much
assured that whatever we duly conclude from either of them, is as certain,
because whatever is drawn from any principle, was vertually contained in it.
(2.) I infer, That Reason is, in a sense, the Word of God, viz. that, which he
has written upon our minds, and hearts; as Scripture is that, which is written
in a Book. The former is the Word, whereby he has spoken to all Mankind; the
latter is that, whereby he has declared his will to the Church, and his
peculiar people, Reason is that Candle of the Lord, of which Solomon speaks,
Prove. 20.27. That light, whereby Christ has enlightened every one that comes
into the world, John 1.9. And, that Law whereby the Consciences of the Heathen
either accuse, or excuse one another, Romans 2.15. So that Hierocles spoke well,
when he said, (...); To be persuaded by God and right reason is one and the
same thing. And Luther called Philosophy, within its own bounds, The truth of
God. (3.) The belief of our reasons is an exercise of Faith, and Faith is an
act of Reason; The former part is clear, from the last particular, and we
believe our Reasons because we have them from God, who cannot mistake, and will
not deceive. So that relying on them, in things clearly perceived, is trust in
Gods veracity, and goodness, and that is an exercise of Faith. Thus Luke 12.
The not belief of Reason, that suggests from Gods clothing the Lillies, that
He will provide for us, is made by our Savior, a defect of Faith, ver. 28. O
ye of little Faith! And for the other part, that Faith is an act of Reason,
that is evident also; For, It Is the highest reason to believe in God revealing.
(4.) No Principle of Reason contradicts any Articles of Faith. This follows
upon the whole. Faith befriends Reason; and Reason serves Religion, and
therefore They cannot clash. They are both certain, both the truths of God; and
one truth does not interfere with another, (...), says Aristotle, Truth agrees
with all things that are. Whatsoever contradicts Faith, is opposite to Reason;
for it is a fundamental Principle of that, That God is to be believed. Indeed
sometimes there is a seeming contradiction between them; But then, either
something is taken for Faith, that is but Fancy; or something for Reason, that
is but Sophistry; or the supposed contradiction is an error, and mistake. (5.)
When any thing is pretended from Reason, against any Article of Faith, we ought
not to cut the knot, by denying reason; but endeavor to unty it by answering
the Argument, and it is certain it may be fairly answered. For all Heretics
argue either from false Principles, or fallaciously conclude from true ones: So
that our Faith is to be defended, not by declaiming against Reason in such a
case (which strengthens the enemy, and, to the great prejudice of Religion,
allows reason on his side) But we must endeavor to defend it, either by
discovering the falsehood of the Principles he uses in the name of Reason; or
the ill consequence, which he calls, proof. (6.) When any thing is offered us
for an Article of Faith that seems to contradict Reason, we ought to see that
there be good cause to believe that this is divinely revealed, and in the sense
propounded. If it be, we may be assured from the former Aphorisms, that the
contradiction is but an appearance; and it may be discovered to be so. But if
the contradiction be real, This can be no Article of Revelation, or the
Revelation has not this sense. For God cannot be the Author of Contradictions;
and we have seen that Reason, as well as Faith, is his. I mean, the Principles
of Natural Truth, as well as those of Revelation. (...), says Aristotle, Truth
is throughout contrary to falsehood; and what is true in Divinity, cannot be
false in Reason. It Is said indeed in the Talmud, If two Rabbis differ in
Contradictories, yet both have their Opinions from Moses, and from God. But we
are not obliged to such a non-sensical kind of Faith; And ought not to receive
any thing as an Article in a sense, that palpably contradicts Reason, no more
than we may receive any in a sense that contradicts other Scriptures. Faith,
and Reason accord as well as the Old Testament, and the New; and the Analogy of
Reason is to be heeded also, because even that is Divine and Sacred. (7.) There
is nothing that God has revealed, to oblige our Faith, but he has given us
reason to believe that he has revealed it. For though the thing be never so
clearly told me, If I have not reason to think, that God is the Revealer of
what is so declared, I am not bound to believe, except there be evidence in the
thing it self. For it is not faith, but vain credulity to believe every thing
that pretends to be from God. So that we ought to ask our selves a Reason* why
we believe the Scripture to be the Revelation of Gods will, and ought not to
assent to any sense put upon it, 'till we have ground to think, that that sense
is his mind? I say, we must have ground, either from our particular Reasons; or
the Authority of the Church, otherwise our Faith is vain credulity, and not
faith in God. (8.) A man may hold an erroneous opinion from a mistaken sense of
Scripture, and deny what is the truth of the proposition, and what is the right
meaning of the Text; and yet not err in Faith. For Faith is belief of God
revealing: And if God have not so revealed this, or that, as to give us certain
ground to believe this to be his sense, he has not sufficiently revealed it to
oblige our Faith. So that, though I deny such, or such a sense, while I
believe, it is not from God; his veracity, and Authority is not concerned,
since I am ready however to give a cheerful assent to whatever is clearly, and
sufficiently revealed. This Proposition follows from the former, and must be
understood only of those Doctrines that are difficult, and obscurely delivered:
And that many things are so delivered in Scripture, is certain; For some are
only hinted, and spoken occasionally; some figuratively, and by way of Parable,
and Allegory; some according to men's conceptions; and some in ambiguous, and
Aenigmatical Phrases; which obscurities may occasion mistake in those, who are
very ready to believe what ever God says; and when they do, I should be loath
to say that such err in Faith; Though those that wrest plain Texts to a
compliance with their interests, and their Lusts, Though their affections may
bring their judgments to vote with them; yet theirs is error in Faith with a
witness; and capable of no benefit from this Proposition. (9.) In searching
after the sense of Scripture we ought to consult the Principles of Reason, as
we do other Scriptures. For we have shown, That Reason is another part of Gods
Word. And though the Scripture be sufficient to Its end, yet reason must be
presupposed unto It; for without this, Scripture cannot be used, nor compared,
nor applied, nor understood. (10.) The essentials of Religion are so plainly
revealed, that no man can miss them, that has not a mighty corrupt bias in his
will and affections to infatuate and blind his understanding. Those Essentials
are contained in the Decalogue and the Creed: Many speculative remoter
Doctrines may be true, but not Fundamental. For it is not agreeable to the
goodness, or justice of God, that men's eternal interests should depend upon
things that are difficult to be understood, and easily mistaken. If they did;
No man could be secure, but that, do what he could, he should perish
everlastingly for not believing; or believing amiss some of those difficult
points, that are supposed necessary to salvation; and all those that are
ignorant, and of weak understanding must perish without help, or they must be
saved by implicit Faith in unknown Fundamentals.
THESE are some Propositions that follow from my discourse, and from one
another. The better they are considered, the more their force will be
perceived; and I think they may serve for many very considerable purposes of
Religion, Charity, and the peace of mankind.

AND now give me leave to speak a word to You, my Brethren of the CLERGY, (
Those, I mean of the Younger sort, for I shall not presume to teach my Elders.)
You have heard, no doubt, frequent, and earnest declamations against Reason,
during the years of your Education; and Youth, we know, receives impressions
easily; And I shall not wonder if you have been possessed with very hard
thoughts of this pretended terrible enemy of Faith, and Religion: But did you
ever consider deeply since, what ends of Religion, or Sobriety, such vehement
defamations of our faculties could serve? And what Ends of a Party they did? I
hope these things you have pondered, as you ought, and discern the consequent
mischiefs: But yet, I shall beg leave to refresh your thoughts, with some
Considerations of the dangerous tendencies and issues of such Preachments.

(1.) To disclaim Reason, as an Enemy to Religion, tends to the introduction of
Atheism, Infidelity, and Skepticism; and has already brought in a flood of
these upon us. For what advantage can the Atheist, and Infidel expect greater,
than this, That Reason is against Religion? What do they pretend? What can they
propose more? If so, there will be no proving, That there is a God; or That the
Scripture is his Word; and then we believe gratis; and our Faith hangs upon
humor, and imagination; and that Religion that depends upon a warm Fancy, an
ungrounded belief, stands but, 'till a disease, or a new conceit alter the
Scene of imagination; and then down falls the Castle whose foundation was in
the Air. 'Twas the charge of Julian the Apostate against the Primitive
Christians; (...); That their only wisdom was to believe; as if they had no
ground for their Faith. And those that renounce, and decry Reason, justify
Julian in his charge. Thus Religion will have no bottom, but the Fancy of
every one that professes it; and how various, and inconstant a thing
Imagination is, every man knows. These are the Consequences of the defamations
of Reason, on the pretended account of Religion; and we have seen, in
multitudes of deplorable Instances, That they follow in practice, as well as
reasoning. Men of corrupt inclinations, suspect that there is No Reason for our
Faith, and Religion, and so are upon the borders of quitting it; And the
Enthusiast, that pretends to know Religion best, tells them, that these
Suspicions are very true; and thence the Debauchee gladly makes the desperate
Conclusion. And when others also hear Reason disparaged as uncertain, various,
and fallacious, they deny all credit to their Faculties, and become confounded
Scepticks, that settle in nothing. This I take to have been one of the
greatest, and most deadly occasion of the Atheism of our days; and he that has
rejected Reason, may be one when he pleases, and cannot reprehend, or reduce
any one, that is so already.

(2.) The Denial of Reason in Religion has been the principal Engine, that
Heretics, and Enthusiasts have used against the Faith; and that which lays us
open to infinite follies, and impostures. Thus the Arrians quarrelled with
(...), because it was deduced by consequence, but not expressed in Scripture.
The Apollinarists, would by no means allow of Reason; And St. Austin says of
the Donatists, that they did calumniate, and decry It, to raise prejudice
against the Catholic Faith; and elsewhere, Doctores vestri Hominem dialecticum
fugiendum potius, and cavendum, quam refellendum censuerunt. The Ubiquitarians
defend their Errors, by denying the judgment of Reason; and the Macedonians
would not have the Deity of the Holy Ghost proved by Consequence. The later
Enthusiasts in Germany, and other places, set up loud, and vehement out cries
against Reason; and the Lunaticks among us, (that agree in nothing else) do yet
sweetly accord in opposing this Carnal Reason; and this indeed is their common
Interest. The impostures of men's Phancies must not be seen in too much light;
and we cannot dream, with our eyes open. Reason would discover the nakedness of
Sacred Whimsies; and the vanity of mysterious nonsense; This would disparage
the darlings of the brain, and cool the pleasant heats of kindled Imagination:
And therefore Reason must be decryed, because an enemy to madness; and Fancy
set up, under the Notion of Faith, and Inspiration. Hence men had got the
trick, to call every thing that was Consequent, and Reasonable, Vain
Philosophy; and every thing that was Sober, Carnal Reasoning. Religion is set
so far above Reason, that at length it is put beyond Sobriety, and Sense; and
then 'twas fit to be believed, when 'twas impossible to be proved, or
understood. The way to be a Christian is first to be a Brute; and to be a true
Believer, in this Divinity, is to be fit for Bedlam. Men have been taught to
put out their eyes, that they might see; and to hoodwink themselves, that they
might avoid the Precipices. Thus have all extravagancies been brought into
Religion beyond the Imaginations of a Fever, and the Conceits of Midnight:
Whatever is phancied, is certain; and whatever is vehement, is Sacred; every
thing must be believed, that is dreamed; and every thing that is absurd, is a
Mystery. And by this way, men in our days have been prepared to swallow every
thing, but what is sober: whatever is wild, will be sucked in, like the Air;
but what is reasonable, will be fled like infection. So that if a man would
recommend any thing, for his life, to those enemies of Reason, it must be some
odd nonsense, in the clothing of Imagination; and He that can be the Author
of a new kind of madness, shall lead a Party. Thus has Religion by the
disparagement of Reason, been made a medley of Fantastic trash, spiritualized
into an heap of vapors, and formed into a Castle of Clouds; and exposed to
every wind of humor, and Imagination.

(3.) By the same way great advantage is given to the Church of Rome: Which
those of that Profession know very well; and therefore Perronius, Gonterius,
Arnoldus, Veronius, and other Jesuits, have loudly declaimed against Reason;
and the last mentioned, Veronius, presented the World with a Method to
overthrow Heretics, (meaning those of the Protestant Faith) which promised
more than ordinary; And that was, to deny, and renounce all Principles of
Reason in affairs of Faith absolutely, and roundly; and not to vouchsafe an
Answer to any Argument against Transubstantiation, or any other Article of
their new Faith; but point blank to deny whatever Reason says, in such
matters. And he affirms that even these Principles of Reason, viz. Non entis
non sunt Attributa; at omne quod est, quando est, necesse est esse; and such
like which are the foundations of all reasoning, are dangerous to the Catholic
Faith; and therefore not to be heeded. This man speaks out, and affirms
directly, and boldly, what the other enemies of Reason imply; but will not own.
This is a Method to destroy Heretics in earnest; but the mischief is, all
Christians, and all other Religions, and all other reasonings are cut off by
the same Sword. This Book, and Method of Veronius was kindly received by the
Pope, privileged by the King of Spain, approved by Cardinals, Archbishops,
Bishops, and all the Gallick Clergy, as solid, and for the advantage of Souls;
and the Sorbone Doctors gave it their approbation, and recommended it as the
only way to confute Heretics. Did these know what they recommended? And did
they, think we, understand the Interest of the Roman Church? If so, we kindly
serve their ends, and promote their Designs in the way, which they account
best, while we vilify, and disparage Reason? If This be renounced in matters
of Religion, with what face can we use it against the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, or any other Points of the Roman Creed? Would it not be
blameless, and irreprovable for us to give up our understandings implicitly to
the Dictates, and Declarations of that Church? May we not follow blindly
whatever the Infallible Man at Rome, and his Councils, say? And would it not be
vain self-contradiction to use Arguments against their Decrees, though they are
never so unreasonable? Or to allege Consequences from Scripture against any of
their Articles, though never so contrary to the Holy Oracles? How easily may
They rejoyn, when we dispute against them; You argue from Reason, and by
Consequences; But Reason is dull, and carnal, and an enemy to the things of the
Spirit, and not to be heard in the high matters of Religion? And what can we
say next, if we consent to the Accusation? I say, by this way, we perfectly
disable, or grossly contradict our selves in most of our disputes against the
Romanists: And we are very disingenious in our dealings, while we use Reason
against them, and deny It, when it is urged against our selves by another sort
of Adversaries: which implies, that when we say, Reason is not to be heard, we
mean, It Is not to be heard against us; But It must, against the Church of Rome;
or any others we can oppugn by It. Thus, I say, our denying Reason in Religion
is either very humoursome, and partial; or, it is a direct yielding up our
selves to our enemies, and doing that our selves, which is the only thing They
desire* to undo us, and to promote their own interests upon our Ruins.

And thus, My Brethen, I have represented some of the mischiefs, that arise
from the disparagement of Reason; and they are great ones, and big of many
others, and such, as are destructive to all Government, and all the Interests
of the sober part of mankind: And I hope I need not entreat You not to
contribute to the promoting, and continuance of so false and dangerous a
conceit. The assertion of this is properly Fanaticism; and all that we call so,
grows upon it. Here the enemies of our Church, and Government began; upon this
They insisted still; and filled their Books, and Pulpits, and private corners
with these Cantings. This was the Engine to overthrow all sober Principles, and
Establishments; with This the people were infatuated, and credit was reconciled
to Gibberish, and Folly; Enthusiasms, and vain Impulses. This is the food of
Conventicles to this day; the root of their matter, and the burden of their
Preachments. Let Reason be heard, and tie them to sense, and most of their
Holders-forth have no more to say. Their spirituality, for which they are
admired, is besides Reason, and against It, rather than above it; And while
this Principle of the enmity between Reason, and Religion stands, the people
will think Them the more Spiritual Preachers, because they are the less
reasonable: And while they are abused by such a belief, 'twill be impossible
for sober men to have any success in their endeavors to convince them.

These things I doubt not but you discern, and know; and therefore I add no
more, for I am sensible to whom I speak.

But, there are another sort, and those Conformists too, who are made Divines
by the Notes they formerly took from those Canters against Reason; To such, I
should not tell what to say, They will whine on, and vent their Iargon; to
persuade them to speak better sense, is to desire them to hold their peace;
which of all things they hate most* But I hope there are none of Those, here;
and I could wish the Government would take special care of them, where they
are; For they are the most dangerous enemies the Church of England has; They
keep alive the Principles of Fancy, and Faction, which otherwise would go out
of themselves. But I let them pass, and conclude with a short Advice to the
People.

I HAVE in the foregoing Discourse shown, with all the plainness, and
perspicuity, that I could, the fair agreement between Reason, and Religion; and
the mischiefs that arise from the opinion that sets them at odds. If what I
have said be not clear to your minds, it is because I could not help it: All
Subjects are not capable of being made alike plain to all Capacities; I have
all along designed distinct speaking, and have (as much as I could) avoided
mixture of Languages, and Terms of Art, that so you might apprehend that, in
which I take you to be much concerned, though I chiefly intended the Discourse
for my Reverend Brethren the Clergy, who I doubt not apprehend it fully.

What I have more to say to YOU is, That you would beware of those Teachers
that rail against Reason; For either they know not what they say; or have a
design to abuse you. Instead of hearkening to such, Endeavor to be informed of
the Reason of your Faith, and Hope: For we are fallen into times, in which you
will have frequent occasion to use it: And That faith which is reasonable will
not make you ashamed; and that hope which is well grounded will not disappoint
you; But the end of such an hope, will be the satisfaction of your desires, in
the day of your expectations; And the end of such a faith, the Salvation of
your souls in the day of the Lord Jesus. To whom, with God the Father, and God
the Holy Ghost, be ascribed all Glory, and Adoration henceforth, and for ever.

FINIS.

