Catholics NO IDOLATERS. Or a Full Refutation Of Doctor STILLINGFLEETS Unjust
Charge of Idolatry Against the CHURCH OF ROME.

Let not Them who charge the Pope to be Antichrist, and the Papists Idolaters,
lead the People by the Nose, to believe that they can prove their Supposition,
when They cannot. Mr. Thorndike, Just Weights and Measures, Chap. 2.

Printed in the Year, 1672.



TO THE QUEEN.
MADAM,
THe Book, before which I presume to fix Your Royal Name, being the Product of
some Hours defalkt from Your Majesty's Service, and the Subject of it
Polemical, set me for some time at dispute with my self, whether I should let
it venture to knock at Your Closet-Door. Your Early Preventing the Sun to
praise your Creator, and Constant Retirements from the Tumults of the World
(which I could wish were as much imitated as they are admired) to Unite Your
Soul by Prayer with Him, and establish it in that perfect Peace, which can only
be enjoyed in becoming One Spirit with Him, made me judge some Treatise of
Divine Love (which might minister matter to the Sacred Fire, that burns
continually upon the Altar of Your Heart) would suit much better with that
Better Part, which you have chosen with Mary, than a Book of Controversy. Here
then my thoughts were at a stand, how to make my Address without Offense; And I
was ready to complain with Martha, that I was left alone; when that Admirable
Mixture of Clemency and Zeal, which disposes Your Heroic Mind, not only to
forgive Offenses of this Nature; but to esteem and cherish them as Pious;
convinced me, I must be guilty of a greater Trespass, should I doubt of
obtaining either Your Pardon or Protection.

Nor was this All. The Glorious Saint, S. Catharine.
(whose Name You bear,) as she encouraged me with her Example to engage in this
Controversy; so much more to recommend my endeavors to Your Majesty's
Patronage. It was Her business to convince and reduce Idolaters to the Faith of
Christ: Mine, is to defend the Faith which Christ planted in his Church, from
the Imputation of Idolatry. An Aspersion so foul and Blasphemous, that it
betrays the Forger Calvin, Anagr. Lucian.
of it to be, what the Anagram of his Name expresses, a second Lucian.
Blasphemous, I say: For who-ever will undertake to maintain the Charge, must at
the same time profess that Christ, who commanded us under pain of damnation to
hear his Church, has permitted Her to require and enjoin her Children for many
hundreds of years together, to commit Idolatry (as my Adversary contends)
parallel to that of the Heathens. And consequently that Mahomet, (that grand
Impostor) whose Followers have been preserved by the Grounds he laid, for above
a Thousand Years, from falling into Idolatry, had more Wisdom and Power to
contrive and carry on his design, than the Son of God: and that our
Forefathers in this Land, had better have been converted to Judaism, or
Turcism, than to Christianity, as they were.

These, Madam, are the detestable Consequences of charging Idolatry upon the
Catholick-Roman Church; which, as they must needs strike horror into Your
Religious Soul (nay even of any who values the name of Christian) So I thought
it my Duty, being singled out by a particular desiance from this new Abettor of
it, to appear in Vindication of that Faith (on which Your MAJESTY grounds Your
Hope of Heaven, and whose Influence has enriched Your Mind with all the
Noblest Virtues) from so unjust and scandalous a slander. Which nevertheless I
have endeavored to manage with that Moderation and Temper, as (Circumstances
duly weighed) can neither create just Offense in the dissenting Party; nor I
hope render it mis-deserving to be presented to Your Majesty's View, by

MADAM, Your Majesty's Most Humble and Most Obedient Subject and Servant T. G.

THE PREFACE.
Christian Reader,
THough I never designed to trouble Thee with any thing in Print, especially in
a Contentious way (from which those who know me, think me to be naturally
averse) yet now, I am forced to appear publicly in defense of a little Paper,
which Another has Printed for me. Three Years were almost elapsed, and the
subject of that Paper quite worn out of my Memory, when a Particular Messenger
from Dr. Stillingfleet delivers me in Answer to it, a large Book entitled, A
Discourse concerning the Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome, etc. As
Civility obliged me to, return thanks for such a Present, to a Person, to whom
I thought I had been unknown; so it had been great dullness not to look upon it
with the same regard, that Men look upon a Glove, when sent by a Person, with
whom they have happened formerly to have some difference. Hereupon my thoughts
presently began to incline me to meditate a return both to his Civility and
Challenge, at least as to the Principal Heads contained in his Book; but
finding in his Preface, the performances of those, who had (as occasion served)
replied to some Passages of his Rational Account, compared by Him to the way
that Rats answer Books, by gnawing some of the Leaves of them, and that He
proclaimed a general defiance to All to come into the Open Field, from which,
he says, they had of late so wisely withdrawn themselves, I easily conceived
he would not want many abler Adversaries, who would take themselves to be
concerned to stand up for the Public cause of GOD's Church, and his Saints.
Nor was I deceived in my expectation, as those Learned Treatises witness, which
have been written against Him upon this occasion: Some of them in Vindication
of the Devotion of the Roman Church, and of the sanctity of those Persons whom
he traduces: Others against his Principles; One to show how he contradicts
himself; and another compendiously refuting his whole Book: All which I
supposed would cost him a larger time to answer, than he tells us he spent in
writing and pointing the Book it self, which he says, was but from about
Christmas to Midsumer, at what time it came forth. This made me waver a while,
after I had applied my thoughts to the Confutation of what first occurred in
his Title and Book, viz. The Charge of Idolatry, which he most unjustly fixes
upon the Church of Rome; whether I should expose them to public view or no.
But then considering the Foulness of the Charge, the particularness of the
Challenge, and the General Expectation to see him traced step by step, (which
was the design I had undertaken) I thought my self obliged to commit them to
the Press. And that the Reader may know what he is to expect from me, it is
that I have endeavored to make my self such an Adversary, as the Author of the
Account, Page 14.
(...). conceived would be a great pleasure and content of heart to Dr. St. if
he could meet with, viz. One who viewing his Aerie subtilties should oppose him
seriously, as if he were serious himself; and then distinguish, as if he were
dealing with some solid Divine; and then ply him with Proofs and Testimonies;
refell him by shorter Enthymems, and longer Syllogisms; search in what Mood and
Figure he speaks; and then tell him how his Consequence flaggs, or Antecedent
is Ambiguous, till he have consumed a hundred Pages in refutation of a Trifle.
This I confess is a Character of my present Undertaking; though not to the
full, because in the Prosecution of it, I shall be forced over and above to lay
open frequent Contradictions, Calumnies, and Mis-representations of the words
and sense of Authors, which can be no great pleasure nor content of heart to my
Adversary to see discovered. I was in good hope to have been freed from this
ungrateful task of laying open faults of this nature, (which cannot be treated
of without being named, nor named without offense) by the fair promise he makes
to represent the matters in difference between us truly, report faithfully, and
argue closely: And this Hope made me for a good while not exact that severity
of quoting Authors, which is required and expected in the managing of
Controversy; But since the necessity he has drawn upon himself, by defending
so Extravagant a Charge, as that of Idolatry upon the Roman Church, has made
him too often forget so good a purpose, I must beg his pardon, if at length I
take the freedom to make the Reader a little sensible of it, with that
Plainness which the Merits of the Cause will not only bear, but require: Of
which the Reader must be Judge.

Whether the Laurels he fancies he has acquired from his Adversaries, by their
declining, as he says, Personal Conferences, look as green and fresh to
others, as to himself, I very much question. For Meetings of this nature being
hardly to be undertaken by Catholics without exposing themselves to the Danger
of being accounted Bold and Insolent, and so of irritating His Majesty and the
Government against them; All sober and impartial Men will easily judge, that
they may be more prudently declined without prejudice to their cause; than
Arguments in writing (which is a much more peaceable and satisfactory way of
proceeding) be by their Adversaries (who run no such hazard) slighted, either
as Inconsiderable, or upon account of business, or upon a reasonable
Presumption that the Person concerned had already forsaken their Church. These
(and such like) may be Prudential Motives to them, to slight answering a Paper,
and also for declining Personal Conferences, as sometimes they have been; Yet
they must not be allowed at any time, for such to Catholics: Nay, even their
modest comp^rtment toward Authority, must go for no other than a Pretense only
of hazard; though we see a Private Paper (as this was, from which the Doctor
has taken occasion to make all this noise) published in Print with such
Characteristical Notes of the Author, as might easily discover his Person, and
in terms so Invidious, as were apt to create the greatest Prejudice against
him. Why else was he styled (and that upon every post and corner) a Revolted
Protestant, when Roman Catholic might have sufficed? And why was He made the
Proposer of the Questions, when the Party concerned proposed them indifferently
to both?

As for the Paper it self (which is now become the Subject of Debate) what
others may have thought or said of its not being answered I know not, but from
my Adversary's own Relation: nor does the Person taxed in particular, remember
any such thing. Besides I am certain, I never communicated any Copy of it, but
to the Party, for whose satisfaction it was written. Yet since my Adversary
has thought good to publish it, together with his own Answer to the two
Questions, at the beginning of his Book: I have judged ^it to do the same
before mine: not that I except against any thing as misrepresented in it,
besides some little Errors of the Press; but that I conceive it may be some
Satisfaction to the Reader in the perusing of this Rejoinder, to recur
sometimes to the first Papers; at least that he may clearly see, that the
Charge of Idolatry, was no way necessary to the Resolution of the Questions,
(as I shall show more at large in the First Chapter,) but merely brought in by
Him upon some other Account, which I am now to consider.

The Account Himself gives of reviving a Charge, which for many Years had lain
buried under the ruins of its own Infamy, was, as he pretends, to] Justify more
clearly the Separation of the Church of England, from the Guilt of Schism. For
this, he says, lies open to the Conscience of every Man, if the Church of Rome
(...) guilty of Idolatry, our separation can be no Schism either before God or
Man, because our Communion would be a Sin. This is what he pretends. Just
Weights, c. 1.
And this Cause indeed, (as Mr. Thorndike well observes) would be more than
sufficient to Justify the separation, did it appear to be true: but then on the
other side, says he, it charges the mischiefs of the Schism upon those who
proceed upon it, before it be as Evident as the Mischiefs are, which they run
into upon it. So that should the Church of England declare, that the change
which we call Reformation, is grounded upon this supposition, I must then
acknowledge, says he, that we are Schismatics. For the cause not appearing to
me (as hitherto it has not, and I think will never be made to appear to me)
the separation and the mischief of it, must be imputed to them that make the
change. -- In plain terms, We (of the Church of England) make our selves
Schismatics by grounding our Reformation upon this pretense. Thus Mr.
Thorndike, whose Judgment, abetted by diverse of the most learned and most
Judicious Persons of the Church of England, (and this is thought to be the
reason why the Doctor's Book came forth without the public stamp of an
Imprimatur from any of its Bishops) will stand as a convincing Prejudice
against him, till he can make it as evident that the Church of Rome is guilty
of Idolatry, as the mischiefs are that have ensued upon it.

This He saw was not possible to be done, and therefore laying those Divines
aside for Men of more charity, than Judgment, least he should be thought in so
severe a Censure, to contradict the sense of his Church (which, he says, he
has so great a regard to) he undertakes to show that this charge of Idolatry
has been managed against the Church of Rome, by the greatest and most learned
Defenders of it ever since the Reformation. But if he have such a regard, as he
says, for the Church of England, Why did he not appeal to her 39. Articles?
For as himself says (p. 209.) of the sense of the Church of Rome, that we are
to appeal for it, not to the Writings of particular Doctors, but to the Decrees
of her Councils; so in like manner for the sense of the Church of England, He
ought to have appealed to Her Publickly-Authorized Articles? But in them the
Church of England declares no such thing. For we see it hotly disputed between
her Divines, whether any of the three Points instanced by the Doctor, viz.
Veneration of Images, Adoration of the B. Sacrament, and Invocation of Saints,
be Idolatry, or no: and those who side least with that Party, which are called
Non-conformists, are for the Negative, Viz. that it is not Idolatry: whereas,
if it had been the sense of the Church of England in those Articles, that it
were Idolatry to do any of those things, they had by maintaining the contrary
as erroneous, incurred Excommunication, ips. facto. as appears by the Canons
Printed before the 39 Articles, set forth by Mr. Rogers.

Here therefore the Doctor to maintain his charge of Idolatry to be (as he
calls it) the received Doctrine and practice of the Church of England, is forced
to have recourse to the Book of Homilies; and to the Sentiments of Particular
Persons, of which he cites no less than Seventeen: the greatest part of whom I
shall show to be incompetent Witnesses in the case, and the rest, to speak
nothing to his Purpose.

First then for the Book of Homilies, which he says is not barely allowed, but
subscribed to as containing godly and wholesome Doctrine, Art. 35.
and necessary for these times: I answer, this does not Evince that every
particular Doctrine contained in it, is such. And therefore Mr. Thorndike
speaking of the very Homily against peril of Idolatry, Epil. 3. part. p. 363.
here urged by Dr. St. says, that in this particular he must have leave to
think it fails, as it evidently does in others. And Bish. Mountague says, The
Book of Homilies contains a general Godly doctrine, yet it is not in every part
the public dogmatical doctrine of the Church. Appeal, c. 23.
And Dr. Heylin in his necessary Introduction to Cyprianus Anglicus, p. 14.
tells us, that the vehemence used in those Homilies, was not against Images as
Intolerable in themselves, but as they might be made in those broken and
unsettled times an occasion of falling. But that People being well instructed in
the right use of them, Images may be still kept for good uses in Churches, and
for stirring up of devotion, in which respect they were called, says he, by
Pope Gregory, and not unfitly, the Lay-men's Books.

As for the particular Doctors he cites, I except against little less than two
parts of three of them, as Incompetent Witnesses in the Case. And in Order to
this I shall take the same measure, the Doctor himself puts into my hand, when
to show the Testimony of Arch bishop Whitgift to be valid in his cause, he
premises that none could be less suspected to be Puritanically inclined than
He; that is, I shall cast out of the List all those, who shall be found to have
been Puritans, or Puritanically inclined. And first for his two Archbishops
Whitgift and Abbot, the Former (though otherwise a stiff Asserter of the
Discipline of the Church of England) is known to have consented to the frameing
of the Lambeth Articles; Confer. at Hampton Court. page 20. 40.
and to have proposed them to the Divines of Cambridge: and the latter was so
great a Favourer and Abettor of the Puritan Party, that to stop them in their
full Carreer, Dr. Heylin says, Cyprian. Angl. p. 242.
it was found necessary to suspend Him from his Metropolitical Jurisdiction. of
Dr. White, the same Heylin reports, (p. 135.) that for Licensing Bishop
Mountague's Appello Caesarem, it was said, that White was turned Black. Jewel,
Bilson, and Davenant were all excepted against by our late Sovereign K. Charles
I. in his 3d. Paper to Hinderson, Dr. Fulk also (in Matthew. 28. 46.) is noted
for abetting Calvin in his blasphemous Opinion, that our Savior Christ
suffered in his Soul the very pains of a damned Person upon the Cross. Reynolds
and Whitaker are notorious for their siding with the Puritans: the latter being
a great stickler for the Lambeth Articles: and the Former appearing publicly
the Foreman or Champion of that Party at the Conference at Hampton Court
against the Church of England. Bishop Usher and Bishop Downam cannot be
excused: The story of the first is to be seen in Cyprianus Anglicus, p. 271.
where after many Calvinistical Opinions, of which the said Primate was the
Contriver in Ireland, Dr. Heylin says, he refused to receive the whole Body of
the Canons made in the year, 1603, because he was afraid of bowing at the name
of Jesus, and some other Reverences, which he neither practiced, nor approved:
and (p. 216.) that his Book called Gottescalchus, had run the same Fate of
being called in, with that of Bishop Downam 's about Perseverance, but that it
seemed not fit to put a public disgrace, upon the Primate of a Nation. By all
which it appears, that of Seventeen Authors He cites, to maintain his unjust
charge of Idolatry upon the Church of Rome, to be the sense of the Church of
England; no less than Eleven are shown to have been downright Puritans, or
Puritanically affected.

For the Six which remain, viz. Dr. Jackson, Dr. Field, Isaac Casaubon, Bishop
Andrews, Arch bishop Laud, and King James, whoever compares what the Doctor
cites out of them, with what they write in other places; nay, whoever
attentively considers but the very places cited by my Adversary, shall find,
that they do not impugn the Doctrine it self of the Church of Rome, or the
practice conformable to that Doctrine; but such things as they conceived to be
great abuses in the Practice of it. For Dr. Jackson, as cited by the Doctor,
does not say, that to give a honourary Veneration to Images, is Idolatry; but
to give divine honor to them, which he says, the Papists do; and the Papists
themselves deny. Bishop Andrews in like manner, gives for the reason of his
charge, that the Papists, do not merely pray to the Saints to pray for them,
but to give what they pray for, themselves; and the Papists profess they do no
such things. Dr. Field does not charge the Invocation of Saints, with Idolatry
and Superstition, but speaks only of the Idolatry and Superstition, which he
thought, but not truly, was committed in it. Archbishop Laud also (as his own
words declare) speaks of the practice of Adoration of Images in the Modern
Church of Rome, which he erroneously affirms to be too like to Paganism. And
so K. James, in the place cited by the Doctor (had He not so soon forgot his
promise of reporting faithfully) says expressly, that what He condemns, is
Adoring of Images (viz. with Divine Worship) praying to them, and imagining a
kind of sanctity to be in them, all which are detested by Catholics. And all
that he cites out of Isaac Casaubon, when He was employed by the King to
deliver His Opinion to Cardinal Perron, in the Invocation of Saints, was that
the Church of England did affirm, that some Particular Practices were joined
with great impiety. So that it is not the Doctrine of the Church of Rome, if
rightly practiced, which these Authors condemn of Idolatry, but the abuses they
conceived to be committed in the practice of it; as to give the Worship due to
God to an Image; to pray to it; or imagine any virtue or Divinity to be in it;
or to pray to the Saints, as to those who are to give us what we pray for,
themselves; All which are forbidden by the 2d. Nicen Council, and that of
Trent: and for other practices which the Dr. occasionally objects, they shall
be discussed in the following Discourse.

This being so as I have shown, and the Judgment of these Divines differing
only as more and less in the same kind, from what Mr. Thorndike, and other
learned Protestants pretend, when they reprove some practices as Idolatrous, or
at least in danger to be such: These last Six Authors cited by the Doctor,
ought to have been alleged for the contrary position of what He affirms, viz.
That the Church of Rome neither in her Doctrine, nor Practice, (conformable to
her Doctrine) is guilty of Idolatry. For whilst they impeach only some
Practices, which they judge different from the Doctrine, it is manifest, they
i^ply the Doctrine it self, and Practice, if conformable to it, not to be
Idolatrous.

Here then let the Reader judge, whether Dr. St, being (as He says) by command
publicly engaged in the defense of so excellent a cause, as that of the Church
of England against the Church of Rome, have not betrayed his trust, and his
Church too (if it be his) in advancing such a Medium to justify Her
separation, as contradicts the sense of that Church, if it be to be taken from
the sentiments of those who are esteemed Her true and Genuin Sons; and in the
Judgment of some of them, makes it in plain terms to be Schismatical: Which yet
will appear more clearly, if we consider how this Charge of Idolatry subverts
the very foundation of Ecclesiastical Authority in the Church of England. For
it being a received Maxim, and not denyable by any one of common sense, that
no Man can give to another that, which he has not himself, it lies open to the
Conscience of every man, that if the Church of Rome be guilty of Heresy, much
more if Guilty of Idolatry, it falls under the Apostles Excommunication (Gal.
1. 8.) and so remains deprived of the lawful Authority to use and exercise the
Power of Orders; and consequently the Authority of Governing, Preaching, and
Administering Sacraments, which those of the Church of England challenge to
themselves, as derived from the Church of Rome, can be no true and lawful
Jurisdiction, but usurped and Antichristian. This is what follows against the
Church of England from the charge of Idolatry upon the Church of Rome; and so
much the more as issuing from his Pen, who in his Irenicum (a Book very humbly
tendered by him to Consideration, after the Re-settlement of Episcopacy in the
Church of England) maintains that no particular Form of Church Government is De
Jure Divino; but mutable, as the Secular Magistrate, with the advice of learned
and experienced Persons, shall see convenient for State and Church; and
particularly, that the main Ground for settling Episcopal Government in this
Nation, was not any pretense of Divine Right, but convenience to the State, and
condition of the Church at the time of its Reformation; citing for it the
Testimony of Arch bishop Cranmer, and others. Mr. Foulis I know, speaking of
that Book, calls Him a Bold Fellow that Published it, and affirms, that he
little understood the compass and merit of that Controversy: I like not the
rudeness of these, and other expressions of like nature He there uses, and I
forbear to repeat; yet I could willingly join with Him so far in Charity, as to
impute it rather to Inadvertence than design in my Adversary, did not this new
charge of Idolatry seem but too apparently to be but a clinching of the nail
which He had driven before to the Head. For if the Form of Church Government be
mutable, as the Secular Power well-advised shall see reason, what greater
reason can there be for the actual changing of it, than the nullity of its
Jurisdiction? This has made me wonder not a little, how the Governors of the
Church of England could see their Authority so closely attacqued (at least so
manifestly betrayed) by their pretended Champion, and not vindicate themselves
and their Jurisdiction from the ^oul stain of Antichristian, which necessarily
follows, if the Church of Rome, as He pretends, be guilty of Idolatry* and they
derive together with their Consecration, their Episcopal Jurisdiction from it.
But I shall leave these things to those whom it concerns; and betake my self to
my present business, which is to show, that the Church of Rome neither in her
Doctrine, nor Practice, conformable to her Doctrine, is guilty of Idolatry. And
this I bid done much sooner, had not the Time spent i^ Transcribing, least the
Copy should be surprised; the Difficulty of the Press, (which also increased
the Errata;) and other Employments (...) a few, (for we also are none of those
happy Men, who have only one thing to mind) re^arded me in my design.

ERRATA.
IN the Preface, page 2. line 27. for Pointing, read Printing, p. 6. l. 8. r.
Dr. Tailor; that neither. p 25. l. 15. r. Question thus put. p. 35. l. 30. for
with, r. against. p. 38. l. 8. for couse, r. caus^. l. 9. for ers. r. eos. p.
41* l. 10 r. writings. p. 5^. l. 28. r. Beholders. p. 64 l* 12 r.
Irrepresentablenes. p. 80. l. 11. for the, r. his. p. 81. l. 18. f. seat* r.
State. p. 87. l. 6. f. did, r. drew. p. 92. l. ult. r. advantages. p. 124. l.
11. add in the Marg. Of the Church, li. 3. c. 36. p. 134. l. 3. f. cross. r.
Cross. p. 138. l. 23. r. ^ue that by p. 140. l. ult. f. rashly, r. vainly. p.
158. l. 27. r. Obcaecans. l. 27. f. that. r. that is. p. 161. l. 25. or
^magine, r. Imagine. l. 28. for Oracres, r. Oraces. p 172. l. 5. for in, r. me.
p. 178. l. 25. r. in this matter. p. 212. l. 27. for honor, r. comfort. p.
2^7. l 6. r. Wherefore. p. 246. l. 2. r. Begotten Son. p. 360. l. 30. f. first,
r. ^isth. p. 363. l. 2. after for Biu, put St. Nicholas; for Eru. p. 411. l. 7.
8. f. Paul. r. Paula. l. 23. Praises r. prays. p. 448. l. 17. f. Flood r.
Floods.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
PART I.
Of the Veneration of Holy Images.
Chap. 1. DR. Stillingfleet's 1st. and 2d. Answer to the First Question, shown
not pertinent. Necessity of Communion with the Church of Rome, proved; and his
Charge of Idolatry overthrown by his own Principles. Page 1. Chap. 2. His chief
Argument to prove the Church of Rome guilty of Idolatry, examined; and his
Preposterous ways of arguing laid open. Page 17. Chap. 3. The Mystery of making
the same Proposition sometimes an Article of Faith, and sometimes none. No
express Text against worshipping God by an Image. His first Proof from the
Terms of the Law, manifestly groundless. The Arguments from St. Austin's
Judgment, and the Septuagint's Translating the word Pesel, Idol, and not Image,
reinforced. Page 33. Chap. 4. The Doctor's Second Proof from the Reason of the
Law, sophistical. All Representations of God, not dishonorable to him, nor
rejected as such by the Church of England. The Proper Reason of the Law on
God's part is assigned; and asserted to be the Supreme Excellency of his
Nature. page 57. Chap. 5. Worship unlawful by the light of Nature, equally
unlawful to Jews and Christians. A strange Paradox advanced by Dr.
Stillingfleet, viz. What can an Image do to the heightning devotion, or raising
Affections? How far his Devotion to the Sun may be allowed in the Judgment of
St. Leo. page 76. Chap. 6. Of the Notions and practice of the Wiser Heathens in
the matter of their Images. The Texts of St. Paul, Acts 17. 24. and Romans 1. 21.
explained. Some of the Doctor's Testimonies examined; in particular, the
Relation He gives of what the Jesuits did in China. Page 95. Chap. 7. Of the
2d. General Council of Nice, called most irreverently by Dr. St. that wise
Synod. His Constantinopolitan Father's Objections answered by Epiphanius, and
his Answers shown to be go^d. page 118. Chap. 8. The Dr.'s Objection from the
Council of Franckford examined, and shown to be no advantage to his Cause. page
140. Chap. 9. Of the Doctor's Third Proof from the Judgment, as He pretends, of
the Lawgiver. His Speculation concerning the Golden Calves, manifestly
repugnant to the H. Scripture and Fathers. Mr. Thorndike's Judgment of the
Meaning and Extent of the second Commandment. page 153. Chap. 10. What kind of
honor the Church gives to Holy Images, explained; and the Doctor's mixing
School-disputes with matters of Faith, shown to be sophistical. page 176. Chap.
11. Of the Instances brought to explicate the nature of the honor given to
Images, from the like Reverence given to the Chair of State, to the Ground, to
the Ark, to the Name of Jesus, etc. The weakness of the Doctor's Evasions laid
open; and His own Arguments returned upon Him. page 193.
PART II.
Of the Adoration of the most Blessed Sacrament.
Chap. 1. THe Practice of the Primitive Church in this Point. The Doctor's
Argument to prove it to be Idolatry, built upon an Injurious Calumny, that
Catholics believe the Bread to be God. The sense of his first Proposition
cleared, and the Proofs He brings for it, refuted. page 221. Chap. 2. The true
State of the Controversy laid open, together with the Doctor's endeavors to
mis-represent it. His manner of arguing against the Adoration of Christ in the
Eucharist, equally destructive to the Adoration of Him as God. page 243. Chap.
3. Of Dr. St.'s Scruple about the Host's not being consecrated for want of
Intention in the Priest: and his mistake of the true Reason of giving Adoration
to Christ in the Sacrament. page 256. Chap. 4. His Fundamental Principle of
judging of matters proposed to our Belief by Sense and Reason, shown to be
absurd in it self, and destructive to Christianity. p. 272. Chap. 5. A Check to
the Doctor's bigg words against the Grounds of Transubstantiation. With a New
Example of reporting faithfully (as he calls it) the words and sense of an
Author. page 294. Chap. 6. Dr. Taylor's Argument in behalf of Catholics,
supposing them mistaken in the belief of Transubstantiation, not answered by
Dr. St. The Parallel of such a supposed mistake, with that of Idolaters, shown
to be a real and very gross mistake in Himself. page 317.
PART III.
Of the Invocation of Saints.
Chap. 1. THe Doctrine of the Church of Rome in this Point, supposed by Dr. St.
to be Idolatry, but not proved. The disparity between the Worship given by
Catholics to the Saints, and that of the Heathens to their Inferior Deities
laid open. page 333. Chap. 2. What kind of Honor Catholics give to the
Saints. The Testimonies of Origin, and St. Ambrose explained. Of the practice
of making Addresses to Particular Saints. page 353. Chap. 3. What kind of
Worship of Angels was condemned by St. Paul, Theodoret, etc. with a farther
display of the disparity between the Heathens Worship of their Inferior
Deities, and that given by Catholics to Holy Angels and Saints. page 377.
Chap. 4. Of the Term, Formal Invocation, and the different Forms used in the
Invocation of Saints. Some Instances out of the Fathers, to show the like to
have been used in their Times. page 397. Chap. 5. The disparity assigned by Dr.
St. between desiring the Saints in Heaven, and Holy Men upon Earth, to pray for
us, shown to be Insignificant. page 414. Chap. 6. Of the practice of Christian
People in St. Austin's time, in the Invocation of Saints. page 430.
The Two Questions, whence Dr. Still. took Occasion to raise this Controversy.
1. WHether a Protestant having the same Motives to become a Catholic, which
one bred and born, and well grounded in the Catholic Religion, has to remain
in it, may not equally be saved in the profession of it?

2. Whether it be sufficient to be a Christian in the abstract, or in the whole
latitude; or there be a necessity of being a member of some distinct Church, or
Congregation of Christians?

His Answer to the aforesaid Questions.
The first Question being supposed to be put concerning a Protestant yet
continuing so does imply a contradiction, viz. That a Protestant continuing so,
should have the same Motives to become a Catholic (taking that term here, only
as signifying one of the communion of the Church of Rome) which those have who
have been horn or bred in that communion. But supposing the meaning of the
Question to be this, Whether a Protestant leaving the communion of our Church,
upon the Motives used by those of the Roman Church, may not be equally saved
with those who are bred in it? I answer,

1. That an equal capacity of salvation of those persons being supposed, can be
no argument to leave the communion of a Church, wherein salvation of a person
may be much more safe, than of either of them. No more, than it is, for a Man
to leap from the plain Ground into a Ship, that is in danger of being wrackt,
because he may equally hope to be saved with those who are in it. Nay,
supposing an equal capacity of Salvation in two several Churches, there can be
no reason to forsake the communion of the one for the other. So that to
persuade any one to leave our Church to embrace that of Rome, it is by no means
sufficient to ask whether such a one may not as well be sav^d, as they that are
in it already: but it is necessary, that they prove, that it is of necessity to
salvation to leave our Church, and become a Member of theirs: And when they do
this, I intend to be one of their number.

2. We assert, that all those who are in the communion of the Church of Rome,
do run so great a hazard of their Salvation, that none who have a care of their
Souls, ought to embrace it, or continue in it. And that upon these Grounds.

1. Because they must by the terms of communion with that Church, be guilty
either of Hypocrisy or Idolatry, either of which are sins inconsistent with
Salvation; Which I thus prove.

That Church which requires the giving the Creature the Worship due only to the
Creator, makes the Members of it guilty of Hypocrisy or Idolatry; for if they
do it, they are guilty of the latter, if they do it not, of the former; but the
Church of Rome in the Worship of God by Images, the Adoration of the Bread in
the Eucharist, and the formal Invocation of Saints, does require the giving to
the Creature the Worship due only to the Creator; therefore it makes the
Members of it guilty of Hypocrisy or Idolatry.

That the Church of Rome in these particulars does require the giving the
Creature the honor due only to God; I prove thus concerning each of them.

1. Where the Worship of God is terminated upon a Creature, there by their own
confession, the Worship due only to God is given to the Creature; but in the
Worship of God by Images, the Worship due to God is terminated wholly on the
Creature; which is thus proved: The Worship which God himself denies to
receive, must be terminated on the Creature: but God himself in the second
Commandment not only denies to receive it, but threatens severely to punish
them that give it. Therefore it cannot be terminated on God, but only on the
Image.

2. The same Argument which would make the gr^ssest Heathen Idolatry lawful,
cannot excuse any act from Idolatry, but the same argument, whereby the Papists
make the Worship of the Bread in the Eucharist not to be Idolatry, would make
the grossest Heathen Idolatry not to be so. For, if it be not therefore
Idolatry; because they suppose the bread to be God, then the Worship of the Sun
was not Idolatry by them who supposed the Sun to be God* and upon this ground,
the gr^sser the Idolatry was, the less it was Idolatry: for the gr^ss^st
Idolaters were those, who supposed their Statues to be Gods. And upon this
ground their Worship was more lawful, than of those who supposed them not to be
so.

3. If the supposition of a middle excellency between God and us, be a
sufficient ground for formal Invocation, then the Heathen Worship of their
inferior Deities could be no Idolatry: for the Heathens still pretended, that
they did not give to them the Worship proper to the Supreme God; which is as
much as is pretended by the devoutest Papist, in justification of the
Invocation of Saints. To these I expect a direct and punctual answer,
professing as much Charity toward them, as is consistent with Scripture and
Reason.

2. Because the Church of Rome is guilty of so great corruption of the
Christian Religion by such opinions and practices which are very apt to hinder
a good life: Such are, the destroying the necessity of a good life, by making
the Sacrament of Penance joined with contrition, sufficient for salvation; the
taking off the care of it, by supposing an expiation of sin (by the prayers of
the living) after death; and the sincerity of devotion is much obstructed in
it, by prayers in a language which many understand not; by making the efficacy
of Sacraments depend upon the bare administration, whether our minds be
prepared for them or not; by discouraging the reading the Scripture, which is
our most certain rule of faith and life; by the multitude of superstitious
observations never used in the Primitive Church, as we are ready to defend; by
the gross abuse of people in Pardons and Indulgences, by denying the Cup to the
Laity, contrary to the practice of the Church in the solemn Celebration of the
Eucharist for a thousand years after Christ; by making it in the power of any
person to dispense contrary to the Law of God, in oaths and Marriages; by
making disobedience to the Church in disputable matters, more heinous, than
disobedience to the Laws of Christ in unquestionable things, as Marriage in a
Priest, to be a greater crime, than Fornication.

By all which practices and opinions we assert, that there are so many
hindrances to a good life, that none who have a care of their salvation, can
venture their souls, in the communion of such a Church, which either enjoins or
publicly allows them.

3. Because it exposes the ^aith of Christians to so great uncertainty: By
making the authority of the Scriptures to depend on the infallibility of the
Church, when the Churches Infallibility must be proved by the Scripture: by
making those things necessary to be believed, which if they be believed,
overthrow all foundations of faith, viz. That we are not to believe our senses
in the plainest objects of them, as that bread which we see is not bread; upon
which it follows, that tradition being a continued kind of sensation, can be no
more certain, than sense it self* and that the Apostles might have been
deceived in the Body of Christ after the Resurrection; and the Church of any
Age in what they saw or heard. By denying to Men the use of their judgment and
reason as to the matters of says proposed by a Church, when they must use it
in the choice of a Church; by making the Churches power extend to make new
Articles of faith, viz. by making those things necessary to be believed, which
were not so before. By p^etending to infallibility in determining
Controversies, and yet not determining Controversies which are on foot among
themselves. All which, and several other things which my designed brevity will
not permit me to mention; tend very much to shake the faith of such, who have
nothing else to rely on, but the authority of the Church of Rome.

3. I answer, That a Protestant leaving the Communion of our Church, does incur
a greater guilt, than one who was bred up in the communion of the Church of
Rome, and continues therein by invincible ignorance, and therefore cannot
equally be saved with such a one. For a Protestant is supposed, to have
sufficient convictions of the Errors of the Roman Church, or is guilty of
wilful ignorance, if he has not; but although we know not what allowances God
will make for invincible ignorance, we are sure that wilful ignorance, or
choosing a worse Church before a better, is a damnable sin, and unrepented of
destroys salvation.

To the second Question, I answer, 1. I do not understand what is meant by a
Christian in the Abstract, or in the whole Latitude, it being a thing I never
heard or read of before; and therefore may have some meaning in it, which I
cannot understand. 2. But if the Question be as the last words imply it,
Whether a Christian by virtue of his being so, be bound to join in some Church
or Congregation of Christians? I answer affirmatively, and that he is bound to
choose the communion of the purest Church, and not to leave that for a corrupt
one, though called never so Catholic.

The Reply to Dr. Stillingfleet's Answer.
Madam,
I Did not expect that two bare Questions could have produced such a
super-foetation of Controversies, as the Paper you sent me is fraught with; But
since the Answerer has been pleased to take this Method, (for what end himself
best knows) I shall not refuse to give a fair and plain return, to the several
Points he insists upon, and that with as much brevity as the matter and
circumstances will bear.

The Questions proposed were: 1. Whether a Protestant having the same Motives
to become a Catholic, which one bred and born, and well grounded in Catholic
Religion has to remain in it, may not equally be saved in the profession of it?

The 2d. Whether it be sufficient to be a Christian in the abstract, or in the
whole latitude; or there be a necessity of being a Member of some distinct
Church or Congregation of Christians?

The first, he says, being supposed to be put concerning a Protestant
continuing so, implies a contradiction; but where it lies I cannot see, for a
Protestant may have the same Motives, and yet out of wilfulness or passion not
acquiesce to them. He saw no doubt this supposition to be impertinent to the
Question, and therefore in the second part of the 1.. states it thus: Whether a
Protestant leaving the Communion of the Protestant Church, upon the Motives
used by those of the Roman Church, may not be equally saved with those who were
bred in it?

The Question thus stated in its true supposition, he answers first,. 2. That
an equal capacity of salvation of those persons being supposed, can be no
argument to leave the Communion of a Church, wherein the salvation of a person
may be much more safe than of either of them. But before I reply, I must do
both him and my self right in matter of fact; and it is, Madam, that when you
first addressed to me, you professed your self much troubled, that he had told
you, a person leaving the Protestant communion, and embracing the Catholic,
could not be saved. That we should deny salvation to any out of the Catholic
Church, you looked upon as uncharitable, and this assertion of his had startled
you in the opinion you had before of the Protestant Charity. Whereupon you
desired to know my opinion in the case, and I told you I saw no reason, why the
same Motives which secured one born and bred, and well grounded in Catholic
Religion, to continue in it, were no^ sufficient also to (...) a Protestant,
who convinced by them, (...) embrace it. This Madam, (...) was the true
occasion of your proposing the Question, and not (...) supposes, that I used
the mere (...) self as a sufficient Argument to (...) you to embrace the
Catholic Communion. This premised, I reply, that the Answer he gives, is
altogether foreign to the matter in hand, the Controversy not being between a
Bred and a Converted Catholic on the one side, and a person supposed to be in
a safer Church than either of them on the other: nor yet between two several
Churches supposed to have in them an equal Capacity of salvation, but between a
person bred in the Catholic Religion on the one side, and another converted to
it from Protestantism on the other, whether the latter may not be equally saved
with the former? Nor is it to the purpose of the present Question, to prove
that it is of necessity to Salvation to leave the Protestant Church, and become
a Member of the Catholic, because the Question is only of the possibility, not
of the necessity of Salvation. I say it is not necessary to the present
Question to prove this, but rather belongs to the second, (where I shall speak
to it.) Whether there be a necessity of being a Member of some distinct Church?
Which being resolved affirmatively by both parts, it follows then in order to
enquire which this true Church is. As for the Example of a Man leaping from the
plain ground into a Ship that is in danger of being Wrackt, meaning by that
Ship (as I suppose he does) the Catholic Church. Some will be apt to think he
had come nearer the Mark, if he had compared the Protestant to a Ship, which by
often knocking against the Rock on which the Catholic Church is built, had
split it self into innumerable Sects, and was now in danger of sinking: his
comparison was grounded only on his own supposition, but this is grounded on
the truth it self of too sad an experience. But to leave words, and come to the
matter. His second Answer is,. 3. that all those who are in the communion of
the Church of Rome do run so great a hazard of their Salvation, that none who
have a care of their Souls ought to embrace or continue in it. The first answer
as I have showed, was nothing pertinent to the present Question, nor comes this
second any nearer the matter, for though it be supposed, that none ought to
embrace or continue in the Catholic Church by reason of the great hazard, he
says, they run of their salvation, yet if they do embrace or continue in it,
why may they not be equally saved, that is, with equal hazard; but this
assertion, however beside the Question, he makes it his main business to prove,
First,. 4. Because those who embrace or continue in the Catholic Church are
guilty either of Hypocrisy or Idolatry, either of which are sins inconsistent
with salvation. And here he must give me leave to return upon him a more
palpable contradiction, than that he supposed to have found in the Question,
viz. to assert only, that those of the Catholic Communion run a great hazard
of their Salvation, and yet affirm at the same time that they are guilty either
of Hypocrisy or Idolatry, sins inconsistent with Salvation: which reduced into
plain terms, is no other, but that they may be saved, though hardly, and yet
cannot be saved. But to the Argument, The Church of Rome, by the Worship of God
by Images, by the Adoration of Bread in the Eucharist, and the formal
Invocation of Saints, does require the giving to the Creature the Worship due
only to the Creator; Therefore it makes the Members of it guilty of Hypocrisy
or Idolatry. The charge is great, but what are the proofs?

Concerning the first he says, 5. that in the Worship of God by Images, the
Worship due to God is terminated wholly on the Creature. And surely this
implies another contradiction, that it should be the Worship of God by Images,
and yet be terminated wholly on the Creature; Nevertheless he proves it thus;
The Worship which God himself denies to receive, must be terminated upon the
Creature; but God himself in the second Commandment, not only denies to receive
it, but threatens severely to punish them that give it, that is, that Worship
him by an Image. Therefore it cannot be terminated on God, but only on the
Image. To this Argument, which to be just to the Author, I confess I have not
seen anywhere proposed in these terms, I answer, that the first Proposition is
built on a great mistake of the Nature of humane acts; which though they ought
to be governed by the Law of God, yet when they swerve from it, cease not to
tend to their own proper objects. Gods prohibition of such or such a kind of
Worship, may make it to be unlawful, but hinders not the act from tending,
whither it is intended; and consequently if it be intended or directed by the
understanding to God, though after an unlawful manner, it will not fail to be
terminated upon God: Thus when a Thief or a Murderer prays to God to give him
good success in the Theft or Murder he intends, though God denies to hear any
such Prayer, yet is the Prayer truly directed to him: and thus when the Jews
offered to God in Sacrifice the blind and the lame, though he had forbidden it,
yet was the oblation terminated on him, and therefore he reproves them for
having polluted him, Mal 1. 8. and to convince them the more of their evil
doings: Offer it now, says he, to thy Governor, will he be pleased with thee,
or accept thy person? Though the Governor deny to accept what is presented to
him, yet it is truly offered to him by the Presenter; and so, although God deny
to accept such or such Sacrifice, yet it is truly offered to him, though the
offering of it after a forbidden manner make it to be sin: Did not God refuse
to accept the Sacrifice of Cain, and yet the Scripture, Genesis 4. 3. says
expressly, that he brought an offering to the Lord? God had not respect to Cain
nor his offering, but this did not hinder, but that Cain's offering had respect
to God, and was terminated on him. In like manner, though God deny such or such
a kind of Worship; if it be offered though unlawfully by the Creature, yet is
it terminated on him. The Proposition therefore which asserts, that the Worship
which God denies must be terminated on the Creature, I deny as absolutely
false, and so will you too, Madam, when you shall see the sense of it to be no
other, but that a wicked Man cannot Pray to God, or Worship him in an unlawful
or forbidden manner, who is therefore a wicked Man because he does so. What
follows from hence is, that though God should have forbidden Men to Worship him
by Images, yet it does not follow but the Worship so given, would be terminated
on him. But now to speak to his second Proposition, in which the main force of
this Argument consists.

We utterly deny that God in the second Commandment, forbids himself to be
Worshipped by a Crucifix, for example, or such like Sacred Image; for such only
are the subject of the present controversy. What he forbids there, is to give
his Worship to Idols: and this is clear from the circumstances of the Text:
First, Because this Commandment, if St. Austin's Judgment be to be followed, is
but a Part or Explication of the first, Thou shall have no other Gods before
me: Secondly, because the Hebrew word Pescl, in Latin Sculptile, is used in
Scripture to signify an Idol: Let them be confounded who adore Sculptilia,
that is, Idols, says the Psalmist, and so the Septuagint translate it in this
very place (...), an Idol, Thou shall not make to thy self an Idol; So that it
was an artifice of the Protestants to make their assertion seem plausible, to
translate Image instead of Idol; and not a certain kind of Image neither, but
any whatsoever. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven Image. Now what is
all this to Catholics, who neither make to themselves, nor adore Idols, nor
yield Sovereign honor, or acknowledgment of Deity to any but God? We give
indeed a veneration to Images, but the Image of God is not another God besides
him, nor is the Worship of it the Worship of another God, but of him who is
represented by it: for St. Basil says, The Worship of an Image stays not
there, but is referred or carried to the prototype, or thing represented.

We give therefore an insetior, or relative honor only to the Sacred Images of
Christ, and his blessed Mother, and Saints, not latriam, the Worship due to
God, but Honorariam adorationem, a certain honorary Worship, expressed by
kissing them, or putting off our Hats, or kneeling before them, much like the
Worship given to the Chair of State, or the Kings Picture, or his Garment by
the like actions or to come nearer to the subject, such as was commanded to be
given by Moses and Joshua to the ground whereon they stood, by putting off
their Shoos, because it was holy; and by the Jews, in adoring the footstool of
God, or falling down before it, Psalm. 98. 5. Ep. 17. ad Marcellam.
and in Worshipping (as St. Jerome testifies they did) that part of the Temple
called the Holy of Holies, because there were the Cherubims (sacred Images
ordered by God himself to be placed there) the propitiatory (representing Gods
Throne) and the Ark, (his footstool) In a word, such as the Protestants
themselves give to the Name of Jesus when they hear it spoken, by putting off
their Hats, and bowing at it, or to the Elements of Bread and Wine in the
Supper, by kneeling before them, as figures representing the death of Christ;
if condescendence to the conscience of weaker Brethren, will permit them to own
they have any honor or veneration for them, or for the Altar before which they
bow. To conclude this point, the Objector brings a Text, which forbids us to
give the Sovereign honor due to God, to an Idol: but let us hear out of
Scripture an express Text that it is not lawful to give to holy Images, and
other things relating to God, an inferior or relative Worship, such as we have
declared, and that will be to the purpose.

. 6. He aims to conclude the Catholic Church guilty of Idolatry, from the
adoration of the Bread (as he believes it) in the Eucharist. Now to do this, he
ought to prove, that what we adore in the Eucharist, is bread indeed. But
instead of that, he brings a comparison between our adoration of Christ in the
Eucharist, and the Heathens adoration of the Sun: viz. That the Papists by the
same Argument, make the Worship of the bread in the Eucharist not to be
Idolatry, which would excuse the Heathens Worship of the Sun and of their
Statutes from Idolatry; For if it be not therefore Idolatry, says he, because
they suppose the bread to be God, then the Worship of the Sun was not Idolatry
in them, who supposed the Sun to be God. I shall not complain here of the
unhandsomness of the expression, that Catholics suppose the Bread to be God,
just as the Heathens supposed the Sun to be God: whereas he knows, that
Catholics believe, that the substance of the bread is changed into Christ's
body; but shall answer to the Argument, That the Worship of Christ in the
Eucharist is not Idolatry, because we only suppose him to be really present
under the form of bread; but because we know and believe this upon the same
grounds and motives upon which we believe (and those motives stronger than any
Protestant has (if he have no other than the Catholic, to believe) that
Christ is God, and consequently to be adored. And therefore that you may the
better see the inefficaciousness of the Argument, suppose it dropped from the Pen
of an Arrian against the adoration of Christ as God, and it will be of as much
force to evince that to be Idolatry, as it is from the Objector's to prove the
adoration of him in the Eucharist to be so. See there how an Arrian might argue
in the same form. The same Argument which would make the grossest Heathen
Idolatry lawful, cannot excuse any act from Idolatry: but the same Argument,
whereby the Protestants make the Worship of Christ (a pure Man, says the
Arrian) not to be Idolatry, would make the grossest Heathen Idolatry not to be
so: For if it be not therefore Idolatry, because they suppose Christ to be God,
then the Worship of the Sun was not Idolatry, by them who supposed the Sun to
be God, etc. Now the same answer which solves the Arrians argument against the
adoration of Christ as God, serves no less to solve the Objectors Argument
against the adoration of him in the Eucharist, since we have a like Divine
Revelation for his real presence under the Sacramental Signs, as we have for
his being true God and Man.

But what if Catholics should be mistaken in their belief? Would it then
follow, that they were Idolaters? Dr. Tailor an eminent and leading Man amongst
the Protestants, denies the consequence. His words are these, in the Liberty of
Prophesying, Sect. 20. Numb. 26. Idolatry, says he, is a forsaking the true
God, and giving Divine Worship to a Creature, or to an Idol, that is, to an
Imaginary God, who has no foundation in Essence or Existence: And this is that
kind of superstition, which by Divines is called the superstition of an undue
object: Now it is evident, that the object of their (that is, the Catholics)
adoration (that which is represented to them in their minds, their thoughts and
purposes and by which God principally, if not solely, takes estimate of humane
actions) in the blessed Sacrament, is the only true and Eternal God,
hypostatically joined with his Holy Humanity, which Humanity they believe
actually present under the Veil of the Sacramental Signs; and if they thought
him not present, they are so far from worshipping the bread in this case, that
themselves profess it Idolatry to do so; which is a demonstration (mark that)
that their Soul has nothing in it, that is Idolatrical. If their confidence
and fanciful Opinion (so he terms the faith of Catholics) has engaged them
upon so great a mistake (as without doubt, he says it has) yet the will has
nothing in it, but what is a great enemy to Idolatry. Et nihil ardet in inferno
nisi propria voluntas; that is, Nothing burns in Hell, but proper Will. Thus
Dr. Tailor; and I think it will be a task worthy the Objectors pains, to solve
his Argument, if he will not absolve us from being Idolaters.

. 7. He proceeds to prove, that Catholics are guilty of Idolatry, by their
Invocation of Saints: And his Argument is this; If the supposition of a middle
excellency between God and us, be a sufficient ground for formal Invocation,
then the Heathens Worship of their inferior De^ities, could be no Idolatry,
for the Heathens still pretended that they did not give to them the Worship
proper to the Supreme God, which is as much as is pretended by the devoutest
Papists in justification of the Invocation of Saints. To answer this Argument,
I shall need little more than to explicate the hard words in it; which thus I
do. By persons of a middle excellency, we understand persons endowed with
supernatural gifts of Grace in this life, and Glory in Heaven, whose prayers by
consequence are acceptable and available with God: what at he means by formal
Invocation, I understand not well: but what we understand by it, is desiring or
praying those just persons to pray for us. The supreme Deity of the Heathens is
known to be Jupiter, and their inferior Deities, Venus, Mars, Bacchus, Vulcan,
and the like rabble of Devils, as the Scripture calls them, The gods of the
Heathens are Devils. The terms thus explicated, it is easy to see the
inconsequence of the Argument, that because the Heathens were Idolaters in
worshipping Mars and Venus their in^eriour Deities, or rather Devils, though
they pretended not to give them the Worship proper to Jupiter their Supreme
God: Therefore the Catholics, must be guilty of Idolatry, in desiring the
servants of the true God, to pray for them to him. Upon this account we must
not desire the prayer of a just Man, even in this life, because this formal
Invocation will be to make him an inferior Deity.

But if some Sect of Heathens, as the Platonists, did attain to the knowledge
of the true God, yet St. Paul says, they did not glorify him as God; but
changed his glory into an Image made like to corruptible man, adoring and
offering Sacrifice due to God alone, to the Statues themselves, or the
inferior Deities they supposed to dwell or assist in them. Which inferior
Deities St. Austin upon the Ninety sixth Psalm, proves to be Devils or evil
Angels, because they required Sacrifice to be offered to them, and would be
worshipped as Gods. Now what comparison there is between this worship of the
Heathens inferior Deities, and Christians worship of Saints and Angels, let
the same St. Austin declare in his twentieth Book against Faustus the
Manichaean, chap. 21. Fa^stus there calumniates the Catholics (the word is St.
Austins) because they honored the Memories or Shrines of Martyrs, charging
them to have turned the Idols into Martyrs, whom they worship (said he) with
like Vows. The Objection you see is not new, that Catholics make inferior
Deities of their Saints. Faustus long ago made it, and St. Austin' s answer
will serve as well now as then. Christian People, says he, do with Religious
Solemnity celebrate the Memory of Martyrs, both to excite to the imitation of
them, and to become partakers of their Merits, and be helped by their Prayers,
but so that we erect Altars, not to any of the Martyrs: but to the God of
Martyrs, although in Memory of the said Martyrs; For what Bishop efficiating at
the Altar, in the places where their holy Bodies are deposited: does say at any
time we offer to thee Peter, or Paul, or Cyprian? but what is offered, is
offered to God, who crowned the Martyrs, at the Memories of those whom he
crowned; that being put in mind by the very places, a greater affection may be
raised in us to quicken our love, both to those whom we may imitate, and
toward him by whose assistance we can do it. We worship therefore the Martyrs
with that Worship of love and society; with which even in this life also Holy
Men of God are worshipped, whose heart we judge prepared to suffer the like
Martyrdom for the truth of the Gospel. But we worship them so much the more
devoutly, because more securely, after they have overcome all the Incertainties
of this World; as also we praise them more confidently now reigning Conquerors,
in a more happy life, than whilst they were fighting in this; but with that
Worship, which in Greek is called Latria, (and cannot be expressed by one word
in Latin) for as much as it is a certain service properly due to the Divinity,
we neither worship them, nor teach them to be worshipped, but God alone. Now
whereas the offering of Sacrifice belongs to this Worship (of Latria) from
whence they are called Idolaters, who gave it also to Idols, by no means do we
suffer any such thing, or command it to be offered, to any Martyr, or any holy
soul, or any Angel: And whosoever declines into this Error, we reprove him by
sound Dectrine, either that he may be corrected, or avoided. -- And a little
after. It is a much less sin, for a Man to be derided by the Martyrs for
drunkenness, then even fasting to offer Sacrifice to them. I say to sacrifice
to Martyrs, I say not to sacrifice to God in the Memories (or Churches) of the
Martyrs, which we do most frequently, by that rite alone, by which in the
manifestation of the New Testament he has commanded Sacrifice to be offered to
him, which belongs to that Worship, which is called Latria, and is due only to
God. This was the Doctrine and practice of Christian People in St. Augustine' s
time, and that he himself held formal Invocations a part of the Worship due to
Saints, is evident from the Prayer he made to St. Cyprian after his Martyrdom.
Adjuvet nos itaque Beatus Cyprianus orationibus suis, Li. 7. de Bapt. cont.
Donat. c. 1.
etc. Let Blessed Cyprian therefore help us (who are still encompassed with
this mortal flesh, and labor as in a dark Cloud) with his Prayers, that by
Gods grace we may, as far as we are able, imitate his good works. Thus St.
Austin, where you see he directs his Prayer to St. Cyprian, which I take to be
formal invocation, and for a further confirmation of it, we have the ingenuous
confession of Calvin himself, Instit. li. 3. chapter 20. n. 22. where speaking of
the third Council of Carthage, in which St. Austin was present, he acknowledged
it was the custom at that time to say, Sancta Maria, aut Sancte Petre Ora pro
nobis; Holy Mary, or Holy Peter pray for us.

But now Madam, what if after all this, he himself shall deny, that any of the
opposite Tenets are Articles of his faith, viz. That honor is not to be given
to the Images of Christ and his Saints; that what appears to be bread in the
Eucharist, is not the Body of Christ: That it is not lawful to invocate the
Saints to pray for us. Press him close, and I believe you shall find him deny,
that he believes any one of these Negative points to be Divine truths; and if
so, you will easily see his charge of Idolatry against us, to be vain and
groundless.

Having thus given a direct and punctual answer to his argument, I must now
expect as much charity from him, as is consistent with Scripture and Reason.
How much that is, you will see in his third Answer to the first Question. But
to proceed.

. 8. He brings a Miscellany of such Opinions and practices (as he calls them)
which are very apt to hinder a good life, and therefore none who have a care of
their Salvation, can venture their Souls in the communion of such a Church,
which either enjoins, or publicly allows them. He reckons up no less than Ten.
1. That we destroy the necessity of good life, by making the Sacrament of
Penance (that is, confession and absolution) joined with contrition, sufficient
for salvation. And do not Protestants make contrition alone, which is less,
sufficient for Salvation? But perhaps the joining of confession and absolution
with contrition, makes it of a malignant nature: If so, certainly when the Book
of Common Prayer in the Visitation of the Sick, enjoins the sick Man, if he
find his conscience troubled with any weighty matter, to make a special
confession, and receive absolution from the Priest in the same words the
Catholic Church uses, it prescribes him that as a means to prepare himself for
a holy death, which in the judgment of the Objector, destroys the necessity of
good life.

2. Catholics, he says, take off the care of good life, by supposing an
expiation of sin (by the Prayer of the living) after death: But certainly the
belief of temporal pains to be sustained after death, if there be not a perfect
expiation of sin in this life, by works of penance, is rather apt to make a Man
careful not to commit the least sin, than to take off the care of a good life.
And though he be ascertained by faith, that he may be helped by the charitable
suffrages of the faithful living, yet this is no more encouragement to him to
sin, than it would be to a Spendthrift to run into debt, and be cast into
Prison, because he knows he may be relieved by the charity of his Friends. If
he were sure there were no Prison for him, that would be an encouragement
indeed to play the Spendthrift. And this is the case of the Protestants in
their denial of Purgatory.

3. The sincerity of Devotion, he says, is much obstructed by Prayers in a
Language which many understand not. If he speak of private Prayers, all
Catholics are taught to say them in their Mother Tongue: If of the public
Prayers of the Church, I understand not why it may not be done with as much
sincerity of devotion, the People joining their intention and particular
Prayers with the Priest, as their Ambassador to God, as if they understood him:
I am sure the effects of a sincere devotion, for nine hundred years together,
which this manner of Worship produced in this Nation, were much different from
those we have seen since the reducing of the public Liturgy into English, as
is manifest from those Monuments, which yet remain of Churches, Colleges,
Religious Houses, etc. with their endowments, and in the conversion of many
Nations from Heathenism to Christianity, effected by the labors and zeal of
English Missionaries in those times, etc. But this is a matter of Discipline,
and so not to be regulated by the fancies of private Men, but the judgment of
the Church; and so universal has this practice been both in the Primitive
Greek and Latin Churches, and is still (by the confession of the (Protestant)
Authors themselves of the Bible of many Languages, Printed at London, Anno
1655.) in most of the Sects of Christians, to have not only the Scriptures, but
also the Liturgies and Rituals in a Tongue unknown, but to the Learned among
them: that who will dispute against it, must prepare himself to hear the
censure of St. Austin, Ep. 118. where he says, That it is a point of most
insolent madness, to dispute whether that be to be observed, which is
frequented by the whole Church through the World.

4. He says, The sincerity of Devotion is much obstructed, by making the
efficacy of Sacraments depend upon the bare administration, whether our minds
be prepared for them or not. In what Council this Doctrine was defined, I never
read; but as for the Sacrament of Penance, which I suppose he chiefly aims at,
I read in the Council of Trent, Sess. 14. Falso quidam calumniantur, That some
do falsely calumniate Catholic Writers, as if they taught the Sacrament of
Penance did confer Grace without the good motion of the receiver, which the
Church of God never taught nor thought. But I am rather inclined to look upon
this as a mistake, than a calumny in the Objector.

5. He says, The sincerity of Devotion is much obstructed by discouraging the
reading of Scriptures, which is our most certain Rule of Faith and Life. Here
he calls the Churches prudential dispensing the reading of Scripture to
persons, whom she judges fit and disposed for it, and not to such whom she
judges in a condition to receive, or do harm by it, a discouraging the reading
of Scriptures; which is no other than whereas St. Paul, Coloss. 3. 21. enjoins
Fathers not to provoke their Children, lest they be discouraged; one should
reprove a Father for discouraging his Child, because he will not put a Knife or
Sword into his hands, when he foresees he will do mischief with it to himself or
others; the Scriptures in the hands of a meek and humble Soul, who submits its
judgment in the interpretation of it to that of the Church, is a Sword to
defend it: but in the hands of an arrogant and presumptuous Spirit, that has
no Guide to interpret it, but its own fancy or passion, it is a dangerous
Weapon, with which he will wound both himself and others. The first that
permitted promiscuous reading of Scripture in our Nation, was King Henry the
Eighth; and many years were not passed, but he found the ill consequences of
it; for in a Book set forth by Him, in the Year 1542. he complains in the
Preface, That he found entered into some of his Peoples hearts an inclination to
sinister understanding of it, presumption, arrogance, carnal liberty, and
contention: which he compares to the seven worse Spirits in the Gospel, with
which the Devil entered into the House that was purged and cleansed. Whereupon
he declares, that for that part of the Church ordained to be taught, (that is,
the Lay People) it ought not to be denied certainly, that the reading of the
Old and New Testament is not so necessary for all those folks, that of duty
they ought, and be bound to read it; but as the Prince and Policy of the Realm
shall think convenient, so to be tolerated or taken from it. Consonant
whereunto, says he, the Politic Law of our Realm, has now restrained it from
a great many. This was the judgment of him, who first took upon him the Title
of Head of the Church of England; and if that ought not to have been followed
in after times, let the dire effects of so many new Sects and Fanaticisms, as
have risen in England from the reading of it, bear witness. For as St. Austin
says, Tract. 18. in To.
Neque enim natae sunt Haereses; Heresies have no other Origin but hence, that
the Scriptures which in themselves are good, are not well understood, and what
is understood amiss in them, is rashly and boldly asserted, viz. to be the
sense of them. And now whether the Scriptures left to the private
interpretation of every fanciful spirit, as it is among Protestants, be a most
certain Rule of Faith and Life, I leave to your self to judge.

6. He says, The sincerity of Devotion is much obstructed by the multitude of
superstitious observations never used in the Primitive Church, as he is ready
to defend. he should have said to prove; for we deny any such to be used in the
Church.

7. By the gross abuse of People in Pardons and Indulgences. Against this, I
can asse^t as an eyewitness, the great devotion caused by the wholesome use of
Indulgences in Catholic Countries: there being no Indulgence ordinarily
granted, but enjoins him that will avail himself of it, to confess his sins, to
receive the Sacraments, to pray, fast, and give alms, all which duties are with
great devotion performed by Catholic people, which without the incitement of
an Indulgence, had possibly been left undone.

8. He says, The sincerity of Devotion is much obstructed, by denying the Cup
to the Laity, contrary to the practice of the Church in the solemn celebration
of the Eucharist for a Thousand Years after Christ. This thousand years after
Christ makes a great noise, as if it were not as much in the power of the
Church a thousand years after Christ, as well as in the first or second Century
to alter and change things of their own nature indifferent, such as the
communicating under one or both kinds, was ever held to be by Catholics. But
although the Cup were not then denied to the Laity, yet that the custom of
receiving but under one kind was permitted, even in the Primitive Church, in
private Communions, the Objector seems to grant, because he speaks only of the
Administration of it in the solemn Celebration: and that it was also in use in
public Communions, is evident from Examples of that time, both in the Greek
Church in the time of St. Chrysostom; Sozomen. li. 8. Hist. c. 5. and Niceph.
li. 13. c. 11. S. Leo Ser. 4. de Quad.
and of the Latin, in the time of St. Leo the great. As for the pretended
obstruction of Devotion, you must know Catholics believe that under either
species or kind, whole Christ true God and Man is contained and received; and
if it be accounted an hindrance to devotion to receive the total refection of
our soul, though but under one kind, what must it be to believe that I receive
him under neither, but instead of him have Elements of Bread and Wine? Surely
nothing can be more efficacious to stir up Reverence and Devotion in us, than
to believe, that God himself will personally enter under our Roof.

The Ninth Hinderance of the sincerity of devotion is, that we make it in the
power of a person to dispense in Oaths and Marriages contrary to the Law of
God. To this I answer, That some kind of Oaths, the condition of the Person and
other Circumstances considered, may be judged to be hurtful, and not fit to be
kept, and the dispensation in them is, no more than to judge or determine them
to be so: and consequently to do this cannot be a hinderance, but a furtherance
to devotion; nor is it contrary to the Law of God which commands nothing that is
hurtful to be done. As for Marriages we acknowledge the Church may dispense in
some degrees of Consanguinity and Affinity, but in nothing contrary to the Law
of God.

His Tenth pretended Obstruction of Devotion is, that we make disobedience to
the Church in Disputable matters, more heinous than disobedience to Christ in
unquestionable things, as Marriage, he says, in a Priest to be a greater crime
than Fornication. I answer, That whether a Priest may Marry or no (supposing
the Law of the Church forbidding it) is not a disputable matter; but it is out
of Question, even by the Law of God, that Obedience is to be given to the
Commands or Prohibitions of the Church: The Antithesis therefore between
disobedience to the Church, in disputable matters, and disobedience to the Laws
of Christ in unquestionable things, is not only impertinent to the Marriage of
Priests, which is unquestionably forbidden; but supposing the matter to remaind
sputable after the Churches Prohibition, destroys all obedience to the Church.
But if it suppose them only disputable before, then why may not the Church
interpose her Judgment and put them out of dispute?

But still it seems strange to them, who either cannot or will not take the
Word of Christ, that is, his Counsel of Chastity, that Marriage in a Priest
should be a greater sin than Fornication. But he considers not, that though
Marriage in it self be honorable, yet, if it be prohibited to a certain order
of persons, by the Church to whom Christ himself commands us to give obedience,
and they oblige themselves by a voluntary vow to live in perpetual chastity,
the Law of God commanding us to pay our Vows, it loses its honor in such
persons: and if contracted after such vow made, is in the language of the
Fathers, no better than Adultery. In the Primitive Church it was the custom of
some younger Widows to Dedicate themselves to the Service of the Church, and
in order thereunto to take upon them a peculiar habit, and make a vow of
continency for the future. Now in case they married after this, St. Paul
himself. 1 Timothy 1. 12. says, That they incurred Damnation, because by so
doing, they made void their first faith, that is, as the Fathers Expound it,
the vow they had made. And the fourth Council of Carthage, in which were 214
Bishops, and among them St. Austin gives the Reason in these words; If Wives
who commit Adultery are guilty to their Husbands, how much more shall such
Widows as change their Religious State, be noted with the crime of Adultery?
And if this were so in Widows, much more in Priests, if by Marrying they shall
make void their first Faith given to God, when they were cons^e^ated in a more
peculiar manner to his Service.

Thus much may suffice for Answer to the Argument, which with its intricate
terms may seem to puzzle an unlearned Reader, let us now speak a word to the
true state of the Controversy, which is, whether Marriage or single life in a
Priest be more apt to obstruct or further devotion. And St. Paul himself has
determined the question, 1 Cor. 7. 32. where he says, He that is unmarried
cares for the things that belong to our Lord, how he may please our Lord; But
he that is Married cares for the things that are of the World, how he may
please his Wife. This is the difference he puts between the Married and
Single life, that this is apt to make us care for the things which belong to
God; and that to divert our thoughts from him to the things of the World. Judge
therefore which of these states is most convenient for Priests, whose proper
Office it is to attend wholly to the things of God?

Having thus cleared Catholic Doctrines from being any ways obstructive to
good life or devotion, I shall proceed to his third Argument, by which he will
still prove that Catholics run a great hazard of their souls, in adhering to
the Communion of the Church of Rome, Because it exposes the Faith of
Christians to so great uncertainty. This is a strange charge from the Pen of a
Protestant, who has no other certainty for his faith, but every Man's
interpretation of the Letter of the Scriptures. But, First he says it does
this, By making the Authority of the Scriptures to depend upon the
infallibility of the Church, when the Churches infallibility must be proved by
the Scriptures.

To this I Answer that the Authority of the Scripture, not in it self, for so
it has its Authority from God; but in order to us and our belief of it,
depends upon the infallibility of the Church. And therefore St. Austin says of
himself, Li. contr. Epist. fund.
That he would not believe the Gospel, unless the Authority of the Catholic
Church did move him. And if you ask him what moved him to submit to that
Authority; he tells you, That besides the Wisdom he found in the Tenets of the
Church, there were many other things which most justly held him in it: as the
consent of People and Nations, an Authority begun by Miracles, nourished by
Hope, increased by Charity, and established by Antiquity, the succession of
Priests, from the very Seat of St. Peter, to whom our Lord commended the
feeding of his Sheep, unto the present Bishopric. Lastly, The very name of
Catholic which this Church alone among so many Heresies has not without cause
obtained so particularly to her self; that whereas all Heretics would be called
Catholics, yet if a stranger demand where the Catholics go to Church, none of
these Heretics dares to show either his own House or Church. These (says St.
Austin) so many and great most dear bonds of the name of Christian, do justly
hold a believing Man in the Catholic Church. These were the grounds which
moved that great Man to submit to her Authority: And when Catholic Authors
prove the infallibility of the Church from Scriptures, it is an Argument ad
hominem to convince Protestants who will admit nothing but Scripture, and yet
when they are convinced quarrel at them as illogical Disputants, because they
prove it from Scripture.

Next he says we overthrow all foundation of Faith, because We will not
believe our senses in the plainest Objects of them. But what if God have
interposed his Authority, as he has done in the case of the Eucharist, where
he tells us, that it is his Body, must we believe our senses rather than God?
or must we not believe them in other things, because in the particular case of
the Eucharist we must believe God, rather than our senses? Both these
consequences you see are absurd: Now for the case it self, in which he
instances, Dr. Tailor above cited confesses, that they (viz. Catholics) have a
divine Revelation (viz. Christ's word, This is my Body) whose Litteral and
Grammatical sense, if that sense were intended, would warrant them to do
violence to all the Sciences, in the Circle; but, I add, it would be no
precedent to them not to believe their senses in other the plainest Objects of
them, as in the matter of Tradition, or Christ's Body after the Resurrection.

3. He says that We expose Faith to great uncertainty, by denying to Men the
use of their Judgment and Reason as to matters of Faith proposed by a Church,
that is, we deny particular Men's Judgment, as to matters of faith, to be as
good, if not better than the Churches, and to infer from hence, that we make
Faith uncertain, is just as if on the contrary one should say, that Protestants
make faith certain by exposing matter of faith determined by the Church, to be
discussed and reversed by the Judgment and Reason (or rather Fancy) of every
private Man. We have good store of this kind of certainty in England. But as
for the use of our Judgment and Reason, as to the matters themselves proposed
by the Church, it is the daily business of Divines and Preachers, not only to
show them not to be repugnant to any natural truth, but also to illustrate them
with Arguments drawn from reason. But the use, he would have of reason, is I
suppose, to believe nothing, but what his reason can comprehend, and this is
not only irrational in its self, but contrary to the Doctrine of St. Paul, where
he commands us to captivate our understandings to the Obedience of Faith.

4. He adds, We expose faith to uncertainty by making the Church, power extend
to making new Articles of Faith. And this, if it were true, were something
indeed to his purpose. But the Church never yet owned any such power, in her
General Councils, but only to manifest and establish the Doctrine received from
her Forefathers; as is to be seen in the prooems of all the Sessions of the
Council of Trent, where the Fathers before they declare what is to be believed,
ever premise that what they declare, is the same they have received by
Tradition from the Apostles. And because it may happen that some particular
Doctrine was not so plainly delivered to each part of the Church, as it
happened in St. Cyprian's case, concerning the non-rebaptization of Heretics,
we acknowledge it is in her power, to make that necessary to be believed which
was not so before, not by inventing new Articles, but by declaring more
explicitly the Truths contained in Scripture and Tradition.

Lastly he says, We expose Faith to great uncertainty, because the Church
pretending to infallibility, does not determine Controversies on foot among our
selves. As if faith could not be certain, unless all Controversies among
particular Men be determined, what then becomes of the certainty of Protestants
faith, who could yet never find out a sufficient means to determine any one
Controversy among them? for if that means be plain Scripture, what one Judges
plain, another Judges not so, and they acknowledge no Judge between them to
decide the Controversy. As for the Catholic Church, if any Controversies
arise concerning the Doctrine delivered (as in St. Cyprian's case) she
determines the controversy by declaring what is of faith. And for other
Controversies which belong not to faith, she permits, as St. Paul says, every
one to abound in his own sense. And thus much in Answer to his third Argument,
by which, and what has been said to his former objections, it appears that he
has not at all proved what he asserted in his second Answer to the first
Question, viz. That all those who are in the Communion of the Church of Rome do
run so great a hazard of their Salvation, that none who have a care of their
souls ought to embrace or continue in it. But he has a third Answer for us, in
case the former fail; and it is,

10. That a Protestant leaving the Communion of the Protestant Church does
incur a greater guilt, than one who was bred up in the Church of Rome, and
continues therein by invincible ignorance. This is the directest Answer he
gives to the Question, and what it imports is this, That invincible Ignorance
(and he does not know what allowance God will make for that neither) is the
only Anchor which a Catholic has to save himself by. If by discoursing with
Protestants, and reading their Books, he be not sufficiently convinced, whereas
he ought in the supposition of the Answerer, to be so, that the Letter of the
Scripture as interpretable by every private Man's reason, is a most certain Rule
of Faith and Life; but is still overruled by his own Motives (the same which
held St. Austin in the bosom of the Catholic Church) he is guilty of wilful
Ignorance, and consequently a lost Man; there is no hope of Salvation for him.
Much less for a Protestant who shall embrace the Catholic Communion, because
he is supposed (doubtless from the same Rule) to have sufficient conviction of
the Errors of the Roman Church, or is guilty of wilful Ignorance, if he have
it not, which is a damnable sin, and unrepented of destroys salvation. So that
now the upshot of the Answer to the Question, Whether a Protestant embracing
Catholic Religion upon the same motives, which one bred and well grounded in
it, has to remain in it, may be equally saved with him, comes to this, that
they shall both be damned, though unequally, because the converted Catholic
more deeply, than he that was bred so. And now who can out lament the sad
condition of that great Doctor and Father of the Church, and hitherto reputed
St. Austin, who rejecting the Manichees pretended rule of Scripture, upon the
aforesaid grounds, left their Communion to embrace the Communion of the Church
of Rome? And what is become now of their distinction of points fundamental from
not fundamental, which heretofore they thought sufficient to secure both
Catholics and Protestants Salvation, and to charge us with unconscionable
uncharitableness in not allowing them to be sharers with us? The absurdness of
these consequences may serve for a sufficient conviction of the nullity of his
third and last answer to the first Question.

As for what he says to the second, I agree so far with him, that every
Christian is bound to choose the Communion of the purest Church, but which that
Church is, must be seen by the grounds it brings to prove the Doctrines it
teaches, to have been delivered by Christ and his Apostles. That Church is to
be judged purest which has the best grounds: and consequently it is of
necessity to salvation to embrace the communion of it.

What then you are bound to do in reason and conscience is, to see which
Religion of the two, has the strongest Motives for it, and to embrace that as
you will answer the contrary to God and your own soul. To help you to do this,
and that the Answerer may have the less exception against them, I will give you
a Catalogue of Catholic Motives (though not all neither) in the words of the
forecited Dr. Tailor, advertising only for brevity sake, I leave out some
mentioned by him, and that in these I set down, you also give allowance for
some expressions of his, with which he has misrepresented them: Thus then he,
Liberty of Proph. Sect. 20. Speaking of Catholics, The beauty and Splendor of
their Church, their pompous (he should have said solemn) Service; the
stateliness and solemnity of the Hierarchy, their Name of Catholic, which they
suppose (he should have said, their very Adversaries give them) as their own
due, and to concern no other Sect of Christians; the Antiquity of many of their
Doctrines, (he should have said all) the continual succession of their Bishops,
their immediate derivation from the Apostles; their Title to succeed St. Peter,
the flattering (he should have said due) expressions of Minor Bishops (he means
in acknowledging the Pope head of the Church) which by being old records, have
obtained credibility; the multitude and variety of People which are of their
persuasion; apparent consent with Antiquity in many Ceremonials, which other
Churches have rejected; and a pretended, and sometimes (he should have said
always) apparent consent with some elder Ages in matters Doctrinal; The great
consent of one part with another in that which most of them affirm to be de
fide (of Faith) The great differences which are commenced among their
Adversaries, abusing the liberty of Prophesying into a very great
licentiousness; Their happiness of being Instruments in converting diverse (he
should rather have said of all) Nations. The piety and austerity of their
Religious Orders of Men and Women* The single life of their Priests and
Bishops, the severity of their Fasts, and their exterior observances, the
great reputation of their first Bishops for faith and sanctity; the known
holiness of some of those persons, whose institutes the religious persons
pretend to imitate; the oblique Arts and indirect proceedings of some of those
who d^parted from them, and amongst many other things the names of Heretic and
Schismatic which they with infinite pertinacity (he should have said, upon the
same grounds the Fathers did) fasten upon all that disagree from them. These
things, says he, and diverse others may very easily persuade persons of much
reason, and more piety to retain that which they know to have been the Religion
of their Forefathers, which had actually possession and seizure of Men's
understandings, before the opposite professions (to wit, of Protestant,
Presbyterian, Anabaptist, etc.) had a name.

Thus Dr. Tailor, an eminent and leading Man amongst the Protestants; and if he
confess that these Motives were sufficient for a Catholic to retain his
Religion, they must be of like force to persuade a dis-interessed Protestant to
embrace it, unless the Protestants can produce Motives for their Religion of
greater, or at least equal force, with these, which so great a Man among them
confesses, that Catholics have for theirs. Here therefore you must call upon
the Author of the Paper you sent me to produce a Catalogue of grounds, or at
least some one ground for the Protestant Religion of greater or equal force
with all these: And as Dr. Tailor says, diverse others which he omitted, viz.
The Scripture interpreted by the consent of Fathers, the determination of
General Councils, the known Maxim of Catholics, that nothing is to be
believed of Faith, but what was received from their Forefathers as handed down
from the Apostles; The testimony of the present Church, of no less Authority
now, than in St. Austin's time, both for the Letter and the sense of the
Scripture, etc. Do this, and the Controversy will quickly be at an end.
Particular disputes are endless, and above the understanding of such, as are
not learned; but in grounds and principles, it is not so hard for Reason and
common sense to Judge. That you may the better do it in your case, I shall
desire you to take these two Cautions along with you:

First, That the Subject of the present Controversy, are not those Articles in
which the Protestants agree with us, and for which they may pretend to produce
the same Motives, we do: But in those in which they dissent from us, such as
are no Transubstantiation, no Purgatory, no honor due to Images, no Invocation
to Saints, and the like, in which the very Essence of Protestant, as distinct
from Catholic, consists. What Motives they can or will produce for these. I do
not foresee: The pretense of Scriptures being sufficiently plain, has no
place here, because then the foresaid Negatives would be necessary to be
believed as divine Truths. And for their own Reason and Learning, it will be
found too light when put into the Scale against that of the Catholic Church
for so many Ages.

The second Caution is, That you be careful to distinguish between Protestants
producing grounds for their own Religion, and finding fault with ours. An
Atheist can cavil and find fault with the grounds which learned Men bring to
prove a Deity, such as are the Order of this visible World, the general consent
of Nations, etc. In this an Atheist thinks he does somewhat: But can he produce
as good or better grounds for his own Opinion? No, you see then it is one thing
to produce grounds for what we hold, and another to find fault with those which
are produced by the contrary part. The latter has made Controversy so long,
and the former will make it as short; let the Answerer therefore instead of
finding fault with our Motives produce his own for the Articles in
Controversy, and I am confident you will quickly discern which carry the most
weight, and consequently which are to be preferred.

A Full Refutation OF Dr. STILLINGFLEET's Unjust Charge of IDOLATRY Against the
Church of Rome.
The First Part.
Of the Veneration of Holy Images.
CHAP. I.
The First and Second Answer to the First Question, shown not pertinent.
Necessity of Communion with the Church of Rome proved; and his Charge of
Idolatry overthrown by his own Principles.

1. WHoever considers how Dr. Stillingfleet in his Answer to the Two Questions,
has engaged himself and his Adversary in Seventeen or Eighteen of the most
material Controversies between Catholics and Protestants, besides innumerable
others of lesser concern, which together with the former have swelled his
Rejoinder to a short Paper, into a large Book; will not very easily free him
upon his own word, from being fond of the practice of the Noble Science of
Controversy, or, as his Friend Dr. T. calls it, The Blessed Art of Eternal
Wrangling: especially, if he reflect how easy and obvious the Answer was to
the Questions themselves, without running into farther Disputes: To the First,
by showing that the Motives which are sufficient to secure the Salvation of one
bred up and well-grounded in Catholic Religion, are not sufficient to secure
the salvation of one bred up in the Protestant, who convinced by them should
embrace the Catholic. To the Second, by showing the Motives for Communion with
the Protestant Church, to be greater and stronger than those for the Roman; and
therefore that to be necessarily embraced before this; it being agreed between
us, that it is of necessity to salvation to be a Member of some distinct
Church. This had been a ready way to put an end to the Dispute, and give
Satisfaction to the Reader; and this had been sufficient; our Assent to the
Articles in controversy, depending upon the strength of the Motives: But to
multiply Disputes without cause, without end, and without bringing them to
Grounds and Principles, as it is no good Argument to prove a man not to be fond
of Controversy, so all the Satisfaction the Reader is likely to gather from
it, is a despair of being ever satisfied. When therefore the Doctor says he had
no other end in this increase of Controversies, but to let his Protestant
Reader see there could be no reason to forsake the Communion of that Church; it
is much like, as if a Mother, to deter her Son from traveling into other
Countries, should tell him there was a great Sea between, full of Rocks and
Pirates, and no Vessel strong enough to venture over: Besides, that the
Country whither he was going swarmed with Bears and Lions. This is one way to
let him see there could be no reason to think of leaving his Native Country;
and this is the Method generally pursued by our Adversaries, for want of sound
Principles, to retain their Adherents in their Communion, to make the dangers
and difficulties they are to encounter with in that of the Roman, seem
insuperable, and therefore best for them to sit down contented where they are.
But what if all the dangers and difficulties he raises, prove but Bugbears and
Scare-Crows? This I hope by GOD's Grace to make appear in the following
Treatise.

2. His first Answer to the first Question, was, that an equal capacity of
Salvation of those persons supposed, not only in order to a safer Church, but
in two several Churches supposed equally safe, can be no argument to forsake
the Communion of the one for the other. To this, I replied, that the Answer was
altogether impertinent to the Question, the Controversy not being between two
persons compared with a third in a safer Church; nor yet between two several
Churches supposed to have in them an equal capacity of Salvation, but between a
Catholic bred so, and a Protestant converted to be so, whether the later,
having the same Motives with the former, may not equally be saved with him? To
what purpose then was it to talk of an equal capacity supposed in two persons
compared with a third in a much safer condition, or in two several Churches
compared to one another; unless it were to make his Reader believe that a
supposed possibility of Salvation in the Catholic Church, was used by me as a
sufficient Argument to embrace its Communion? Whereas his own telling the
Person concerned, that however Catholics who were bred so, might be saved; yet
a Person leaving the Protestant Communion for the Catholic, could Not be Saved
in it, was that which occasioned the Question. A weak but common Artifice of
the Doctor and his Party, to deter Persons from embracing the Catholic
Communion; when yet the more genuine Sons of the Church of England are not so
cruel as to damn all those who embrace it. The Answer then was nothing to the
purpose of the Question; and this himself seems to acknowledge, when he adds
Whether it were to the Question or no, he is sure it was very much to the
purpose, for which this Controversy was first started. And then having gotten
this loop-hole, he beseeches the Person who had proposed the Question, to
propose another, and if not for her own sake, yet for his to insist upon, that
he may know one reason at least, why the Believing all the Ancient Creeds, and
leading a Good Life, may not be sufficient to salvation, unless one be of the
Communion of the Church of Rome. And this, he says, he cannot yet procure,
though he have often requested it. Here himself is afraid he may be thought to
digress; but so earnest a request must not be denied.

3. I remember I promised to speak to this Point when it should be proper,
(viz. in handling the second Question [Whether it be necessary to be a Member
of some distinct Church?] where it came in order) and I did so, (though my
Adversary takes no notice of it here) as far as was pertinent to the present
purpose; when upon his Grant, that A Christian by virtue of his being so, is
bound to join in some Church, and to choose the Communion of the purest; I
subjoyned, that that Church was to be judged the purest, which had the
strongest Motives for it: and then laid down a Catalogue of such weighty
Motives for the Roman Catholic, allowed by Dr. Tailor Liberty of Prop^^cy,
Sect. 20.
: To which I added, That neither himself in his Defense, nor Dr. Tailor when he
had a mind to invalidate them, produced any thing to weigh against them, but a
few Tinsel-words, P. 550.
and one Scripture-Testimony, interpreted by and according to their own Fancy.
Having done this, they sing Io Triumph, that [Thou shall not worship any
graven Image] will outweigh all the best and fairest Imaginations of the Roman
Church. And now let the Reader judge whether he had any reason to say, that he
could not procure an Answer to this Question, though he had often requested it.

4. But because he seems so little satisfied with this Answer, as to take no
notice of it, I shall now enforce it farther with this Argument ad hominem.
There was in the World before Luther, a distinct Church, whose Communion was
necessary to Salvation; But this was not the Protestant: Therefore it was the
Roman. The Major is evident from his own Concession; that a Christian, by
virtue of his being so, is bound to join in some distinct Church; which is not
possible, if there be not such a distinct Church to join with. The Minor also,
that this was not the Protestant, is manifest, because before Luther there was
no such Church in the World distinct from the Roman. It follows therefore (the
Question between him and us being of the necessity of Communion either with the
Roman, or with the Protestant) that of the two, the Roman Church was, and still
is, (as remaining still the same) that Church whose Communion is necessary to
Salvation.

5. Again, taking the term Roman-Church, not only for the particular Diocese
of Rome, but for the Churches also in Communion with it, as the Head, as we
generally take it in this Controversy; nothing can render her Communion not
necessary to Salvation, but either Heresy, that is, an adhesion to some
private or singular Opinion or Error in Faith; or Schism, that is a Separation
from former Ecclesiastical Unity. For the first, my Adversary himself (Rat.
Account, p. 54.) acknowledges (as I shall show before I end this Chapter) the
Church of Rome to believe all the same Articles of Faith with the Protestant,
and that the Points in which the Protestant differs from the Roman, are not
Articles of Faith; consequently, the Opposite Tenets to them, can be no Errors
in Faith with him. And for the second, if he will make the Church of Rome
guilty of Schism, he must assign some other distinct Church (then at least in
being) from whose Unity she departed; which I think was never pretended, I am
sure can never be performed. As for the Charge of Causal Schism, that is, the
Churches having given just cause for Separation (the common plea of all
Separatists) by Imposing, as is pretended, New Articles of Faith, and some of
them Idolatrous; as it implies an acknowledgment of the Fact of Schism, that
is, of breaking Church-Unity, to be on the Protestants side: so till the
Accusation be made good, and judged so by some other more competent Judge than
themselves, they stand arraigned of the Crime of Schism also, for breaking
Communion with the Church of Rome.

6. Lastly, not to spend too much time in a Digression, and yet satisfy his
desire, (and if not his, the Readers) why the Believing all the Ancient Creeds,
and leading a Good Life, may not be sufficient to Salvation, unless one be of
the Communion of the Church of Rome: I argue thus: A Christian by virtue of his
being so, is bound to be of the Communion of that Church which evidently was
the true one, and the purest, until it be as evidently at least (if not more
evidently) proved not to be so: for otherwise he wrongs both his Reason and
Conscience, if he leave a greater evidence, and adhere to a lesser. But the
Roman Church, as comprehending all those in Communion with her, by the
Testimony not only of S. Paul (Romans c. 1. and c. 16.) but of the whole
Christian World of all Ages, was evidently once the only true Church of
Christ, and conseqently the Purest; and neither has nor can be as evidently,
much less more evidently, proved not to be so still, since the Testimony of
those who do or will deny it, is incomparably short of the former. Therefore a
Christian, by virtue of his being so, is bound to be of the Communion of the
Roman Church.

7. Having thus not only given one but more Reasons to his Demand (which I
heartily pray may do him good, because he requested so earnestly to know them)
I cannot but reflect how speciously soever it has been hitherto pretended
against the Church of Rome, that the believing all the Ancient Creeds, and
leading a Good Life, is all that is necessary to Salvation; yet now there is
more required by him, viz. to join in some Church or Congregation of
Christians, by virtue of a man's being a Christian, and that he is bound to
choose the Communion of the Purest Church, by which I will suppose at present he
means the Church of England. I hope I may without offense take the same liberty
with him, which he did with me, and desire, if not for my own sake, at least
for the satisfaction of the Presbyterians, Anabaptists, and other Separated
Congregations, to know one Reason from him, why the believing all the Ancient
Creeds, and leading a Good Life, may not be sufficient to Salvation, unless one
be of the Communion of the Church of England! I confess I may be mistaken to
suppose him to mean by the purest Church, the Church of England: It is not
improbable, as will appear in the following Discourse, that he means that of
the Presbyterians; but let him mean which he will, it comes all to the same
pass. I leave him to satisfy all other Sectaries, why they are bound, by
virtue of their Christianity, to join in either of those two Congregations; or
if not in them, in any other which he fancies to be the purest. Which done, I
proceed to his Second Answer to the First Question, very fitly called by him
the main business, because it serves him as a Foundation to raise so many
Controversies upon, as by his manner of treating them, may frighten any one
that shall but look toward the Roman Church, into despair of ever getting out
of so intricate a Labyrinth.

8. His second Answer to the Frst Question, was, That all those who are in the
Communion of the Church of Rome, do run so great a hazard of their Salvation,
that none who have a care of their Souls, ought to embrace it, or continue in
it, because they must be guilty either of Hypocrisy or Idolatry, sins
inconsistent with Salvation. This, I said, was as little pertinent to the
Question, as the former; for, though it be supposed that none ought to embrace
or continue in the Catholic Church, by reason of the great hazard, he says,
they run of their Salvation; yet if they do embrace it, why may they not be
equally saved, that is, with equal hazard? To this he returns, that he is
amazed I should say this Answer of his was not pertinent to the Question, if
the Question were propounded for any ones satisfaction, that doubted, which
Churches Communion it were best to embrace. And who can choose but be more
amazed at this Reply, which gives no satisfaction at all to the Question? For
the Question, supposing the same Motives, and consequently an equal capacity,
or hazard (as he will have it) of Salvation in two persons, what answer is it
to the Question, whether they may not equally be saved, though with hazard, to
say the hazard they run is very great? And yet of 573 pages his Book contains,
no less than 544 of them are spent upon this subject. Tant^ (...)

I added farther, That this Answer of his implied a Contradiction, in
asserting, that all those of the Catholic Communion do run indeed a great
hazard of their Salvation, and then affirming for proof of this Assertion, that
they must be guilty of Hypocrisy or Idolatry, sins inconsistent with
Salvation: Which reduced into plain terms, is no other but to say, they may be
saved, though with danger, and yet indeed they cannot be saved at all. To salve
this Contradiction, he runs to a pretended supposition of wilful embracing or
continuing in Hypocrisy or Idolatry, sins (if unrepented of) inconsistent with
Salvation: But this Salve is not at all proper for the Sore, since if the
Motives convince the Understanding, and the Persons be sincere, as the Question
supposes, there cannot with any show of Reason be any thing of wilfulness
supposed in the Case. The Answer then was nothing to the purpose of the
Question; but only that it might serve him for an occasion to bring the whole
Body of Controversy into the Field, and give a treble Charge of Idolatry
against the Church of Rome, viz. in worshipping of Images, Adoration of the
Host, and Invocation of Saints. There want not Learned and Eminent men of the
Church of England, who think the Charge to be over great; and there needs no
more than his own Principles to make the Metal of his Proofs appear of too
inferior an Alloy to bear it. Which thus I show.

9. In his Rational Account of the Grounds of Protestant Religion, page 54. he
lays down the state of the difference between the Church of Rome and the Church
of England, in these words: The Church of Rome imposes new Articles of Faith
to be believed as necessary to Salvation. -- But the Church of England makes no
Articles of Faith but such as have the Testimony and Approbation of the whole
Christian World of all Ages, and are acknowledged to be such by Rome it self,
and in other things (as that no Veneration is due to Images, the Bread is not
Transubstantiated into the Body of Christ, Saints are not to be invocated,
etc.) she requires subscription to them, not as Articles of Faith, but as
inferior Truths; or as Dr. Bramhall, (Lord Primate of Ireland, alleged by
him) calls them, Pious Opinions, fitted for the preservation of Unity; not,
says he, that we oblige any man to believe them, but only not to oppose or
contradict them. This then is the Basis and Foundation he lays of his Rational
Account of the Grounds of the Protestant Religion, that no Doctrine of the
Protestant Religion, as it differs from that of the Roman, is an Article of
Faith; that is, that no Protestant believes, or if he do, he ought not to
believe, as a matter of Faith, that the Images (for example) of Christ and his
Saints are not to be honored, that the substance of the Bread is not changed
into the Body of Christ, that the Saints in Heaven are not to be invoked to
pray for us: Nay, all that he is obliged to by the Church of England, is not to
oppose or contradict them. This being so, let us now see what follows from this
Doctrine.

1. It follows that the Church of Rome does not err against any Article of
Faith, because the Church of England as he says, makes no Articles of Faith,
but such as are acknowledged to be such by Rome it self.

2dly, It follows, that himself does not believe any of these Points to be
Articles of Faith, Viz. That Veneration is not to be given to Holy Images, that
Adoration is not to be given to the Eucharist, or that the Saints are not to be
invocated; because to be Articles of Faith with him, they must have the
Testimony and Approbation of the whole Christian World of all Ages, and be
acknowledged to be such by Rome it self.

3dly, It follows, that after all this bustle to make the Church of Rome guilty
of Idolatry, in these very Points of Veneration of Images, etc. For ought any
Man knows, himself gives no interior assent to any of the forementioned
Tenets, not even as to Inferior Truths, or Pious Opinions, because the Church
of England, as he cites out of Dr. Bramhall, does not oblige any Man to believe
them, but only not to oppose or contradict them; and it is not likely he defers
more to the Church of England, than she obliges him too.

4thly, and lastly, It follows, that his charge of Idolatry against the Church
of Rome is vain and groundless, for Idolatry being an Error against the most
Fundamental Point of Faith, and the Church of Rome according to him, not erring
against any Article of Faith, it is evident, that to charge the Church of Rome
with Idolatry, must according to his own Principles be the most groundless,
unreasonable, and contradictory proceeding in the World. But it is time now to
come to particulars; only I must not omit to desire every indifferent Reader
to reflect, and judge whether Dr. Stillingfleet, to render the Doctrine of the
39. Articles, digestible to the most squeamish stomach of the nicest
Nonconformist, have not done a notable piece of service to the Church of
England in degrading so many of them as are not acknowledged by the Church of
Rome (although they be esteemed the distinctive badg of the purity of the
Church of England) from the dignity of being Articles of Faith, into a lower
Class of Inferior Truths, as he calls them, which neither himself nor any
Body else know, whether they have a grain of truth in them, or no; and
consequently are not bound to believe them? Nay, does he not undermine the
Church of England both in her Doctrine and Government? In her Doctrine, by
freeing her Subjects from any obligation of interior believing her Articles
(in which she differs from the Church of Rome) to be so much as Inferior
Truths; In her Government, by exposing her Ordination to be invaded without
scruple, by such as in their hearts judge it Antichristian, when he tells them,
her Sense is to oblige them no farther, than not to oppose or contradict it?
Was it not worth the while to rend asunder the Peace of Christendom for a
Company of Opinions, which (though Dr. Bramhall call them Pious) yet the
greater part of Christians both in the East and West for many Ages have, and do
condemn for Impious and Blasphemous? Is not this a very Rational, or rather (as
Mr. J. S. expounds the word) a very Reasonable Account of the Grounds of
Protestant Religion; and a rare way of justifying her from the Guilt of Schism?
Sure he never thought of charging the Church of Rome with Idolatry, when he
laid such sandy Principles for his Foundation: Principles of so brittle a
temper, that it was not possible they should bear so great a Charge, without
breaking and discharging upon himself.

CHAP. II.
Dr. St.'s chief Argument to prove the Church of Rome guilty of Idolatry,
examined; and his Preposterous ways of arguing laid open.

. 1. IT is a known saying of St. Irenaeus, and St. Hierom, (Ep. ad Ctesiphont.)
speaking of those, who set up their own fancies, in opposition to the Doctrine
of the Church, that to lay open what they hold, is to refute it; and certainly
it was never more true, than in the subject of the present Debate concerning
the Veneration of Images, the very light of nature teaching, that the honor or
dishonor, done to a Picture or Image reflects upon the Person represented by
it. This Protestants themselves confess in civil matters, as in the Picture or
Image of the King in order to his Person; and did they not corrupt themselves,
in those things which they know naturally, they could not but acknowledge the
same in the Image of Christ, and his Saints, in order to them. For, is it an
honor to the King, to kiss his Picture and, is it not the like to Christ, to
put off our Hats, or kneel before His* Was it a dishonor to the King, to shoot
his Picture with Bullets, a^ the Soldiers did in the late times, as they
marched along the Streets? And was it none to Christ, to have his Image bored
through with hot Irons, as he was represented rising from the Grave upon
Cheapside Cross? A Man would think there needed no more but the light of Nature
and Common sense to decide this Controversy; and yet the Doctor will needs
sustain, that the honor given to the Images of Christ and his Saints, does not
redound at all to them; but is so far from that, that it is no other than down
right Idolatry.

. 2. How vain and groundless (to say no more) this Assertion of his is, I have
already showed in the foregoing Chapter, which may serve for a full and just
Refutation of all he brings to justify his Charge of Idolatry, not only in
this matter of Veneration of Images, but also of the Adoration of the B.
Sacrament, and Invocation of Saints; In regard none of the contrary Tenets are
with him Articles of Faith; nay he professes himself not obliged to give any
interior Assent to them so much as to inferior Truths, or Pious Opinions. But
lest he should take this Compendious way of Refuting, by bringing things to
Grounds and Principles, for none at all, (as his very-well-assured Friend Dr.
Tillotson does with my demonstrating Friend, as he calls him, Mr. J. S. after
two Books set forth by him in answer to his Rule of Faith, viz. his Letter of
Thanks, and Faith vindicated) to remove, I say, the very Temptation of any
suchlike vapouring pretense from my Adversary, I shall take the pains to
examine and answer (with as much brevity as his prolixity will permit) the
particular Arguments with which he endeavors to underprop his tottering
because groundless Charge of Idolatry.

3. In order hereunto, I shall first set down what it is that the Catholic
Church teaches concerning the Veneration of Images, and thus it stands recorded
in the last General Council at Trent, (Conc. Trident. Sess. 25.) viz. That the
Images of Christ, and of the Blessed Virgin Mother of God, and of other Saints,
are to be kept and reserved especially in Churches, and due Honor and
Veneration to be given to them; not for that any Divinity or Virtue is believed
to be in them, or that any thing is to be asked of them, or any confidence to
be placed in them, as was anciently done by the Heathens, who put their trust
in Idols, but because the honor which is exhibited to the Images, is referred
to the Prototype, or thing represented by them: So that by the Images which we
kiss, and before which we kneel, or put off our Hats, we adore Christ, and
reverence his Saints, whom the said Images represent. This is what the Council
teaches, and the import of it is, that we may lawfully (and therefore ought
upon occasion) to put off our Hats, or kn^el before the Images of Christ and
his Saints, with intent thereby to adore him, and reverence them; and this is
what the Council calls (most conformably to the Light of Nature and Religion)
the giving of due Honor and Veneration to Images, but Dr. Still* (most
repugnantly to both) Idolatry.

. 4 To maintain this Charge, he lays down a P^oposition, which I said implied a
Contradiction, viz. that in the worship of God by Images, the worship due to
God is terminated wholly on the Creature. For what greater Contradiction, than
that it should be the worship of God, and yet be terminated wholly on the
Creature? What he brings in his Excuse (p. 57.) is a pretense that God has
forbidden it under the Notion of Idolatry, and that the Worship which God calls
by the name of Idolatry, and its being terminated wholly on the Creature, are
but the some thing in other words. And what is this in effect, but to tell us
first, that it is Idolatry, because it is wholly terminated on the Creature;
and then again, that it is wholly terminated on the Creature, because it is
Idolatry? A very proper de^ence for such a Cause! And from hence D^. Tillotson
may note that the use of Identical Propositions is not so despicable and
ridiculous as he would make it; but rather the most expedite way for Dr. St. to
reconcile the Terms of the greatest Contradiction. But to the matter it self I
shall speak more anon. Let us now see how he proves this main Proposition.
[viz. In the worship of God by Images, the worship aue to God, is terminated
wholly on the Creature.] The worship, sath he, (p. 4.) which God himself denies
to receive, must be terminated on the Creature: But God himself in the second
Commandment, not only denies to receive it, but threatens severely to punish
them that give it: Therefore it cannot be terminated on God, but only on the
Image.

. 5. This is the terrible Argument, by virtue of which he passes the Sentence
of Eternal Damnation upon all those who are of the Communion of the Church of
Rome, if they repent not of their ^doring Christ by putting off their hats, or
kneeling before his Image. And that the Reader may see with what Justice and
Charity he does it, before I proceed to examine particulars, I shall convene
his own Conscience, to declare to the World, what kind of Argument he judges
this to be. If only Topical, or Probable, what answer will he give to the
Great Judge at the dreadful day of Judgment, for positively condemning his
Spouse the Church for an Adulteress, upon an account which himself acknowledges
to be inevident and uncertain? I believe, himself would condemn that person for
unjust and uncharitable, who should positively charge the meanest man's Wife of
Adultery upon the like account. If he judge it a Demonstration, (which I cannot
easily believe, he seems to have taken such a Pique against the Demonstrating
Way) then the Premises must be evidently and certainly true, and the
Conclusion in virtue of them, Impossible to be false; and consequently he must
have greater certainty that the Church of Rome is Idolatrous, than he has (if
he be of the same mind with his Friend Dr. Tillotson) of the Scripture's being
the Word of God, or of the Sense of any Text of it; for example, that Christ is
God; for the said Doctor lays this down for his Fundamental Position in his
Rule of Faith, p. 118. (and affirms it expressly of the Books of Scripture, in
the Preface to his Sermons) that we are not infallibly certain either that any
Book is so ancient as it pretends to be, or that it was written by him whose
name it bears, or that this is the sense of such and such passages in it: It is
possible all this may be otherwise. From whence I infer yet farther, that if we
are not sure of the Sense of any Text of Scripture, but possibly it may be
false, Himself is not sure that God has forbidden the worshipping himself by
Images in the second Commandment, and therefore cannot judge his own Argument
to be a Demonstration, nor consequently evidence sufficient to make out his
Charge of Idolatry. But to come now to particulars.

. 5. The worship, says he, which God himself denies to receive, must be
terminated on the Creature, and that wholly and only on the Creature, as he
expresses it in the Context of his Discourse. This is the Major Proposition of
his Syllogism, and if this fail, the Charge he builds upon it, must needs fall.
I asserted it in my Reply, to be absolutely false, as built upon a mistake of
the nature of humane Acts, which though they ought to be governed by the Law of
God, yet when they swerve from it, cease not to tend to their own proper
Objects, and that Gods prohibition of such or such a kind of worship, may make
it to be unlawful, but hinders not the Act from tending whither it is intended.
Of this I gave instances in the Prayers which Thieves and Murderers make to God
for good success; the Jew's offering to God the Blind and the Lame, which he
had forbidden, Cain's bringing a Sacrifice to the Lord, Genesis 4. 3. which he
refused to accept. All which I showed were notwithstanding terminated on God;
and from thence inferred, that though God (as he falsely supposes) should have
forbidden men to worship him by Images, yet it does not follow, but the worship
so given would be terminated on him.

. 7. To show the insufficiency (as he calls it) of this Answer, he asserts,
that where God has prohibited any particular way or means of giving Worship to
himself, that Worship so given cannot be said to be terminated on him. And to
show the Vanity and Impertinency of this Defense, I answer, That this very
Assertion of his, quite changes the state of the Question; for his Charge being
of real Idolatry, and that antecedently to any Prohibition, as appears by his
contending that the Church of Rome does require the giving the Creature the
honor due only to God, p. 3. and by his asserting, p. 62. that any Image
being made so far the Object of Divine Worship, that men do how down before it,
does thereby become an Idol, and on that account is forbidden in the second
Commandment: he now changes his Peremptory [cannot be terminated on God] into
that Dwindling Expression of [It cannot be said to be terminated on God] giving
his Reader to understand, that his meaning now is not, that Catholics are
really Idolaters, that is, by the very nature of Worship so given by an Image
antecedently to any Law forbidding it; but denominatively, and in name only;
and that upon account of a Law (supposed by him most falsely, as I shall make
manifest in the following Discourse) to prohibit the giving Worship to God by
bowing or kneeling before an Image. And lest we should any way doubt that this
was his meaning, himself in the contents of his First Chapter, puts down the
state of the Controversy between us, in these words: The main Question, says
he, is, Whether God has forbidden the worshipping of himself by an Image,
under the notion or (as he explicates it, page 57.) under the name of Idolatry?
It were worth the while to see the Doctor reconcile the state of the Question
put by himself, with that Assertion of his above cited, page 62. that any Image
being made so far the Object of Divine Worship, that men do bow down before it,
does thereby become an Idol, and on that account is forbidden in the second
Commandment. The former supposes it to have the notion or name of Idolatry,
upon the account of its being forbidden: The later affirms it to be forbidden
upon the account of its being Idolatry in the very nature of the thing,
antecedently to any Prohibition. And in which sense soever of the two, he take
the Proposition in debate, viz. [The Worship which God denies to receive,
cannot be terminated on him, but on the Image] it is evident he contradicts
himself; For if he mean that it cannot be terminated on God, antecedently to
the Prohibition, because any Image being made so far the Object of Divine
Worship, that men do bow down before it, does thereby become an Idol, and on
that account is forbidden in the second Commandment, he must deny that it is
the Prohibition which makes it to be terminated on the Image. And if he mean
that it cannot be terminated on God, because it is prohibited by him to Worship
Him by a^ Image, he must deny what he asserted before, that any Image being
made so far the Object of Divine Worship, that men do bow down before it, does
THEREBY become an Idol, and ON THAT ACCOUNT is forbidden in the second
Commandment. Let him extricate himself as well as he can out of this Labyrinth.
I return to what he adds in defense of his Assertion, viz. The Worship which
God himself denies to receive, must be terminated on the Creature.

. 8. To vindicate this Assertion from the Note of Falsehood I had fixed upon it,
he lays down these three Propositions: 1. That Worship is nothing else but an
external signification of Honor and Respect. 2. That the signification of
Honor which is due to God, is not to be measured by the Intentions of Men,
against the declared Will of God. 3. The Divine Law being the Rule of Worship
all prohibited ways of Worship must receive that denomination which God himself
gives them: As, says he, it would be Treason, after the Princes Declaration of
it by his Laws, for any man to bow down to a Sign-Post with the Princes Head
upon it. And therefore if God have declared the Worship of himself by an Image
to be Idolatry, it cannot be terminated on God, but only on the Image. This is
the substance of his Defense, and what it amounts to, is this, That if God have
forbidden, under the name of Idolatry, to bow down before any Image, though
with intention to Worship Him by it, this Act of Worship must be called
Idolatry, because not men's Intentions, but the Will of God is the Rule of
Worship. A rare Defense indeed! But nothing at all to the purpose, (although we
should yield the Supposition to be as true as it is false, viz. that God had
forbidden it under that name) unless he can show that words can never be taken
Metaphorically, but that the very definition of a thing must always necessarily
go along with its name. What he charges upon us, is the very definition of
Idolatry, viz. That we give to the Creature the honor due only to God. What
he brings to prove it, is a supposed extrinsecal denomination, that if God have
called the Worshipping him by an Image Idolatry, it must receive the name of
Idolatry, and therefore be terminated on the Image. And if this kind of arguing
be good, he may prove by the same Logic, that a man worshipping a false God,
violates his Neighbors Bed, because God himself calls the Worshipping a false
God by the name of Adultery: And that he that wears a Sword with intention to
defend his Prince, has a real intention against his Life, in case the Prince
upon some occasion have forbidden to wear a Sword under the name of Treason. He
that has but looked over Aristotle's Threshold, knows, that from the definition
to the name, the consequence is good, because the Name is but a Note of the
Nature or Essence of the Thing defined. But nothing more inconsequent than to
argue from the Name to the Definition, because the Name may be given upon the
score of some similitude, either intrinsecal or extrinsecal, and not upon the
account of the Nature or Essence, which is properly signified by such a Name.
The Doctor therefore (to give him his due) in the beginning of his Charge,
argues like a good Logician, when he would conclude the Church of Rome guilty
of Idolatry, because (he says) she requires the giving to the Creature the
Honor due only to God. But he plays the downright Sophister in the close,
when he would prove that in worshipping God by an Image, she gives to the Image
the Honor due only to Him; because if God have given it the name of Idolatry,
it must receive the denomination of Idolatry. Either he must make it out, that
a mere Extrinsecal Denomination has the miraculous power to reflect against
Nature, the Honor directed to God, from Him to the Image, or he must confess
that Gods Prohibition of such Worship (if there were any) may make it indeed to
be unlawful, but hinders not the Act from tending whither it was intended: and
consequently if it be intended or directed by the Understanding and Will, to
God, though after an unlawful manner, it will not fail to be terminated on God.
Nor is this to make the Intentions of men to be the Rule of Divine Worship, for
if God have forbidden himself to be Worshipped after such a manner, the giving
him such Worship will be a dishonouring of Him, though the Giver intend it
never so much for his honor. Disobedience it will be, or some other sin, and
denominatively Idolatry (if forbidden under that name) but not a terminating
the honor due to God upon the Image, unless the Doctor think it a good
Argument to prove the Fields and Trees to be Merry Companions, because the
Prophet says, The Fields are joyful, and the Trees of the Wood rejoice. These
he will say are Metaphorical denominations; and so must that of Idolatry be, in
his supposed Prohibition, unless he can prove the Worship due to God, to be
terminated wholly on the Image, and so the Act it self to have in it the true
nature of Idolatry, antecedently to such a denomination.

. 9. As for that Courtly Comparison of his, that it would be Treason in any man
to bow down to a Sign. Post with the Princes Head upon it, though with an
intention to honor him by it; (a most self-denying Ordinance I confess, and
not unlike to that rare example of Self-denial to which himself so Religiously
exhorts the Prelates of the Church of England in the Preface to his Irenicum,
viz. to reduce the form of Church Government to its Primitive State and Order,
by retrenching all Exorbitancies (as he calls them) of Power, and restoring
Presbyteries) as the World is like to want such an unheard of Example of
Self-abnegation, at least till Princes can be persuaded that the honor or
dishonor done to their Pictures reflects not upon Them; and that Act of the
Civil Law be repealed, (L. unica. cod. de his qui ad Statuas) which declares it
Treason for any man to deface his Princes Picture; So, were it enacted, it
would not hinder the Act of Reverence and Respect from being terminated upon
the Prince to whom it was intended.

. 10. To the Instances I gave in my Reply, of the Prayers which Thieves and
Murderers make to God for good success, of the Jews offering to God the Blind
and Lame, which he had forbidden, and of Cain's offering a Sacrifice to God,
which he refused to accept; all which evidently show that God's having
forbidden such a kind of Worship, hinders it not from being terminated on him:
All that he answers, is, That these Instances do not suppose any prohibited
Object, or Means of Worship, as he supposes the Worship of God by an Image
does. And here again he falls into the same Contradiction as before, viz. that
it is the Worship of God by an Image, and yet the Image is made the whole and
sole object of Worship. But to conclude this point: It Is evident, that the
Image is not made the Object of Worship by the Intention of him that gives it;
which (says Dr. Tailor) is that by which God principally, if not solely takes
estimate of humane actions) for what he intends, is, to Worship God by it; and
the Intention not making it the Object of Worship, an Extrinsecal Denomination
from a Law forbidding, (if there were any such) cannot make it to be so, nor
hinder the Act from being terminated on God, its intended Object. It Is manifest
then, that the Major Proposition of the Argument brought by him to prove the
Church of Rome guilty of Idolatry, viz. That the Worship which God denies to
receive, must be terminated on the Creature, is absolutely false; and
consequently all that he builds upon it, falls to the ground. But this was but
a Prelude to usher in his Minor, viz. That God not only denies to receive
Worship by an Image, but threatens severaly to punish them that give it. Upon
this it is he lays the main stress of his Charge of Idolatry; how
inconsequently (though supposed to be as he would have it, a Prohibition) I
have showed already, and shall make yet more apparent, by laying open the
nullity of the Proofs he brings to maintain it.

CHAP. III.
The mystery of making the same Proposition sometimes an Article of Faith, and
sometimes none. No express Text against Worshipping God by an Image. His first
Proof from the Terms of the Law, manifes^ly groundless. The Argument from St.
Austin's Judgment, and the Septuagints translating the word Pesel, Idol, and
not Image, reinforced.

1. WHat we are to consider in the first place here, is, what it is that Dr.
St. will undertake to prove; and it is this, That God in the second Commandment
(according to his reckoning) expressly prohibited the giving any Worship to
himself by an Image. This is what upon his Second Thoughts (for the term
expressly was not in his FIRST Answer) he undertakes to prove: And I cannot but
wonder to see it drop now from his Pen, who on the one side asserts Scripture
(doubtless express Scripture) to be his most certain Rule of Faith; and on the
other side, denies (as I showed above, Chap. 1.) any thing to b^ an Article of
Faith, which is not acknowledged to be such by Rome it self. What may the
meaning of this be? If it be expressly revealed in Scripture that God is not to
be worshipped by an Image, it is an Article of Faith. If it be not acknowledged
to be such by Rome it self, it is no Article of Faith, but (as he calls it) an
Inferior Truth or Pious Opinion, yet such as neither himself nor any man else
is bound to believe there is a jot of Truth in it. Is it then, or is it not an
Article of Faith that God is not to be worshipped by an Image? If it be an
Article of Faith, it is false what he asserts so stiffly in his Rational
Account, p. 54. that the Church of England makes no Articles of Faith but what
are acknowledged to be such by Rome it self. If it be not an Article of Faith,
it is false what he affirms so positively here, that God has expressly
prohibited it in the second Commandment. Which side soever he takes, it is
manifest he contradicts himself.

2. But perhaps his meaning is, that what at one time is but an Inferior
Truth, must at another be an Article of Faith, according as it may serve to the
different ends and purposes he has designed to himself. And here if I mistake
not, lies the Knack, or (if you will give it so venerable a name) the Mystery
of the business. When the Hedge of the Church of England (viz. Subscription to
her 39 Articles) must be broken down for the good Brethren the Nonconformists
to enter in, and ravage without scruple her Rights and Revenues, so many of the
said Articles as are not owned by Rome it self, must be a company of Inferious
Truths, or Pious Opinions, not to be assented to, but not to be opposed for
Unity's sake. But when the Church of Rome is to be charged with Idolatry, (the
Pretense with which Ignorant Preachers, says Mr. Thorndike, (Just Weights, p.
128.) drive their Factions) then they are no more Infericur Truths, but
Articles of Faith, expressly revealed in the Holy Scriptures. Now, would an
Impartial Reader (to use Dr. Taylor's expression upon another occasion) say
upon his conscience, that this was not kindly done, to make use of the
Authority of the Church of Rome to unhallow so many of the 39 Articles as are
not owned by her, and cast them down into the Class of Inferior Truths, to
stitch up the Rent made by the Nonconformists from the Church of England; And
then to consecrate them again so easily by virtue of this one definitive word [
Expresly] into Divine Revelations, against the Church of Rome, to make the
Breach of the Church of England from her yet wider. But what cannot an Irenical
Compliance with one Party, and a Polemical Animosity, or (as Mr. Thorndike
calls it) Faction with another do* When the same Proposition as it respects the
former, shall be ranked only amongst Inferior Truths, which none are obliged
to assent to; and as it oppugns the latter, shall be raised to an Article of
Faith, which all are bound to believe? Here then lies the Mystery, that the
same Proposition, viz. That God is not to be worshipped by an Image, taken
Irenically, and in its Paci^i^k Temper, is but an Inferior Truth, because not
owned to be an Article of Faith by the Church of Rome; but taken Polemically,
and in its ^a^like Humor, it must be an Article of Faith, because expressly (as
he says) revealed in Scripture. And if he will have it so, let us see how he
goes about to prove it.

3. Our Contr^versie, says he, p. 58. being (...) about the sense of a Law, the
best ways we have to find the meaning of it, are either from the Terms in which
it is express^d, or from the Reason annexed to it, or from the Judgment of
Th^se whom we believe best able to understand and interpret it. And he will
prove from every one of these three ways, that it is expressly prohibited in the
second Commandment to worship God by an Image. It were well, he would tell us
here first, what he understands by the term Expressly. For if he calls that, for
example, an express Text, which of it self is absolutely clear and manifest,
and therefore as St. Austin says, (de unit. E^^l. c. 19.) Non eget Interpret,
needs no Interpreter; Mr. Thorndike (and those other Learned Men of the Church
of England, who see no better than he) have reason to lament the loss of their
Eyesight. But if he mean no more, but that it is clear and manifest to
himself, they may hope they see as well as their Neighbors, though they see
the quite contrary; unless They will suffer themselves to be wrought upon by
his stout asserting it to be clear and manifest; as the Travelers were by
Polus in Erasmus his Exorcismus, when pretending that he saw a huge Dragon with
^iery Horns in the Sky, by avouching it strongly, and pointing expressly to the
place, he forced them (out of shame not to see so perspicuous a thing) to
confess that they saw it also. That it is not absolutely clear and manifest of
it self, the pains and the ways he takes to make it out, sufficiently evince.
And whether it be clear and manifest even to himself we have cause to doubt;
because the Proposition in debate, [viz. That God has prohibited the
worshipping himself by an Image in the second Commandment] not being
acknowledged by the Church of Rome for an Article of Faith, the Church of
England, says he, obliges no man to assent to it, but only not to oppose it;
and yet on the other side, every man is bound to assent to that which he sees
to be clear and manifest. Such frequent self-contradictions are the natural
Consequences of a Discourse not grounded upon Truth; And although the Reader
may think I take a delight to discover them in my Adversary, yet I can assure
him it is a much greater Grief to me to see so subtle a Wit so often entangled
in them. The fault is in the Couse, which cannot be managed without falling
into them. But as St. Austin says, Quis coegit ers malam causam habere? Who
forced him and his Partisans to engage in a bad Cause? Nothing of Faith, if it
be true which he tells us in his Rational Account: Nothing of Reason as I shall
show in the Examination of his Proofs.

4. The first way he takes to prove that God in the second Commandment has
expressly prohibited the giving any Worship to himself by an Image, is from the
Terms in which the Law is expressed. And what are they in the Protestants own
Translation Exodus 20. 4? Thou shall not make unto thee any graven Image, or any
likeness of any thing, etc. Thou shall not bow down thy self to them, nor serve
them. These are the Terms in which the Law is expressed, and where I pray, is
it expressed here, that we may not give any Worship to God himself by an Image?
The first part touches not the Worship of Images, nor of God himself by them;
but only the making them; and gives matter to Divines to dispute whether it be
forbidden by this Commandment to make any Image or any Likeness at all? A thing
in which Catholics and Protestants are equally concerned. The second forbids
indeed in express terms, to bow our selves down to the Images themselves, but
speaks not one word of the lawfulness or unlawfulness of worshipping God
himself by them. So that in case we have not here another of the Doctors
Identical Propositions, viz. that to treat a matter expressly, is the same in
other words, as not to speak of it at all, it is manifest, that to worship God
himself before or by an Image, is not expressly prohibited in this Commandment.
Let the Protestant Reader consider this well, and not suffer himself to be
deluded with the sound of words. To bow our selves down to the Images
themselves, without any Relation to God, is by the Concession of all to worship
them instead of God. And is it all one to worship an Image instead of God, and
to worship God himself by bowing before an Image? The difference is too
palpable not to be seen by any one who has not the natural Conceptions of his
mind corrupted by an over-eager desire to pursue at any rate so unjust and
uncharitable a Charge as that of Idolatry. The Jews we know did worship God by
bowing down before the Ark and the Cherubims, and yet they did not worship them
instead of God. And if the Doctor will needs contend that this was a particular
dispensation to the Jews, that they might lawfully bow down before the Ark and
the Cherubims, to worship God; he must acknowledge the Precept (if it were so)
as to that part of not worshipping God by bowing before an Image, not to have
been Natural, for then God had dispensed with them in committing real Idolatry;
but Ceremonial, and consequently not to oblige Christians, unless he will
engage them also in the observance of all the Ceremonial part of the Law of
Moses. Taking then the Terms of the Law as translated by Protestants themselves
in favor of their own Cause, it is manifest that to worship God by an Image, is
not expressly prohibited, because not at all spoken of in that Commandment.

5. What I asserted to be the meaning of the Law, was, That God forbad to give
his Worship to Idols. To prove this, I urged 1. The Judgment of St. Austin, who
makes those words, Thou shall not make to thy self any graven thing, etc. to be
but an explication of the immediately foregoing ones, Thou shall have no other
Gods before me. 2. That the word Pesel in Hebrew, in Latin Sculptile, (a graven
thing) was used in Scripture to signify an Idol, and particularly was
translated by the Septuagint in this very place (...), Thou shall not make to
thy self an Idol.

To the First he answers (page 99,) by asking, How am I sure this was St.
Austin's constant Judgment, since in his later Writings he reckons up the
Commandments as others of the Fathers had done before him? But before I reply
to this Demand, it will be convenient to lay down what was S. Austin's Judgment
in his former Writing, concerning the dividing of the Commandments.

6. In his LXXI Question upon Exodus, he treats this Point expressly, and at
large, viz. Whether three Commandments only are to be assigned to the first
Table, and seven to the second? Or four to the First, and six only to the
Second? And he gives his Resolution in these words. Those, says he, who assign
four to the First Table, will have those words, [Thou shall not make to thy
self an Idol; where Idols are forbidden to to be worshipped] to be a distinct
Precept from the foregoing words, Thou shall have no other Gods besides me; and
these other words, Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors Wife, and, Thou shall not
covet thy Neighbors house, with the rest to the end of the second Table, to be
but One. Those who assign but Three to the First Table, make whatever is
commanded concerning the Worship of One God; that nothing else be worshipped
for God besides him; to be but One Precept: and divide the last words of the
Second Table into Two, so that, Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors Wife, is one
Commandment; and, Thou shall not covet his house, nor any thing that is his,
another. Yet neither of them doubt of the Commandments being Ten, because this
the Scripture it self witnesses. But to me, says He, it seems more congruous
to divide them into Three and Seven, because those which belong to God seem to
insinuate a Trinity of Persons to such as more attentively look into them. And
in reality the very same thing is more perfectly explicated, when Idols are
forbidden to be worshipped, which was said in the forgoing words, Thou shall
have no other Gods besides me. Thus S. Austin. And then having shown the last
words of the Second Table, Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors wife, Thou shall
not covet thy Neighbors house, etc. to be two distinct Precepts from the
distinct Prohibitions, [Thou shall not, and Thou shall not] answerable to the
different nature of the Sins forbidden he adds, But as to that which is
forbidden by those words, Thou shall have no other Gods besides me, it is
apparent that a more diligent execution of this matter is imported by the words
which follow. For to what does that Prohibition belong, Thou shall not make to
thy self and Idol, or any similitude of things in Heaven above, Thou shall not
adore them, nor serve them, but to that which was said before, Thou shall have
no other Gods before me? These are the Words and the Discourse of S. Austin; in
which the Reader may note, 1. That he translates, Thou shall not make to thy
self an Idol, not an Image, as Protestants do very artificially, to make their
Assertion seem more plausible. 2. That he makes the sense of the Law to be the
forbidding to give the Worship of God to Idols. 3. That he does not make it a
distinct Precept from the foregoing words, Thou shall have no other Gods
besides me, but only a more particular and perfect explication of them. So
that if the Judgment of S. Austin be to be followed, either for the meaning of
the Law, or for the dividing of the Decalogue, it is evident he stands on the
Catholick's side, and not on the Protestant's.

7. This Dr. St. saw very well, and therefore found no other way to evade the
weight of his Judgment, but to call me to Account how I am sure that this was
his constant Judgment, since in his latter Writings (upon his bare word you
must take it, for there is nothing in the place to prove it) he reckons up the
Commandments as others of the Fathers had done before him? He would seem (...)
these last words to in^inuate as if S. Austin had changed his Judgment upon
consideration of what other Fathers had done before him; but there is mention
of no such thing in those later Writings cited by himself; and in the former
cited by me, it is plain that he had considered the Opinion of those other
Fathers before him (concerning the dividing the Commandments as Protestants do
now) and that notwithstanding their Sentiment in the case, he rejected it as
less congruous to the meaning of the Law, and the natures of the things
forbidden. This then was a pretty Artifice to amuze the Reader, instead of
speaking to the Point. But to come to his demand, How I am sure that S. Austin
remained constant in this Judgment, Let us first see what the words are in the
place to which he refers us in his Margin, Who will say, says S. Austin)
(Contra duas Ep. Pelag. li. 3. c. 4.) that Christians are not bound to observe,
that God only is to be served with the service of Religion, that an Idol is
not to be worshipped, that the Name of God ought not to be taken in vain, that
Parents are to be honored, that Adulteries, Murders, Thes^s are not to be
committed, that false witness is not to be born, that our Neighbors Wife, that
no other thing which is his, is not to be coveted. These are the words of S.
Austin. And his Intention here was no more, but to recapitulate the Duties
enjoined in the Decalogue, which Christians are bound to observe, as is
evident, 1. From his first words, Who will say that Christians are not bound to
observe, etc. 2. From the occasion of them, which was to answer the Calumny of
the Pelagians, who accused him for asserting. That the Law was not given to
justify the Observers, but to be a greater cause of sin. 3. From his leaving
out the keeping of the Sabbath, as it was commanded to be observed by the Jews,
which he had before excepted. This was his Intention in the place cited by the
Doctor, and not to meddle at all with the manner how the Commandments are to be
divided; for whether Four be assigned to the First Table, and Six to the
Second; or Three only to the First, and Seven to the Second, the Duties which
Christians are bound to observe, are still the same. So that the Doctor has no
more ground from hence to say that St. Austin divides them in this place, as
Protestants do, than he has from the very words of the Decalogue, as they are
set down in Exodus, where although the Commandments are expressly said to be
Ten; yet how many belong to the First Table, and how many to the Second, is not
specified. Concerning this, he had delivered his Judgment professedly in the
place cited by me, to be the same which Catholics at this day follow; and if
the Doctor questioned the Constancy of his Judgment, any man of Reason would
think it had been his part to show he had changed it; and not to ask his
Adversary how he is sure he had not done so, when he could bring nothing to
prove it, but the very matter it self in dispute. This I confess is a new way
of answering the Fathers, and the readiest I ever met with, excepting that of
denying them. Whether it be as Good as New, let the Reader judge. I am sure if
it be allowed for good, there is no more to do, when an express Testimony is
alleged out of any Father for any point in Controversy, but to stand up and
ask the Alledger confidently, How he is sure that the Father did not afterward
change his mind, in his later Writings, although he speak not at all to that
Question in them. As for the particular point in debate, viz. Whether those
words, Thou shall not make to thee a graven thing, be to be taken according to
S. Austin, not as a distinct Commandment, but as an explication only of the
foregoing words, Thou shall have no other Gods besides me? I am sure I have
his Judgment professedly for me in his former Writings, and having possession
on my side, I am yet farther sure, that I ought not in justice to be deprived
of it, till the Doctor can bring some better evidence out of his later
Writings, than a bare recital of the Commandments; this being in plain terms no
other than to beg the Question. The Reader may note here also, that even in
this place, cited by the Doctor for himself, the sense S. Austin gives of the
Law (whether it be a distinct Precept or no) is the very same I gave in my
Reply, ut Idolum non colatur, that an Idol is not to be worshipped. And if I
mistake not, his Judgment is to be preferred before Calvin's.

8. The next thing I insisted upon to show the meaning of the Law to be the
forbidding to give the Worship of God to Idols, was the use of the Hebrew word
Pesel in Scripture to signify an Idol, and particularly its being translated
so in this very place by the Septuagint. To this he returns a double Answer. 1.
That supposing it signified only an Idol, yet that were not enough, because
there is added another Word of as large a signification as may be to this
purpose, which is (Themuna) SIMILITUDE. But this is nothing at all to the
purpose, for how large soever its signification be, when taken by it self, yet
in our present case, it is limited by the following words, Thou shall not bow
down to them, nor serve them, to signify the likeness of something which is
made to be worshipped as God, that is, to be an Idol. And upon this account, as
Mr. Thorndike (Epilog. Of the Laws of the Church, p. 361.) well observes,
Tertullian contr. Marcion, li. 2. c. 22. manifestly affirms, the making of the
Brazen Serpent and Cherubins, not to have been against the Law, because not
made for Idols, alleging the words of the Precept, [Thou shall not worship
them, nor serve them] for a Restriction limiting the Generality of a Carved
Image. And this Opinion, says he; I doubt not to be true. But to what purpose,
says Dr. St. are words of the largest signification put into a Law, if the
sense be limited according to the most narrow acceptance of one word mentioned
therein? Instances I doubt not may be brought of Humane Laws, in which words of
the largest signification are frequently put in, (and to purpose too) when the
Intention of the Lawmakers is, that they be understood according to the
narrower signification of some other word or words in the Law. And that the
Reader may see it was not done to no purpose, in the present Law under debate,
I must desire him to take notice, that the Heathens (as Origin Hom. 8. in Exodus
20. and Theodoret Q. 38. in Exodus tell us, when they expound this very
Commandment) had two sorts of Images; some which were purely sigments or
Fictions of their own Brain, made to represent what had no existence but in
their own Imaginations, as Sphynxes, Tritons, Centaurs, and the like; and
others, which were made to represent such things as had a real and substantial
being in the World, as the Sun, Moon, Stars, and other like things, which they
esteemed and worshipped as Gods. And although the word [Idol] as it is
generally taken, be used to signify any thing that is falsely esteemed and
worshipped as a God, whether real or imaginary, yet the former only of those
Images, say these Fathers, are signified in this Law by the word Idol, and the
latter by the word Similitude. From whence it appears that the term Similitude
in this place, is neither taken in its largest extent, to signify any Image or
Representation whatsoever, though with relation to the worship of the true God;
nor yet in the narrowest signification of the word Idol, which is such an Image
as is made to represent for Worship, a Figment that has no real Being; but in a
middle acception, for an Image or resemblance of some real thing, but falsely
imagined to be a God. And it was to the purpose that the Law should be thus
enlarged for the Instruction of a people so rude and prone to all kind of
Idolatry as the Jews were: But supposing the Law to be Natural, and not in part
Ceremonial, it was nothing to the purpose to put the word Similitude in its
largest meaning, that is, as signifying any Image what soever, though made with
respect to the Worship of the true God; when God himself commanded the Ark and
the Cherubins to be made for that respect. What the Doctor should prove (and it
is his part at present to prove) against these Fathers, and the General Sense
of the Church of Christ for so many hundred years, is, that the word Similitude
is to be taken so here; that is, for any Image made with respect to the Worship
of God. But all the Proof he brings, is a confident I confess it cannot enter
into my mind how God should have forbidden it by more express and emphatical
words than he has done; and yet his own words, (p. 60.) that God forbids any
Image or Similitude to be made with respect to his Worship, I conceive are much
more express and emphatical to his purpose, than those of the Law; for Those
bear a great dispute, These none at all. But to let this pass; What he
endeavors instead of proving his own Assertion, is, to render the explication
brought by his Adversary ridiculous, by a Comparison, much of the same s^amp
with his former one, of a Princes making it Treason to bow down to a Sign Post
with his Head upon it, with Intention to honor him. And to do him right, the
Reader shall have it as it lies. If a Prince, says he, should under a severe
penalty (you may suppose it Treason, as in the other case) forbid all his
Subjects making any Image or resemblance, with intent to give honor to him by
kneeling before them, would not that man be thought very ridiculous, who should
go about to interpret the Law thus, that the Prince did not forbid them making
any Picture of Himself or his Son, or any of his Favorites, (for the Worship of
these could not but redound to his own honor) but only that they should not
make the Image of an Ape, or an Ass, or a Tiger, thinking to honor their
Prince thereby? Much such an exposition, says he, is that here given of the
Law. God forbids any Image or Similitude to be made with respect to his
Worship, (for it is ridiculous to imagine the Law means any thing else) but he
(his Adversary) says, This Law must not be understood to exclude a Crucifix,
or suchlike Sacred Image, with an intention to worship God by them; but only
they should not worship Apis or Dagen, an Ichneumon or a Crocodile, or any the
most ridiculous follies of the Heathen. Behold here a quaint Comparison! A
product of pure Fancy indeed, that a Prince should be imagined to enact a Law
so much against Nature, and his own honor. But to make it run on all four,
with the Beasts mentioned in it, viz. the Ape, the Ass, and the Tiger, ought
not the Doctor first to have proved the Sense of the Law in question to be,
That God forbids an Image or Similitude to be made with respect to his Worship,
by some better Reason, than [for it is ridiculous to imagine the Law means any
thing else:] when there is not one word in the Law expressing a Prohibition of
any such thing, as I showed above, and the Jews were expressly commanded to make
the Ark and the Cherubins, and to bow down before them to that very end? How
quaint soever then the Comparison be, it is g^ounded on a false Supposition,
and so quite beside the matter. I shall take leave to set it down, as I
conceive it ought to be, and so leave it to the Reader to judge between us.
Suppose that the R^b^ls of Astracan, having defaced all Images in the City, had
set up that of their Leader Stephan Radzin in every Street, and as they passed
by, put off their Hats, or bowed to it, with intent to honor him by those
actions. Suppose farther, that the Czar of Muscovy, their lawful Prince, having
reduced the City to his Obedience, should forbid under a severe Penalty all his
Subjects to uncover or bow themselves to an Image; and at the same time, or a
little after, command those which were set up for the Usurper's honor to be
pulled down and burnt, and others relating to himself set up* to the Intent to
honor him by them: would not that man be thought very ridiculous, who should
go about to interpret the Law to be meant of any Image whatsoever, (though made
with respect to the Prince'^ own honor) by taking the word Image in its
largest signification, especially if there were another word or clause in the
Law, limiting the Generality of the word Image to those of the Usurper? Just
such an exposition of the Law is that given here by the Doctor. Rebel Mankind
had set up Idols and Images of false Gods in all parts of the World, to honor
that Arch Rebel the Devil, by bowing down before them; and God having reduced a
part of it to his Obedience, (the People of the Jews) forbids them to make an
Idol, or any similitude of things in Heaven, or Earth, or under the Earth, to
bow down to them, or serve them, restraining thereby the generality of the word
similitude, to signify those of false Gods: And at the same time, or presently
after, commands them to make an Ark and Cherubins to give Worship to himself by
bowing down before them. Would not that man now be thought ridiculous, who
should go about to interpret the Law to mean by that general term Similitude,
the forbidding any Image or Similitude whatsoever to be made with respect to
his own Worship? Let the Reader judge whether this I have set down, be not the
plain state of the point in debate between us: and whether there be any thing
more extravagant than such an Exposition of the Law as this here given, except
the Reason it self he gives (...) ridiculous to imagine the Law means any thing
else?

9. His second Answer to my Argument is, that the word Pesel is very properly
rendered an Image, and does not signify barely an Idol. And what he offers by
way of Proof is, that it is no less than forty several times rendered by the
Lxx. glypton, a graven thing, and but thrice by eidoolon, an Idol, and once by
eikoon, which is properly an Image. But granting this to be so, does it any way
hinder, but their Judgment was, it was to be rendered by Idol in this place? Nay
is it not evident, that translating it generally by glypton, a graven thing,
they had some particular reason to render it by Idol, rather than by graven
thing or Image, in this and the other two places? I, but the word Pesel is o^
so large a signification, that he says it properly signifies any thing that is
carved out of Wood or Stone, and being so often rendered by the Septu^gint a
graven thing, it is plain from thence, says he, that when they translate it by
an Idol, they mean no more thereby than a graven Image. But what a strange kind
of consequence is this, that because they oftentimes translate it a graven
thing, therefore, when they translate it Idol, they mean no more I suppose he
means ^o less.
thereby than a graven thing? As if the sense of a word of a stricter
signification, were to be regulated by another of a larger, and not the more
ample by the narrower; especially in this place, where the words, Thou shall
not worship them, nor serve them, are (as Tertullian above cited says) a
Restriction limiting the Generality of a Carved Image. No assistance then can
be given him from hence, nor yet from the Alexandrian MS. rendering it glypton
in the repetition of the Law, Deuteronomy. 5. 8. nor its being translated ^ikoon, Isa.
40. 18. nor yet from the Vulgar Latin using Idolum, Sculptile, and Imago, all
to express the same thing, Isa. 44. 9, 10, 13. for in all these places (as They
may see who will look into them) there is still some term or clause restraining
the words, Sculptile and Imago, to signify such a graven thing or Image as is
made to be compared with God, or to be the Object of Divine Worship, that is,
to be an Idol: from whence the contrary to what he infers, is plain, that when
they translate it by graven Image, they mean no more thereby than an IDOL. As
for that final Conclusion of his, (viz. By which it appears, that any Image
being made so far the Object of Divine Worship that men do bow down before it,
does thereby become an Idol, and on that account is forbidden in this
Commandment;) not to spend time in divining what that is by which this appears
(it is so very mystical) the Proposition it self, 1. Supposes most falsely,
that to bow down before any Image, though with intent to worship God, is to
make it the Object of Divine Worship, and consequently an Idol. 2. It
contradicts also what he said before, that to do so, is Idolatry, upon the
quite contrary account, viz. because it is forbidden, as has been shown more
at large above. Let him not contradict Christ's holy Spouse the Church (if he
will not contradict himself) much less accuse her of Idolatry, for worshipping
God by bowing or kneeling before a Crucifix; as the Jews were allowed to do by
the like actions before the Ark and the Cherubins. When he can prove this to be
Idolatry from the Terms of the Law, or any thing else, he will do something.
Hitherto he has done nothing, there being not any one Term in the Law, (as I
have showed) by which it is expressly prohibited to give Worship to God himself
by an Image. I advance now to his Second Proof, drawn, as he says, from the
Reason annexed to the Law.

CHAP. IV.
Dr. St.'s Second Proof, from the Reason of the Law, Sophistical. All
Representations of God, not dishonorable to him; nor rejected as such by the
Church of England. The Proper Reason of the Law on Gods part assigned, and
asserted to be the Supreme Excellency of his Nature.

. 1. THe Second Proof he brings (p. 62.) to show that God in the second
Commandment has expressly prohibited the giving any Worship to himself by an
Image, is from the Reason annexed to it. (P. 58.) And that, he says, the
Scripture tells us was derived from Gods Infinite and Incomprehensible Nature,
which could not be represented to men, but in a way that must be an infinite
disparagement to it. I expected to find this Reason, because he says, it is
annexed to the Law, either in the Law it self, or in the Preface, or in the
Commination against the Transgressors of it: but it seems he could not find it
there himself, and therefore he cites for it, that Text of Isa. 40. 18. To whom
will ye liken God? Or what likeness will ye compare to him? And that of Deuteronomy.
4. 15, 16. Take good heed to your selves, etc. for ye saw no manner of
similitude on the day that the Lord spoke unto you. And the Consequence from
all is, a desire to know whether by this Reason God does not declare, that all
Worship given to him by any visible Representation of him, is extremely
dishonorable to him? This is the Sum of his Discourse; apt enough, I confess,
to d^lude a vulgar Auditory out of the Pulpit, but altogether empty and
insignificant, when brought to the Test of Reason, as I shall make appear in
this Chapter. The Reader in the mean time may please to take notice, that
whereas he infers now only from the Promises, That all Worship given to God
by any visible Representation of him, is extremely dishonorable to him, and
not that it is flat Idolatry, he is either grown kind all on the sudden, or
jealous that his Proof falls short of his Charge: since every extreamly-great
sin, as Blasphemy and the like, is extremely dishonorable to God, and yet not
Idolatry. As for the Conclusion it self, whether and in what sense it may be
true or false, shall be examined below; Let us see first what truth there is in
the Antecedent, from whence he infers it.

. 2. The Proposition he lays down for the Reason of the Law, is this; Gods
Nature being Infinite and Incomprehensible, cannot be represented to men, but
in a way that must be an infinite disparagement to it. And, if this be so, what
shall we say to one that should represent God in Picture, as a Three-Corner'd
Light casting out radiant Beams on all sides of it; at a little distance a
resplendent Cloud of Glory in a Circular form encompassing the Light: Within
the Cloud, near to the Fountain of Brightness, Angels adoring; without the
Cloud, Faith and Religion praying; and directly under it, an Altar with an
inflamed Heart offering it self in Sacrifice? Would such a visible
Representation as this, be an infinite disparagement to God or no? If my
Adversary grant it, (as he must do, if he speak consequently to himself) then
what becomes of the Church of England? For in the Frontispiece of her Book of
Common Prayer, Printed at London by Robert Barker 1642. in octavo, this very
Picture is exposed to the Eyes of all her People; and to prevent their
mistaking it, as intended to represent any thing but God, the incommunicable
Name JEHOVAH is written in the midst of the Triangular Light, and that in
Hebrew Characters, to strike (no doubt) a greater respect and reverence in the
Beholders? If he deny it to be an infinite disparagement, then what becomes of
his Fundamental Position, that God being infinite and incomprehensible, cannot
be represented to men, but in a way that must be an infinite disparagement to
his Nature? Whatever Calvin denies concerning the lawfulness of representing
God in Picture, we see how far the Church of England allows it in the Front of
her Public Liturgy, and there want not other examples not unparallel to this,
in some of her Churches also. So that Dr. Stillingfleet must either condemn her
of Impiety i^ making and exposing such kind of Representations to the Eyes of
the People; or himself of a most gross Error, when he asserts in so universal
a manner, that God cannot be represented to men in any way but what must be an
infinite disparagement to him. Perhaps he will say, they are not exposed by the
Church of England for Worship. But that belongs to the Consequence. Our
Question at present, is, about the Antecedent, whether they may not be made
without disparagement to God? Besides that himself not only condemns them for
Worship, but also in order to the putting us in mind of God; which how strange
soever it seem, he avowedly maintains, p. 68. when he affirms, That they tend
highly to the dishonor of God, and suggest mean thoughts to us of the God we
are to worship. But of this more in the next Chapter. Let him make his
atonement with the Church of England as he can. I come now to speak to the
point it self.

3. Pictures or Images made with reference to God, may be considered two ways:
either a^ made to represent the Divinity it Self, out of an Erroneous Conceit
which the Maker has of it in his mind; such as the Anthropomorphites had of
God, whom they conceived to have Eyes, and Ears, and Hands, and other like
bodily parts, as we have; or as representing immediately such things as bear a
certain Analogy or Proportion to some divine Perfections, and thereupon are apt
to raise our Minds to the Knowledge and Contemplation of the Perfections
themselves; As when God the Father is pictured as he appeared to Daniel in the
likeness of the Ancient of Days, to manifest his Wisdom and Eternity; and the
H. Ghost in the likeness of a Dove, to signify his Purity and Simplicity, in a
manner suitable to our Conceptions. The first sort of Representations are an
infinite disparagement to the Divine Nature; because being infinite and
invisible, it cannot be represented as it is in it self by any corporeal
likeness or figures. But the Second are no way dishonorable to him, because
they are not made to represent the Divine Nature by an immediate or proper
similitude, but by Analogy only, or Metaphorical signification, as is above
declared. And if it were no disparagement to God to appear in such or such
visible forms, it can be none to represent them in Picture, no more than it is
to relate or describe them in Writing.

. 4. This premised, I answer to the Preposition. If his meaning be that Gods
Nature being infinite and incomprehensible, cannot be represented to men
(either Properly or Analogically) but in a way that must be an infinite
disparagement to it; I deny it as false. God the Father would never have
represented himself in a humane form, nor the H. Ghost in the likeness of a
Dove, had it been dishonorable. Nor do I believe the Church of England would
have permitted the Divinity to be pictured in the likeness of a Triangular
Light, had she thought it a disparagement. But if his meaning be, that the
Divine Nature being infinite, cannot be represented properly as it is, by any
corporeal similitude; I grant it. But then the Consequence in virtue of this
Antecedent, can only be this, that to worship God by such a visible
Representation, as conceived proper to his Nature, is extremely dishonorable
to him. And in this we perfectly agree with him; but utterly deny what he
farther infers without any restriction or reason; that all Worship given to God
by any visible Representation of him, (whether conceived as Proper or
Analogical) is extremely dishonorable to him.

Having shown the Proposition it self ((...) taken in the unlimited Sense he
gives it) to be false, it follows manifestly, that it cannot be the Reason of
the Law. Yet for a more ample discovery of his Sophistical managing of
Controversy, I shall give it a farther Consideration, as it is assigned by him
for the Reason of the Law.

. 5. The Question at present between us, is, about the Reason of the Law, viz.
Why God forbad the making a graven Image, or the likeness of any thing in
Heaven or Earth, or under the Earth, to bow down and worship it? And on the
People's part, to whom the Law was given, it is evident that it was to keep
them in their duty of giving Sovereign Worship to God alone, by restraining
them from Idolatry. But this it seems was too plain and obvious a Reason for so
Metaphysical a Discourser; He seeks therefore another more subtle and elevated,
and consequently more apt to lead a vulgar Reader into a maze, viz. What
Perfection in God was the Cause or Reason why he made this Law? What he asserts
it to be, we have already heard, viz. That the Divinity cannot be represented
to men, but in a way that must be an infinite disparagement to it. What I
affirm it to be, is, The Supreme Excellency of God's Nature, to which Sovereign
Worship is only due, and not the incongruity of an Image to represent it, as
he often expresses it. The Question thus stated, I prove my Assertion,

1. From the Preface of the Law (the usual place where the Reasons of all Laws
are expressed) because the Reason there assigned by the Lawmakers himself, is
this, I am the Lord thy God. And what is this, but I am the only Supreme and
Super-Excellent Being above all and over all, to whom therefore Sovereign
honor is only to be given, and to none beside me? Neither is there any
mention at all made of the irrepresentableness of the Divine Nature, or the
incongruity of an Image to represent it to men; But the same reason of his
Supreme Excellency is enforced anew from the Zeal or Jealousy which God has
of his honor, when immediately after the Prohibition, he adds, For I the Lord
thy God am a Jealous God, (as the Protestant Translation has it) by which he
gives us to understand that the Reason why he will punish severely those who
shall give his honor to any thing beside him, is, because he is the Lord their
God, to whom only it is due.

2. I prove it from the necessary Connection there is, as of an effect to its
proper Cause, between the Prohibition of the Law on the one side, and the
Supreme Excellency of the Divine Nature on the other.

To make this as clear as the matter will give me leave, I must desire the
Reader to reflect, that although there be no distinction of Attributes or
Perfections in God, but that All are really one and the same indivisible
Perfection with his Nature; and consequently the same with one another, viz.
his Mercy with his Justice; his Justice with his Truth, and his Truth with his
Omnip^tence, etc. Yet We, by reason of the narrowness of our Understanding, are
forced to apprehend, and discourse (for example) of his Mercy as distinct from
his Justice, assigning them as the proper Causes or Reasons of several (even
contrary) effects, which God produces by them. When he forgives, we say, he
does so because he is Merciful; and when he punishes, we say, he does so,
because he is Just; so that the formal Reason, as conceived by us, why he
forgives, is his Mercy, and not his Justice; and why he punishes, is his
Justice, and not his Mercy; and so immediate is the connection between them and
their effects, that if you abstract his Mercy, there is no reason left to
conceive why he should forgive; nor to punish, if you abstract his Justice. But
in case you abstract his Justice, and leave his Mercy, the effect of forgiving
will still follow, and consequently his Mer^^, and not his Justice, must be
assigned (...) the formal Cause or Reason why h^ forgiv^^^.

From hence, I think, I may infer, and lay down this General Rule, That that
Notion or Perfection in God, upon which (considered precisely in it self) an
effect depends, so that it follows or not follows as a consequence from it,
according as the said notion is or is not considered by us; ought to be
assigned for the proper Cause or Reason of such an effect. But so it is in our
present case, that if we consider the Divine Nature precisely as Supreamly
Excellent (abstracting from its Incongruity to be represented) it necessarily
follows, that Sovereign Worship is due only to It, and not to be given to any
other either Image or Thing. But if we consider it as Invisible only, and
Irrepresentable, (abstracting from the notion of Supreme Excellency) it does
not follow on that account precisely, that Sovereign Worship, or indeed any
Worship at all is due unto it. An Angel is invisible and cannot be represented
as he is; does it therefore follow that Sovereign Worship is due to him? Or
that any Worship at all is to be given to a Sound, because it cannot be
painted? Excellency then, and not Invisibility, is the Formal Reason of
Worship. Whether a thing can or cannot be represented by an Image or Picture,
if it have no Excellency, no Worship is due unto it; and if it have Excellency,
Worship is due to it, according to the degree of Excellency it is endowed with.
And upon that account Sovereign Civil Worship was equally due from the People
to Moses, being constituted their Prince by God, when his Picture could be
drawn, as when it could not because of the shining of his face; or when he kept
on his Vail, or put it off: And God himself was no less adorable when he
appeared to Daniel like the Ancient of Days, than when he gave the Law to Moses
without any Similitude: To conclude, to be Supremely-Excellent is Proper to God
alone; Not-to-be-representable by an Image, is Common to Him with Angels,
though in a higher degree: and however it enter materially, or a part rei, (as
the Schools speak) as the other Attributes of Truth, Wisdom, Goodness, etc. do,
to constitute the Divine Nature Supremely-Excellent; yet it is manifest that
his Excellency precisely, and none of the other Attributes, is the immediate
and formal reason why Sovereign Worship is to be given to none but Him; and
consequently why this Law was made particularly to forbid it to be given (as at
that time it was given by the Heathen) to Grave^ Things, that is,
Representations of Imaginary Beings; or to any Similitude, that is, the
likeness of any thing, which although it had a real Being, yet was not God.

3dly. Ad hominem, I argue thus. What follows precisely from the Divine
Nature's being Invisible and Irrepresentable (abstracting from its Supreme
Excellency, the proper Object of Latria) is only this, that men therefore
ought not to presume to make any Image or likeness, to represent it as it is:
and the Law in virtue of it, must be to forbid the making any such Image: But
Dr. St. utterly denies the Law we treat of to contain any such Prohibition in
it; as appears by his words against Bellarmin and others, page 77. -- [As
though ever any Men were such fools to believe an Image could perfectly
represent an Infinite Being; or that God need to make a Law to forbid that
which is utterly impossible in the very nature of the thing: He might more
reasonably forbid men to paint a Sound, -- or to make new Worlds, than to
command them not to make any Image which should perfectly represent his
Nature.] Thus he, to show the Law meant nothing less than to forbid men to make
an Image of God; which yet is all that follows in virtue of his not being
representable by any corporeal figure. Therefore, according to himself, the
irrepresentableness of the Divine Nature, as precisely considered, cannot be
assigned for the Proper Cause or Reason of this Law. Thus much from Reason.

. 6. I come now to the places of Scripture; which, he says, tell us, that the
Reason of the Law was, That God's Nature being Infinite, could not be
represented but in a way that must be an infinite disparagement to him.

To the first. Isa. 40. 18. To whom will ye liken God? Or what likeness will ye
compare unto him? I answer, The Prophet tells us, that nothing is or can be
like or compared to God; but where does he tell us that this is the Reason of
the Law, unless we are bound to believe it because Dr. St. says it? There is a
likeness of Representation, and a likeness of Comparison (as the words
themselves seem to import) but neither of them evince what he intends. For if
the words be to be understood of likeness in Representation, all that can be
inferred from them, is, that such a likeness is not to be made; the Prohibition
whereof, as the Doctor denies to be any part of the Law; so the thing it self
makes nothing against Catholics, who abhor the very thought of making any such
likeness; and the Council of Trent, Sess. 25. expressly enjoins her Pastors, for
preventing any mistake in ignorant and unlearned Persons, When some Historical
passage of H. Scripture concerning God, is represented in Picture, to teach
them that the Divinity it self is not thereby figured, as if it could be seen
with corporeal Eyes, or drawn in Colors, or expressed in Figures; but that
such kind of Pictures are only Representations of some Apparition or Action of
God, in a way proportionable to our Humane Conception. But if the Prophet speak
not of a likeness in Representation, but in Comparison, as the Contents of the
Chapter in the Protestant Bible affirm in these words, The Prophet comfort
the People v. 18. by the Incomparableness of God: that is, if his intent be (as
their own Annotation has it upon that place, Bible in Quarto, 1610.) to arm
them against the Idolatry wherewith they should be tempted in Babylon, by
showing that none of the Idols of the Heathen were to be compared to Him in
Wisdom, Greatness, Power, etc. as is manifest he does from v. 12. to the end of
the Chapter; it is no more to the purpose for which he alleges it, viz.
Therefore it is forbidden to worship God himself by bowing or kneeling before
an Image, than if one should say, There is no comparison for Riches and
Greatness between a King and a Peasant; therefore it is not lawful to give
honor to the King, by putting off ones Hat before his Picture, or the Chair of
State.

. 7. To the other Text of Deuteronomy. 4. 15. where Moses says, Take good heed to
your selves, (for ye saw no manner of Similitude in the day that the Lord spoke
to you.) I answer, That de facto no manner of Similitude was seen at that time
by the People, that afterward they might not take occasion (as they were apt
enough) to conceive it to have been a proper Representation of the Divinity,
and so entertain an erroneous Conceit of God. Notwithstanding, if it had so
pleased him, when he gave the Law he might have appeared to the People in some
visible likeness, without disparagement to his Nature, as it is likely he did
in a glorious manner to Moses, at the Second giving of the Law, (when he
descended and stood with him on the Rock, and he saw the back parts of God, and
bowed to the Earth, and worshipped, Exodus 33. 23. and 34. 5, 8.) and as both
before and after he appeared to the Patriarchs and Prophets; and consequently
his not appearing so de facto, could not be the Reason of the Law. For as Dr.
St. himself confesses very ingenuously, p. 63. Although God had appeared with a
Similitude then, yet there might have been great reason for making a Law
against worshipping the Heathen Idols, or fixing the intention of their Worship
upon the bare Image; I add, Even against thinking of honoring God, by an Image
made by men, (if that were the meaning of the Law, as it is not) since such a
Law (if necessary) might have been made, and would have obliged, although God
had chosen some visible likeness to appear in at that time. The words then (For
ye saw no manner of Similitude on the day that the Lord spoke to you) though
cited by the Doctor without a Parenthesis, to make them seem of more force,
were not set down by Moses, as the Reason of the Law: But the matter of fact
was made use of by him as a Motive to induce the People to the Observance of
it, in a Sermon he makes Deuteronomy. 4. to press them to that duty. And this
Explication also the Doctor might have found in his own Bible, if he had but
vouchsafed to cast his Eye upon the Contents of the Chapter, where the whole
Discourse is entitled, An Exhortation to Obedience; or on the Breviate on the
top of the Page, where the Arguments used in it are called Persuasions to
Obedience. But there was the word likeness in the first Text; and Similitude in
the second, denied of God; and these were enough without considering the
Context, or the intent of the Writer, or the Contents of the Chapters, to ask,
Whether God by that Reason does not declare, that all Worship given to him by
any visible Representation of him, is extremely dishonorable to him? Now,
though Protestants may hold with Dr. St. that the Scripture is the most certain
Rule of their Faith; yet unless they wilfully shut their Eyes, they cannot
think the Method he takes, to be the most certain way to find out its Sense.
But to draw to a Conclusion in this matter.

. 8. Let us suppose the Argument (notwithstanding all that has been said to
show its deficiency in all its parts) to be good and sound, and that, in its
largest extent, viz. The Nature of God being infinite and incomprehensible,
cannot be represented to men but in a way that must be an infinite
disparagement to it. Let us grant, I say, this Antecedent, and the Places of
Scripture in the sense they are cited by him. Let us grant the Consequence too
he infers from them, Therefore all Worship given to Him, by any visible
Representation of him (whether Proper or Analogical) is extremely dishonorable
to him. Suppose, I say, all this to be so. Will it follow from hence that
Christ according to his Humanity, cannot be represented but with great
disparagement to Him? Or, that to put off our Hats, when we behold the Figure
of his Sacred Body, as Nailed upon the Cross, with intent to Worship Him, must
be extremly dishonorable to Him? What if the Soul of Man be Invisible, and
cannot be represented by any Corporeal Figure or Colors? Will it follow from
thence, that any Picture made to represent a Prince according to his External
Features, would be a disparagement to him? and any Honor given him by means of
such a Representation, a Dishonor? The Consequence he brings is no better, in
order to Christ and his Image. If then his Argument do not at all concern the
practice of Catholics in making the Images of Christ and his Saints, with
respect to their Honor; to what purpose was it to lay down for the Reason of
the Law, (in which he will have it to be forbidden) That God's Nature being
Infinite and Incomprehensible, could not be represented without infinite
disparagement to it? To what purpose was it to spend no less than three Pages,
as he does. 6. in citing Authors to prove that the Wiser Persons of the
Heathens themselves condemned the Worship of God by Images, as incongruous to a
Divine Nature? Was it to make his Reader believe that Catholics allow of any
Pictures as proper Representations of the Invisible Deity? Let him lay his Hand
upon his Heart. I have told him the Churches Sense in that Point. What those
Wiser Persons of the Heathens meant, is evident from their Words, and from the
Time in which they lived, to be this: That the Nature of God being Spiritual
and Invisible, it could not be represented by any thing like unto it; and
therefore the Worship which the People gave to their Images, as Gods, or like
unto the Gods they worshipped, was incongruous to the Divine Nature, and a
disparagement to the Deity. And if the Germans, as Tacitus reports, (de
morib. German. c. 9.) rejected Images made in the likeness of men, (which the
Doctor conveniently leaves out) because they thought them unsuitable to the
Greatness of Celestial Deities (for, Other Figures and Symbols they had in
their consecrated Groves, as the same Tacitus there witnesses, and Dr. St.
suppresseth) it was but what the Light of Nature taught them concerning the
notion of a Deity; which, had the mystery of God made Man been revealed to
them, would have taught them also, that it was no disparagement to Him to be
represented in the likeness of Man, and to be worshipped by such an Image. His
other Citations I took upon his word, without examining them; and the Reader
may guess by this out of Tacitus, whether it be not likely I did him a kindness
in it.

CHAP. V.
Worship unlawful by the Light of Nature, equally unlawful to Jews and
Christians. A strange Paradox advanced by Dr. Stillingfleet, viz. What can an
Image do to the heightning of Devotion, or raising Affections? How far his
Devotion to the Sun may be allowed in the Judgment of St. Leo.

. 1. FRom the Notions of the Wiser Heathens concerning the Worship of Images,
he passes to the Clearer Discoveries of the Gospel, S. 7. and wonders as at a
thing of all things the most strange to him, that any Persons should think this
Precept only respected the Jewish Economy; and he repeats his wonder in a
higher strain, p. 67. when he asks, How any men in their Sense^ can imagine
that Worship to be lawful among Christians, which was unlawful to the Jews? It
seems he wanted an Adversary to combat, and rather than lay down his Weapons,
he was resolved to make one, though of empty Air: For there is not one word in
the Reply (which he pretends to answer) to signify that the Author of it ever
looked upon this Precept as a mere positive Law; (which by his wondering he
would make his Reader believe) but the quite contrary. For the meaning of the
Law there given, is this, That what God forbids in it, is, to give his Worship
to Idols; which Prohibition being but an Explication of the Law of Nature, must
equally oblige both Jews and Christians. Yet to speak to a Point, the occasion
of so much wonder. What Worship is it he means was unlawful to the Jews, and is
lawful to Christians? Was it to worship God by some Symbolical Figures
instituted to raise their Minds to a more lively apprehension of Gods Majesty
and Glory? No; for this the Jews did by bowing down before the Ark and the
Cherubins; and very lawfully they did it, as appears by David's exhorting them
to bow or fall down before the footstool of God, Psalm. 98. Or was it to worship
God by some Corporeal Representation conceived as Proper to his Nature? This he
has been told before, is no less unlawful to Christians now, than it was
formerly to the Jews, but rather more, by reason of the clearer knowledge they
have of the Nature of God. What Worship then does he mean? Pray take it in his
own words, and make the best on it you can. God's being a Spirit, is given,
says he, as a particular Reason why we ought to worship him after a spiritual
manner, and not by any Corporeal Representation, as the Jews said the
Samaritans worshipped God in the form of a Dove. This is what he says; and if
his words be to be taken with relation to what the Samaritans did, he ought
first to have told us what that was; For as it appears from Scripture, 4 Kings
17. 33. they made an erroneous Conceit of God, because they worshipped him
together with the Gods of the Assyrians, and as One of Many, though the Best of
the Company; which neither the Jews did, nor Christians (I hope) do, but as the
only true God. But if his words must be taken without that respect, as they
make up an Antecedent and Consequence, viz. God is a Spirit, therefore we ought
to worship him after a spiritual manner, and not by any Corporeal
Representation whatsoever: As the Consequence will hold as well against
worshipping God by any Corporeal Gesture or Ceremony, as by an Image; So the
giving him Worship by any Corporeal Representation (supposing the Law not to be
merely Positive, but Natural, and the Consequence good) was, and is alike
unlawful both to Jews and Christians. But in case there were a particular
Prohibition given to the Jews (by reason of their proneness to Idolatry) of not
making any Image or likeness for Worship, though of God himself, the Law as to
that part is evin^'d to be only Ceremonial, from their being dispensed with, in
the making and use of the Ark and Cherubins, and so not obliging Christians,
but manifestly inferring, that the use of Images (abstracting from such a
positive Prohibition) is not unlawful. From hence it appears how incongruous
his comparison is between the use of Images and Common Swearing: This being of
its own nature evil, and always dangerous; That not such; nor dangerous in
Christians, who are imbued from their Infancy, with a more clea^ and perfect
knowledge of the Nature of God, than ever the Wiser Heathens attained to by the
Light of Reason, or the Jews by the Law of Moses. Yet is not their state so
spiritual as to put them quite out of their Senses. The Maxim of the
Philosopher holds still good with them, That nothing enters into their
Understanding, but what passes first by the Gates of their Senses, and no
Operation of the Sight (the quickest of them) is performed without an Image.

. 2. Hitherto the Doctor has been very careful to make his Reader believe him
serious; but who can imagine him to be so, when he advances that strange
Paradox, p. 68. What can such an Image, (that is, to use his own phrase, a
Block or a ^ewnstone, representing God to his mind) What can such an Image,
says he, do to the heightning of Devotion, or raising Affections? And he means
not only an Image of the Deity by way of Likeness, or Analogy, or Union; every
one of which, he says, tends highly to the dishonor of the Deity, and
suggests mean thoughts to us of the God we are to worship, but also of the
Images of Christ our Lord, made to represent his Humane Nature with respect to
his Worship; as is evident by his applauding the Constantinopolitan Fathers for
condemning it as a great Absurdity, (p. 79.) the reason whereof he seems to
give in this place, when he immediately adds, And is there no danger among
Christians, that they should entertain too low and unworthy thoughts of God?
And can any thing tend to it more effectually, than the bringing down the
Representations of him to the Figure and Lineaments of a Man, drawn upon a
Table, or carved in an Image? Thus He; And if he be serious, what can I do but
admire the thrice-happy state of these men, who living in the Body as out of
the Body, (it is so spiritualized by continual Praying, Fasting, and other
Macerations) can mount at pleasure into the Third Heaven, and need not the
assistance of any visible Representations to raise them to the knowledge of the
Invisible and Incomprehensible Deity? This, I confess, is a state more to be
admired, than ever to be hoped for) in this life, by the greater part of the
Children of Adam. And therefore God, to lead man to the knowledge of Him, by
means proportionable to his Nature; (which, as I said, is to derive its
knowledge from the Senses) created the stately Machin of this visible World, to
serve as a Hieroglyphick of his Greatness and Power. Next, having chosen a
peculiar People to his Service, although he forbad them to make the likeness of
any of those things he had created, to worship them for Gods; yet he commanded
Moses (Exodus 25. 10, 17, 18.) to place in the Temple where they were to worship
him, a representation of his Footstool and Throne (the Ark and the
Propitiatory) with two Cherubins of beaten Gold attending on each side of the
Seat, to raise their thoughts to a more venerable apprehension of his Majesty
and Greatness. Lastly, the fullness of time being come, in which he would show
the excess of his mercy toward Mankind, he was pleased (as S. Paul says,
Phil. 2. 7.) to take upon him the form of a Servant, and be made in the
likeness of Man, that is, to become indeed true Man, not only to work our
Redemption by shedding his most precious Blood, but also by that visible form
(as the Church sings upon the day of his Nativity) to carry, or rather ravish
our hearts to the contemplation of his Invisible Deity, Ut dum visibiliter Deum
cognoscimus, per hunc ad invisibilia rapiamur. And if this were the means made
choice of by God himself, as most efficacious (because most connatural) to
conduct us to the knowledge and love of Him; then certainly the Pictures or
Images of his Nativity, Passion, Resurrection, etc. which serve to put us in
mind of what he did and suffered for us in that form of a Servant, cannot but
conduce very much to work the like effects in us. And after all this, can any
man (not to use his own phrase, in his Senses, but) who is serious, ask, What
can such an Image do to the heightning of Devotion, or raising Affections? S.
Gregory Nissen says of himself, (Orat. de Deitate Filii and Spiritus Sancti)
That he often beheld, but never without Tears, the Picture of Abraham ready to
sacrifice his Son Isaac; though but a rep^esentation only of a Type of the Son
of God upon the Altar of the Cross: And can any man, whose heart is not of
Stone, behold attentively the Image of his dying Savior himself with his Hands
and Feet Nailed to the Cross, and not be touched with a sense of Devotion
toward Him? Surely he must have lost the notion of Humane Nature who can
soberly affirm, that the making such an Image with respect to His Worship,
tends highly to the dishonor of the Deity, and suggests mean thoughts to us of
the God we are to worship: unless to remember that he dyed for us, be to think
meanly and dishonourably of him. But whither will not a Resolution to maintain
an Error once espoused, hurry the subtillest Wit? The Doctor's eagerness to
make us Idolaters, had made him fancy that where God forbids to give his
Worship to Idols, he forbad to make any Image with respect to his own Worship:
and this forced him (for I cannot believe he did it without force to his own
thoughts) to assert that an Image can do nothing to the heightning of Devotion,
or raising Affections. If he think I strain his words too far, (though no
farther than what his discourse gives me cause to do) let him vindicate himself
by professing heartily, that the Images of Christ according to his Humane
Nature, may serve to raise our Affections, and heighten our Devotion to him as
God. But then he must renounce the patronage of his Constantinopolitan Fathers,
and retract or answer his own Reason, that if this be done by calling to our
mind the Being we are to worship, there must be supposed some Likeness, or
Analogy, or Union between the Object represented and the Image, every one of
which tends highly to the dishonor of the Deity, and suggests mean thoughts to
us of the God we are to worship: and particularly that among Christians nothing
can tend more effectually to it, than the bringing down the representations of
him to the figure and lineaments of a man drawn upon a Table, or carved upon an
Image. But what ought we not to do to free our selves from Mistake, much more
from Error? The Mistake at present (if I may give it so gentle a name) lies in
this, That he considers not, that if one thing has connection with, or analogy
to another, although Invisible, when the former is represented to a Person that
understands the analogy or connection there is between them, it is apt to bring
to his remembrance the later. Hence it is, that although the Soul of man cannot
be drawn in colors, yet when the Body to which it is united, is represented in
Picture, the Representation serves as a means to bring to our minds the
Perfections or Graces of the Soul which informs it; and not to bring them down
(as against Nature and Experience he a^firms) to the figure and lineaments of a
Body drawn upon a Table, or carved in an Image. Had the rest of Mortals been
imbued with this Principle, they had never caused either their Pictures or
Images to be made, lest they might be occasion to their Friends, from whom they
expected Love and Honor, to entertain too l^w and unworthy thoughts of them.
Much less ought Princes to permit any Chair of State to be placed in the
Presenc^ Chamber, for fear of bringing down the representations of them to the
uncouth figure of four or five sticks put awkwardly together. But this is not
all.

. 3. On this account, he says (p. 59.) it seems much more reasonable for him
to worship God by prostrating himself before the Sun, or any of the Heavenly
Bodies; nay to an Ant or a Fly, than to a Picture or an Image. And I have more
kindness for him, if he should do it, than to suppose him therefore (as he
supposes himself, p. 70.) to be a Heathen Idolater, unless he take the Sun for
a God. Philosophy and Experience having given me so much insight into the
nature of humane actions, as to know they go whither they are intended; and
Religion so much Charity, as to believe his intent was only to worship the
true God by it. But why does it seem much more reasonable for him to worship
God, by prostrating to the Sun, nay to an Ant, or a Fly, than to a Picture or
an Image? The reason, he says, is, because in those he sees great evidences of
the Power, and Wisdom, and Goodness of God, which may suggest venerable
apprehensions of God to his mind, (so then now it seems that analogy does not
always tend highly to the dishonor of the Deity, nor suggest mean thoughts to
us of the God we are to worship) whereas a Picture or an Image can have nothing
worthy admiration, unless it be the Skill of the (...). If this be the reason,
he ought in my Judgment to have given the precedence to the Ant and the Fly,
(or to the Ape, the Ass, and the Tiger, brought in by him in a former
comparison) for all these have two degrees of Perfection beyond the Sun, viz.
Life and Sense. If the danger be, that he is more like to take an Ant o^ an
Ape, by reason of their greater Excellency, for God, than the Sun, (the reason
supposed by himself why we choose rather to worship God by an Image, than by the
Sun) on that account (to let him feel the force of his own Argument, if it have
any) that which deserves most honor should have least given it, and that which
deserves least, should have most. For the danger is there still greater, where
the Excellency is greater, and by that means we ought rather to worship (he
says to us, a Beast than a Saint; I say to him) the Earth than the Sun; for
there is less danger of believing one to be God, than the other. But to return
to his former words.

4. Is there nothing then in a Picture worthy admiration, besides the Skill of
the Painter or Artificer? I dare avouch for the greater part of Ladies, who sit
for their Pictures, that they do it not purely to beget in the Beholders an
admiration of the Painter; and those who procure an Author's Picture to be set
before his Book, intend, no doubt, that those who fix their eyes upon it,
should admire something besides the Skill of the Engraver. I have my self a
Picture of a Friend which gives me occasion frequently to admire the great
Endowments of his Mind, but not at all the Hand that did it, it is so rudely
done. Something then there is in Pictures besides the Skill of the Painter,
which may make them worthy, if not of admiration for the excellency of the
work; at least of use, for their quick suggesting to our Mind, not only the
outward Features, but also the inward Graces of the Persons they represent.
This virtue they have from their more express representation and likeness, even
above other things, which have a greater resemblance in natural perfections;
and this is one Reason why we make use of them so frequently since God was made
Man, because they bring Him more immediately to our Mind, than either the Sun,
or an Ant, or a Fly. And this may be the Reason (if I may have leave to suggest
one) why Dr. St. Himself prefers the Sun for a Help to his Devotion, before an
Ant or a Fly, though inferior to them by two degrees in perfection; because
amongst corporeal things, Light is the putest, and conceived by us to be likest
to a Spirit. But to prefer them all, and with them the Ape, the Ass, and the
Tiger, before an Image, because they have greater natural perfections than an
Image has, may (if it prevail in the World) quite undo the Company of
Picture-drawers in a little time. For if it shall be made appear much more
reasonable to make use of what approaches nearer in perfection, than likeness,
the Ladies may come instead of the Pictures of their Friends, to wear Ants and
Flies in Crystal Cases upon their Breasts: and instead of their own Pictures to
send them the Apes and Asses he brought in so lamely in his former Comparison,
I and his Tigers too, when they can catch them, as greater resemblances of
their Perfections. Perhaps he will say, he speaks not of the Perfections of these
Creatures, as barely such, but as great evidences to him of the Power and
Wisdom and Goodness of God. But how many are there in the World not so
Philosophical and Contemplative as he is, who think more how to free themselves
from the importunity of the Ants and Flies, and from the heat of the Sun, than
to consider their perfections as great evidences of the Wisdom, etc. of God;
and yet if they come into a place where a Crucifix is, are presently put in
mind of God, and testify the venerable apprehension they have of him, by
bowing their Knee, or putting off their Hats? If he find his Devotion more
inflamed by the light and heat of the Sun, and the motions of those little
Beasts, than by an Image, much good may it do him. But this ought not to
prescribe to the Generality of Christians, who I believe experience more
frequent and more venerable thoughts of God suggested to their Minds by the
sight of a Crucifix, than by seeing the Sun, with all the Ants and Flies in the
World. It Is not the nearer approach in perfection, even in the effect, that
brings us always soonest and surest to the knowledge of the cause. We see many
Fathers are not known by their Sons, who yet are presently known by their
Pictures. And Atheists deny the perfections of the Creatures to be any
evidences at all of that Being we call God: but cannot deny a Crucifix to
represent to their own thoughts, that Person whom we believe to be God.
Pictures then we see have an advantage in representing, above the Creatures;
though in natural perfections they be inferior to them. But yet for all this,

. 5. He says, He cannot for his Heart understand, why he may not as well, nay
better burn Incense, and say his Prayers to the Sun, having an intention only
to honor the true God by it, as to do both these to an Image. And the reason
is still the same, because he is sure the Sun has far more advantages than any
Artificial Image can have, and the beauty and influence of it may inflame and
warm ones Devotion much more. I am sure too, the Sun has far more advantages
than any material word can have, even the Name of JESUS either written or
spoken; and yet I do not find the beauty and influence of the Sun to inflame
and warm ones Devotion so much as the hearing or reading of that Sacred Name.
But I perceive he has a particular Devotion to the Sun (though it have less
advantages than an Ant or a Fly) and therefore must warn him in Charity, not to
say his Prayers to it, no more than we do to Images, (as he very well knows,
though he would make his Reader believe the contrary) for that were to
terminate his Intention upon the Sun, to put his trust in it, and make it his
God; but as for his bowing to it, with intent to worship the true God, (or
burning Incense, using it, as it is used by the Church, for a Ceremony of like
nature with bowing) he may have a Resolution of the Case, how far it may be
allowed him, from the Pen of that Great and Learned Doctor S. Leo: and for his
farther satisfaction I shall take the pains to transcribe his words.

From that Opinion (says S. Leo, Sermon. in Natal. Dom.) viz. That the life of
Man is governed by the Stars, that Impiety also takes its rise, which is used
by some who are less wise, to adore the Sun at his Rising from some eminent
place. A thing which some Christians think they do so religiously in the
observance of it, that before they enter into the Church of S. Peter the
Apostle, which is dedicated to the One true and living God, they go up to the
top of the Church, and turning themselves to the rising Sun, with low obeisance
bow down themselves in honor of that Illustrious Planet. Which we are
exceedingly grieved to see done, partly out of ignorance, and partly out of a
Heathenish spirit. Because although some perchance do worship the Creator
rather of that fair Light, than the Light it self which is a Creature;
nevertheless they ought to abstain from the very show of such a kind of
Service, which when some new Convert, who has forsaken the Worship of false
Gods, shall find exhibited to the Sun by the more ancient Professors of
Christianity, will be induced to retain that part of his old Opinion as
probable or allowable, which he shall see to be common both to Christians and
Heathens. Let the Faithful therefore abstain from so perverse and
worthy-to-be-condemned a Custom; nor let the honor due to God alone, be mixed
with their Rites who serve the Creatures; for the H. Scripture says, Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve, Matthew. 4. This
is the Resolution of that Ancient and Learned Father, at a time, whenas yet
there were some Relics of Paganism remaining in the World. And from it the
Doctor may infer, That if he do not say his Prayers to the Sun, but only bow
down, or use some external signification of honor of the like nature, not out
of ignorance, or a Paganish spirit, but with intent to worship the True God, in
such sort as not to give scandal to the weaker Brethren, it may pass for a
piece of private Devotion in a Person so Philosophical and Contemplative as I
judge him to be. And this is all which Vasques (so much accused by him, p.
129.) does teach; for as for public and promiscuous adoring of Creatures, he
condemns it as undecent and scandalous, Lib. 3. de adorat. c. 1.
saying expressly, that Indiscriminatim creaturas adorandas proponere, esset
multis manifesta causa periculi. If he ask me yet again, Why he may not do this
as well, nay better to the Sun, than to an Image, since he is sure the Sun has
far more advantages than any Artificial Image? I think I may ask him, why he
may not as well, nay better put off his Hat to one of the Lions in the Tower,
with intent to honor the King, as do it to his Picture, or the Chair of State;
since I am sure the Lion in his Sense has far more advantage than any
Artificial Image or Figure can have; the Majesty and Generosity of the King of
Beasts, may suggest more venerable apprehensions to him of the King he is to
honor. But, to answer what for his heart he says he cannot understand, and
give him a clear Solution of his Scruple, I must desire him to consider, that
although the Creatures do represent God after their manner, yet it is so
rudely, remotely, darkly, and imperfectly, that there is need of a great deal
of discourse to discover the Analogy or Proportion they bear to their Creator;
They are called Gods Footsteps, and to gather the height and bigness of
Hercucules from his Foot-step, was not the work of every Vulgar Capacity.
Whereas an Image (for example) of Christ, is so apparently representative of
him, that upon sight thereof our thoughts fly presently unto him: and his
Picture is no sooner in our Eyes, than his Person by imagination in our Mind:
and consequently the likeness it bears to Him, is much more apt to inflame and
warm ones Devotion, than the beauty and influence of the Sun. Besides, that the
Creatures being subsistent in themselves, and evidently the Causes of many
great benefits to Mankind, the danger is greater of terminating Worship upon
them, than upon an Image, whose formal Being consisting in Representation
only, connaturally carries our Thoughts and Affections to the Person
represented by it. By what has been said, he may see how far the Defense he
makes for himself (p. 70.) by his abusive application of the distinction of
Dulia and Hyperdulia, and of Supreme and Relative Worship, in case he should
bow down to the Sun, with intent to worship the true God, will bear him out. If
he go farther, and (as he states the case himself) pay his Devotions to the Sun
as a subservient and ministerial God, though with subordination to the Supreme
Deity; at his peril be it: For that which possibly would justify his
worshipping of God by the Sun, will most certainly not justify his worshipping
the Sun for a God.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Notions and Practice of the Wiser Heathens in the matter of their
Images. The Texts of St. Paul, Acts 17. 24. and Romans 1. 21. Explained. Some of
the Doctors Testimonies Examined; in particular the Relation he gives of what
the Jesuits did in China.

. 1. THe next Onset the Doctor makes upon the Catholic use of Images, is with
a fresh Recruit of his Wiser Heathens; the most Intelligent of whom, he says,
p. 74. did never look on their Images as any other than Symbols or
Representations of that Being to which they gave Worship. What he would infer
from thence, is so soul, he could not find in his heart to speak it out. Yet I
cannot but acknowledge his kindness to us here, in comparing us at least with
the most Intelligent among the Heathens; whereas p. 70. he had done his
endeavor to insinuate into his Reader's belief, that the Egyptians (who
worshipped Crocodiles and Serpents, Leeks and Onyons ^or Gods) were more
excusable than the Papists. To usher in the Wisdom of the Heathens he premises
two Texts out of S. Paul, Acts 17. 24. and Romans 1. 19. as a mighty Argument, he
says, to prove the unsuitableness of the Worship of Images to the Nature of
God, to be of an unalterable and universal nature. And I wonder whoever denied
it of such Images as are conceived to be proper Likenesses or Representations
of the Divinity, of which S. Paul speaks in the first place; or of the Images
of the false Gods of the Heathens, of which he speaks in the latter. Must the
words of Scripture be always taken barely according to their sound, without
consideration had to the Times and Circumstances in which they were written?
That the Athenians whom S. Paul reproved Acts 17. 24. thought the Divinity to
be like to the Images they made of Gold and Silver, is evident by his words, as
set down by Dr. St. himself, viz. Because God was He who made the World, etc.
Therefore we ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto Gold, or Silver,
or Stone, graven by Art or man's device. And himself grants this to have been
their supposition. This then was a mighty Argument from the mouth of S. Paul,
to drive that Erroneous Conceit out of the Minds of the Athenians, who believed
the Divinity to be like the Images they made; but none at all from the Pen of
Dr. St. against Catholics, who detest the thoughts of having or making any
such Image. To what purpose then was it brought, except he intended to make his
Reader believe the Papists to be no wiser than the Athenians, who were so
possessed with a wrong apprehension of the Nature of God, that (as St.
Chrysostom tells us upon that place) when they heard St. Paul speak of
Anastasis, that is, the Resurrection, because it was a new thing they never
heard of before, and the word of the Feminine Gender, they concluded he brought
them Tidings of some new Goddess?

. 2. As for the second place of Romans 1. 21, 23. nothing can be more clear, than
that the Apostle speaks there of the Idols or Images of the Heathens; for after
he had laid down the matter of fact which he condemned, viz. That although they
knew God, yet they did not glorify him as God, but changed the Glory of the
Incorruptible God into an Image made like to corruptible Man, he adds also, And
to Birds, and four footed Beasts, and Creeping Things, (which words were
clapped under Deck by the Doctor with an etc. because they plainly declare what
kind of Images the Apostle meant) and then verse. 25. tells us that by so doing*
They changed the Truth of God into a Lie, and worshipped and served the
Creature, rather than the Creator. These are the words of the Apostle, so plain
that the Doctor could find no evasion, but to tell us, that St. Paul does not
discourse here against the most gross and sottish Idolaters of the Heathen,
but, as St. Chrysostom (says he) well observes, against the Philosophers, and
the wisest among them: who though they differed in their Opinions of Religion
extremely from the Vulgar, yet they concurred with them in all the external
practices of their Idolatry. And before we go farther, it is well worth the
observing what he observes out of St. Chrysostom. S. Chrysostom. Hom. 3. in Ep.
ad Romans
Dices, quid haec ad Philosophos? You will say, says St. Chrysostom, if the
Apostle reprehended the Heathens for giving the glory of God to irrational
Creatures, and what was yet more sottish, to their very Images; what is that to
the Philosophers, or more Intelligent among them? Marry I answer, says he,
that, what has been said, most of all concerns them: For they have for their
Masters the Egyptians, who were the Inventors of these things. And Plato, who
yet seems graver than the rest, glories in them. Nay his Master (Socrates) was
a great Admirer of them; for this is He who commands a Cock to be offered to
Aesculapius. Hence you may see the Images of Beasts and Creeping Things to be
worshipped, and together with them, Apollo and Bacchus. This is what St.
Chrysostom observed of the Philosophers: And was it not luckily done of the
Doctor to make him the Patron of his Explication, viz. that the intent of the
Apostle was not to charge them with false Notions of a Deity, but to show their
vanity and folly in thinking they had found out subtiller ways of defending the
Common Idolatry among them, and instead of opposing them, made use of their
Wits to excuse them? But suppose what he says were so: that the Philosophers
were as subtle as he would make them, were they not worthily condemned by the
Apostle, though but for the external profession of praying and offering
Sacrifice to the Statues of Jupiter, Venus, Mercury, etc. and also to those of
Birds, and four-footed Beasts, and Creeping Things, as the Vulgar did? And if
they found out subtiller ways of defending the Common Idolatries among them,
and instead of opposing them, made use of their Wits to excuse them, were they
not to blame in so doing? But what is all this to Christians? To make his
discourse from the Apostles words come home to them, he should show that the
Images by which they honor Christ and his Saints, are worshipped by them as
Gods, or as the Images of false Gods, as those were of which the Apostle speaks
in that place; otherwise the subtle ways of defending he covertly aims at, will
be as allowable against the Deserters of the Churches Faith, in the point of
Images, as in other Mysteries of Christianity. But to come to the point it self.

. 3. The most Intelligent Heathens, says he, did never look on their Images as
any other than Symbols or Representations of that Being to which they gave
Divine Worship. What Being this was, he does not tell us, whether the only
true God, or those false ones represented by their Images. If he mean these
latter, he knows in his Conscience he does wrong to Catholics in comparing
them even to his Wiser Heathens. If the former, he does those more right by his
subtle way of defending them, than appears from the Testimonies he brings, They
ever thought of doing themselves. For all that is expressed there (and you may
believe he would suppress nothing that might make to his purpose) out of
Origin, Eusebius, Athanasius, Arnobius, Augustine, Maximus Tyrius, and Julian,
concerning the more Intelligent Heathens, is, that they did not look on their
Images as Gods: That they looked upon them nevertheless as Images or Symbols of
false Gods, some of his own Testimonies affirm, as that of Celsus in Origin,
lib. 7. That none but a stark fool believes the Images themselves to be Gods,
had he not left out the latter part of it, viz. Non diis dicatas Statuas, but
that they were Statues erected to the Gods. And that of Julian, when he says,
They are but Symbols of the presence of the Gods. But not any thing is there in
them to signify that they worshipped the true God by them, besides the two
words of Divinity and Deity, which he cogg'd into the Testimonies of Arnobius
and St. Austin to make his Reader believe so. I shall set down the passages
both in his words and the Fathers, that the Reader by comparing them, may learn
what credit he is to give hereafter to his citing of Authors; and at the same
time receive a farther Testimony of my kindness to him in taking the rest upon
his word.

First then for Arnobius. Arnob.
What Dr. St. (p. 74.) Contra.
makes the Wiser Heathens deny there, Gent. li. 6.
is that they ever thought their Images to be Gods, or to have any Divinity in
them, but what only comes from their Consecration to such an use. And the
Reader finding the word Divinity in a different Character, and in the singular
number, as it were in opposition to the Gods he immediately mentions before,
and that they have no Divinity but what comes from their Consecration to such
an use; What can he think, but that those wise Heathen, intended to worship the
true Divinity by those Images, and looked only upon them as Signs consecrated
to such an use by some extrinsecal deputation, like that of the Images of
Christ and his Saints among Catholics, or of the Communion-Cup or Table even
among Protestants. But is this what Arnobius makes the Heathens to say? Pray
hear what the wiser Heathens return upon him, when he upbraided them for
worshipping Gods of Gold and Silver, the works of men's hands. Erras and
laberis; nam neque nos era, neque auri argentique materias esse per se Deos,
and religiosa decernimus Numina. You err (say they) and are mistaken, O
Arnobius, in what you affirm, for we do not think the matter of Brass, Silver,
and Gold to be Gods, and adorable Deities, PER SE, of themselves. No, we are
wiser than so. But how then? Sed eos in his colimu^ eosque veneramur, quos
dedicatio infert sacra, and fabrilibus efficit inhabitare simulacris. But we
honor and worship the Gods or Deities in those Statues, whom the virtue of
sacred dedication has brought into them, and made to dwell in those Images
made by Art. And by Sacred Dedication is here meant Magical Incantation, by
which the Souls of Wicked Men, or Evil Spirits, were evocated, and as it were
tied to dwell in those Images, as St. Austin relates, Lib. 8. de Civit. Dei.
c. 23. and 26. And now I beseech you judge if this be fair play? When the wiser
Heathens say, that they do not think their Images to be Gods PER SE, of
themselves, that is, without Spirits dwelling in them; to say absolutely, that
they denied they ever thought their Images to be Gods? And when they
acknowledge that they did worship the Gods which by Dedication were made to
dwell in them; to tell us they do not acknowledge any Divinity in them, but
what comes from their Consecration to such an use; as if in the Opinion of
those Heathens the End of the Consecration had been in order to the Worship of
the True God, and not to introduce false Gods, (or evil Spirits) to reside in
the Images. Nay when they say expressly, that the Object of their Worship was
the Gods which inhabited in those Images, and that their Wisdom consisted in
this, that they did not worship the Images themselves for Gods, but the Gods
(Deos and Numina, in the Plural Number) which dwelt in them; to put for all
this, Divinity in the Singular, as if their intention had been to worship the
true God by them: is this, I say, fair dealing in a Controvertist? To set up a
Flag upon a Fire-Ship to disguise it, is a commendable Stratagem in an Enemy;
-- Dolus an virtus, quis in host requirat? But when the bottom is full of
Infernal Spirits, to fix upon it the Title of Divinity, and that in a larger
Character, is no such laudable quality in a Writer, whose greatest virtue
should be plain-dealing. But we shall see more of this in the Citation out of
St. Austin.

. 4. What Dr. St. says that the Wiser Heathens deny in St. Austin, is, that
they worshipped the Images themselves; but through them they worshipped THE
DEITY. S. Aug. in Psalm. 113.
These are the Doctors words. Let us now see St. Austin' s. Videntur sibi
purgatioris esse Religionis qui dicunt, Nec simulacrum nec daemonium colo; sed
per effiigiem corporalem ejus rei signum intueor, quam colere debeo. These men,
says he, seem to themselves to have taken up a more refined Religion, who say,
I neither worship an Idol, nor a Devil; but by or in the corporeal Image I
behold a Sign or Symbol of that thing which I ought to worship. And what thing
is that? The Doctor says, the Deity; and that indeed is the only thing they
ought to worship. But was that their meaning? No such matter, for as St. Austin
immediately adds; They give this interpretation of their Images, viz that by
the Image of Tellus, is signified the Earth; by that of Neptune, the Sea; by
that of Juno, the Air; by that of Vulcan the Fire; by that of Venus, the
Day Star; by another the Sun, by another the Moon, etc. This is what they meant
by the thing (they say) they ought to worship. And if it be urged against them
(says St. Austin) that then they worship Bodies, viz. the Earth, the Sea, the
Fire, and the Air; they boldly answer, that they do not worship the Bodies
themselves, sed quae illis regendis praesident numina, but the Deities or
Spirits which preside and govern those Bodies, Which Spirits, the same St.
Austin (in Psalm. 69.) proves to be Devils, because they proudly exact Sacrifice
to be offered to them, and to be worshipped as Gods. These were the things
which the Wiser Heathens professed they ought to worship by their Images, viz.
the corporeal Creatures of Fire, Air, etc. or the Spirits which ruled over
them, and not the Images themselves, nor yet the Deity by them. And thereupon
S. Austin says, that their punishment and condemnation is set forth by the
Apostle in that very Text cited above by the Doctor, out of Romans 1. 25. Who
changed the Truth of God into a Lie, and served the Creature rather than the
Creator. For in the first part, says he, of this Sentence, the Apostle
condemns the Images or Idols themselves; and in the latter, their
interpretation of them. For by calling Figures made by an Artificer by the name
of those things which God made, they change the Truth of God into a Lie; and by
esteeming and worshipping the things themselves for Gods, they serve the
Creature rather than the Creator. These are the words of St. Austin: From
whence it appears, first, That in his Judgment (and I do not read that he ever
changed it in his latter Writings) when St. Paul condemns the Heathens for
changing the Glory of God into the Image of a Man, or Beast, etc. he speaks of
such Images as were worshipped for Gods, or made to represent false Gods:
Secondly, That my Adversary deals very disingenuously with his Reader, in
affirming that the W^ser Heathens did not worship the Images themselves, but
through them the Deity, when it is evident, what they said they ought to worship
by them, were the corporeal Creatures themselves, or the Devils, which they
believed to rule over them. Thirdly, That for any thing appears from the
Testimonies he brings, himself has found out a subtiller way of defending the
common Idolatry among them, than they ever thought on themselves; And so had he
lived in that time, he might in all probability have had a Statue erected to
him, with the Title of (...), Most useful Mercury. Let any Intelligent Person
peruse his 74th page with attention, and see whether he have not made use of
more than Mercurial subtilty in every passage of it, to blind his Reader. But
not to spend more time in a matter of fact, which himself after all
acknowledges tacitly not to have been necessary; for whether the Wiser Heathens
intended to worship the true God, or no, he will have us to suppose they did
so; and we must be content to suppose it with him.

. 5. He desires to know whether in this supposition, that they were not
mistaken as to the Object of their Worship, but intended through the Images to
worship the true Deity, they were to blame or no in the manner of serving God
by them? This Scruple I perceive has long stuck in his mind; and as I gave him
the Resolution of St. Leo concerning his Devotion to the Sun, how far it was
allowable; so I shall let him see how far at least his Wiser Heathens were
culpable in the supposed practice, by a Resolution which St. Paul himself gave
in a case of like nature. 1 Cor. 8. 1.
Some there were in his time, who knowing an Idol to be nothing in the world,
eat without scruple of meats offered to Idols, even in the Temples of the
Idols. The Question was, whether they were to blame or no in using that
liberty? And St. Paul declares they were to blame upon a double account. 1.
Because in so doing they became a stumbling Block to them that were weak, 1
Cor. 8. 9. And 2. Because by partaking of the Table of Devils, they were guilty
at least of the external Profession of Idolatry, 1 Cor. 10. 21. In like manner
I answer to the supposed Practice of the Wiser Heathens, that they were to
blame in serving God by their Images, 1. Because the Images being instituted by
Public Authority for the Worship of false Gods, they concurred, as the Doctor
himself acknowledges, with the Vulgar in all the external practices of their
Idolatry. And then again, 2dly, Because, though in the Schools they denied them
to be Gods, yet as Origin answered Celsus, Orig. li. 7. contr. Cells. p. 518.
one of Dr. St.'s Wiser Heathens, (when he pressed him with the like
supposition) They, says he, being esteemed wise and knowing men, did
nevertheless give honor to them so far, that the People by their example were
led into Error, and their Souls so far depressed with a false Religion, that
they could not endure so much as to hear any one deny them to be Gods whom they
were accustomed to worship. Hoc est crimen quod Celso impingimus aliisque
omnibus qui haec non esse deos fatentur, etc. This, says he, is the Crime with
which we charge Celsus, and all those who confess they are no Gods. But what is
all this to Roman Catholics? What he would infer, is, that they are alike to
blame in worshipping God by putting off their Hats, or bowing down, for
example, before a Crucifix: And who ever saw a wider Consequence? Suppose,
says Dr. St. that the Wiser Heathens did worship the true God by the Images of
their false Gods; Suppose again, that this was the thing which St. Paul pitched
upon to condemn them for. Therefore Roman Catholics, says he, were also
condemned by him for worshipping Christ by his Image. Who sees not here that he
should have bid us suppose one thing more, and that the very thing in Question,
viz. That God has forbidden in the Second Commandment to worship him by an
Image? Or if he will not have us to suppose this, whilst he is endeavoring to
prove it; to make good his Consequence he must first prove that a Crucifix and
other like Images used by Christians, are Symbols and Representations of false
Gods; or that the Jews were alike to blame with his Wiser Heathens for
worshipping the true God by bowing down before the Ark: Otherwise the case will
be nothing parallel, either as to Scandal or exterior Profession of Idolatry:
But by the Law of Contraries, as the Practice of the Wiser Heathens was both
Scandalous and Idolatrous as to the exterior action, even before the Law was
given, because the honor given to the Image is referred to that which is
represented by it; so upon the same account the practice of Christians in
honoring the Images of Christ, will be both honorable to Him, and ed^fying to
our Neighbor.

. 6. By this it appears how invidiously he represents what the Jesuits did in
China, (p. 75.) when he tells his Reader, that they never condemned the People
for worshipping Images, but for worshipping false Gods by them; and persuaded
them not to lay them aside, but to convert them to the honor of the true God:
and so melted down their former Images, and made new ones of them. Who would
not imagine by these words, but that the Jesuits had told the People that they
need not lay aside their Images, but only change their God, or at the most but
melt down the old ones, and make new ones of them. The Doctor never met with an
Adversary more willing to take a Testimony upon his word, than my self. But
this seemed so exorbitant, that I could not believe without seeing: And it cost
me some pains to do it, for the Book is so scarce, a man may run through most
of the Booksellers Shops in London, and not meet with it. At length I found it
in the Library of a particular Friend; and what I found there was this, that
the Jesuits in China had by their Preaching converted some Persons of that
Nation from the Worship of false Gods, to the knowledge of the True One. And
the said Converts, to testify the Truth of their Conversion, (like those in
the Primitive Church, who burnt their Books of curious Arts, Acts 19. 19.)
brought a great heap of Idols, and consumed them in a flaming furnace which
they had made for that purpose. This done, after they had re-edified or
repaired the Altar from which they had cast down the Idols, (it seems they had
demolished or defaced that also) there was placed, says the Author, in their
room the Image of Christ our Savior; neither does he say so much as that It
was made of the melted Metal, though that had been no more than of the
materials of a Pagan Temple to build a Church to the honor of Christ. His
words are these. Simulacrorum (mark that) ingens cumulus extracta furnace
flammis absvmptus est. In eorum locum successit Christi Servatoris Effigies,
quam exturbatis Idolis in renovatam aram suffecerunt. This is what the Author
reports of the Jesuits, Trigaut. de Christan. expedit. apud Sinas, lib. 5. c.
16. p. 588.
and none can or will be offended with them for it; but such as would be
displeased with him that should pull down an Usurper's Image, and set up the
Kings in its place. But as Dr. St. relates it, (I should say translates the
words, for he is so exact as to refer us to the very page) it appears with
quite another aspect, something like the ruins of Nabuchadonosor's Image; but
that there the materials only of the Image, whereas here the Images themselves
of Christ and false Gods, are confusedly blended together by him, when he says
that the Jesuits never condemned the People for worshipping Images, but for
worshipping false Gods by them, and persuaded them not to lay them aside, but
to convert them to the honor of the true God; and so melted down their former
Images, and made new ones of them. I would gladly know what Images those were
by which he says they worshipped false Gods, were they not the Symbols or
Representations of those very false Gods? How then could the Doctor add
(without distinguishing them first from the Images of Christ) that the Jesuits
persuaded the People not to lay them aside, but to convert them to the honor
of the True God; And so melted them down, and made new ones of them? Did the
People at the preaching of the Jesuits cast them into the fire, and They not
condemn them? Did the People tear them from the Altar, and They persuade them
not to lay them aside? Did the People consume them in the fire, and They make
new ones of them? Of will he say, that the word Images being General, may be
applied respectively to the Images of (...) false Gods, and of Christ? But
where then was his Fidelity in translating the word Simulacra (used by
Ecclesiastical Writers, and particularly by the Author in this place, to
signify the Idols of the Heathens) by the General word Images? Where was his
sincerity in confounding together the Images of the false Gods and of Christ,
with so many (...) one upon another (and the first of them, which was to guide
the rest, supposing for the Images of the false Gods) that it was scarce
possible for an ordinary Protestant Reader to avoid being mistaken; whereas
Trigautius himself had distinguished them so clearly in his Relation, that it
was impossible for any one to mistake, but by design? What that must be, in a
Person who dares to charge the whole Church of Christ with Idolatry for so many
hundreds of years together, a wise man will easily guess. What lies open to
every one, is, that he has an excellent faculty in reporting faithfully (as he
calls it in his Preface, I suppose he means by Faithful there, the same as
being True to his own Cause) the sense of an Author, especially if the Book be
hard to be found, and the thing done as far off as China, and that by the
Jesuits. As for the Fact it self, of burning the Images of false Gods, and
setting up that of Christ in their room, it was no more (if not much less) than
what St. Gregory did (by whom this Nation received its Christianity) in
ordering the Pagan Festivals of our Ancestors to be converted to the Assemblies
of Christians: Whose Wisdom in so doing, is highly extolled and justified by
Mr. Thorndike from the very nature of Christianity; Just Weights, Chap. 1.
which, says he, sanctifies all times, all places, all gestures, all
circumstances, that can pretend to express, to procure, to advance, that
attention of mind, that elevation of spirit, wherewith Christians profess to
worship God in Spirit and Truth. And that the Images of Christ, among other
things, may pretend to this, by calling him to mind, and raising our Affections
to Him, I have showed in the precedent Chapter.

. 7. To add new Color to his supposed Reason of the Law, which he will have
to be the Unsuitableness of an Image to represent the Deity, he tells us in the
next place, that the Christian Church believed this Law to be immutable. And to
prove this, he cites a passage or two out of Origin and Clemens of Alexandria,
affirming that the making use of corporeal representations, makes the Deity
contemptible, and that Christians have nothing to do with Images because of the
second Commandment. And to this I answer as formerly, What Roman Catholic ever
denied it of such Images as they there speak of, viz. the Images of the
Heathens (against whom they disputed) who thought their false Gods to dwell in
their Images, Which thought, says Mr. Thorndike, made them Idols? Just
Weights, chapter 19. p. 127.
or of such Images as were by the erroneous conception of the Maker or
Worshipper, supposed to represent the Divinity, in it self? Which kind of
Images are so far from the hearts of Catholics, that we profess with St.
Germanus and St. John Damascen, Damasc. Orth. Fid. Lib. 4. c. 17.
cited by the Doctor, That it is the highest madness and impiety to go about to
make an Image or Similitude of the Invisible Deity. And whereas he would make
Clichtovaeus and Bellarmin to appear non-sensical and ridiculous, for
expounding the aforesaid Fathers to speak of such Images as should be thought
to be like unto God, and perfectly to represent him to us, by adding most
triumphantly, As if ever men were such fools to believe an Image could
perfectly represent an Infinite Being; or that God need make a Law to forbid
that which is utterly impossible in the very nature of the thing. It is evident
he does but trifle; for although it be impossible in the very nature of the
thing, to make an Image which shall perfectly represent the Deity as it is; yet
it is not impossible for men to be such fools as to conceive the Deity
otherwise than it is, and so to go about to make an Image to represent it^
which is plainly Clichtovaeus his sense, and Bellarmin's Answer likewise, as
the Doctor himself confesses; yet rather than spoil so pretty a Comparison as
he had in his head, he goes on to tell us, that God might more reasonably
forbid men to paint a Sound, to grasp all the Air in the hollow of their hands,
to drink up the Ocean, to wear the Sun for a Pendant at their Ears, or to make
new Worlds, than to command them not to make any Image which should perfectly
represent his Nature. These gay Expressions were too dear to be lost, (though
the last of them, which is the ground of the rest, Chamier de Imag. lib. 21.
cap. 3.
were borrowed from Chamier;) and Bellarmin must be made seemingly to speak
nonsense, rather than not be told he lies. So glorious a thing it is, to seem
to have Confuted Bellarmin.

But to end this Chapter, Two things I desire to know of him:

The first is, How he reconciles himself with himself, when he makes the
Irrepresentableness of Gods Nature to be the Reason of the Law, and yet will
not have the Law forbid us to Think of making an Image to represent it;
although this later be the immediate Consequence of the former?

The second, How he will reconcile himself to his Master Calvin, who expounding
this very Law, Instit. lib. 1. c. 11.
Thou shall not make to thy self a graven thing, or any likeness, etc. expressly
affirms, that God by those words restrains our licentiousness, that we should
not attempt to represent Him by any visible figure? If not by any, then
certainly not by such an one as we should think might represent him perfectly.
I leave them conferring notes, and proceed.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Second General Council of Nice, called most irreverently by Dr. St.
That Wise Synod. His Constantinopolitan Fathers Objections answered by
Epiphanius, and the Answers shown to be Good.

. 1. WE are come now to that Stone of Offense, that Rock of Scandal (as the
Doctor would have it) the Second General Council of Nice, Anno 789. in which
all such were anathematized, and condemned as Heretics, who should call the
Images of Christ and his Saints, Idols, and assert the honor given them by
Christians to be Idolatry. What wonder then if he who finds himself
comprehended under that Anathema, be in such a passion against the Council,
that in contempt and scorn he most irreverently calls it, That Wise Synod, p.
76. that is in plain English, the Three Hundred and Fifty Fathers who voted in
it, Fools, together with the Pope's Legates who presided, and the Vicars of the
Oriental Patriarchal Sees, who assisted in it. O my God! is it come to this,
that an Inferior Rector of one P^rochial Church, (whose name is scarce known
but in the Bills of Mortality, and was never heard of in the List of any
General Council) shall dare to condemn as foolish the Sentence of the most
August and Venerable Tribunal upon Earth! Was he not afraid of that dreadful
Sentence of our Lord, Matthew. 5. 22.
He that shall say to his Brother, (how much more to so many Fathers of the
Church) Fool, shall be guilty of Hellfire? What Order and Discipline can be
observed in the Church, if it shall be lawful for any private person, upon
presumption of his own wit, to contemn and deride the Decrees of those whom he
is bound under pain of being accounted as a Heathen and Publican, to hear? Will
he plead for his excuse, that he follows the Judgment of another Synod held not
long before in Constantinople, in which both the making and honoring of sacred
Images was condemned? Let him show that to have been a lawful Council, and not
a Conventicle, as in reality it was, being called by the Secular Power, and
wanting both the consent and presence of the Patriarchs of the East, and
chiefly of the Bishop of Rome, by himself or Legates, Council. Chalced. in Ep.
ad Leon.
whom the Fathers of the fourth General Council of Chalcedon acknowledge to
have presided over them, as the Head over the Members, and without whose
Authority, according to the Canon of the Church, Socrat. li. 2. Hist. Eccl. c.
13. and Sozomen li. 3. c. 91.
no Decrees could be valid. None of which defects were in the Council of Nice.
Besides that diverse of the Bishops, who had voted in, and subscribed to the
false Synod of Constantinople, came and abjured its Doctrine in the Council of
Nice; and among them Gregorius Bishop of Neocaesarea, the Ringleader of the
Faction. Yet Dr. St. takes up, and abets the Arguments of that Pseudo-Synod, as
if they had never been retracted and anathematized as impious by the chief
Author of it; and scoffs at the Answers of the Synod to them as insufficient. I
pray God he may one day imitate him in his Repentance, as he has done hitherto
in his Passion against the Images of Christ and his Saints. Examples we know
move much: and possibly it may be neither unprofitable to Him, nor ungrateful
to the Reader, to set down the form and manner of that Bishops Recantation, and
his Reception into the Church.

. 2. Being brought into the Council by a Person of honor sent from the
Emperor, Conc. Nic. 2. Act. 2.
Tarasius Patriarch of Constantinople asked him, If hitherto he had not known
the Truth, or knowingly had contemned it? His answer was, that he hoped it was
out of ignorance: but desired to learn. And when Tarasius bad him declare what
he desired to learn: he answered; Forasmuch as this whole Assembly does say and
think the same thing, I know and most certainly believe that the Point now
agitated and preached (by this Synod) is the Truth: and therefore I beg pardon
for my former evils, and desire with all these to be instructed and enlightened:
For my Errors and Crimes are great beyond measure; and as God shall please to
move the hearts of this Holy Synod to Compunction (toward me) so be it. Here
Tarasius expressing some doubt he had least his submission might not be
sincere, but that he might speak one thing with his mouth, and have another in
his heart, Gregorius cried out, God forbid! I confess the Truth, and lie not,
neither will I ever go back from my word. Whereupon Tarasius told him, that he
ought long ago to have given ear to what the Holy Apostle St. Paul teaches, 2
These. 2. 15.
saying, Hold fast the Traditions which ye have received, either by our word,
or by our Epistle: And again, 1 Timothy 6. 20. Tit. 3. 9.
to Timothy and Titus, Avoid profane Novelties of words. For what can be a
greater Novelty in Christianity, and more profane, than to say, that Christians
are Idolaters? To this Gregorius returned, that what he and his Partisans had
done, was evil; and we confess, says he, that it was evil: So it was, and so
we did, (by which words it seems he made a particular confession of what evil
they had done) and therefore we beg pardon of our faults. I confess, most Holy
Father, before you and this Holy Synod, that we have sinned, that we have
transgressed, that we have done evil, and ask pardon for it. Upon this it was
ordered, that he should bring in his Confession the next Session of the Synod;
which he did, of the same tenor with that of Basilius, Bishop of Ancyra, and
others in the first Session: Act. 3.
viz. that he did receive and salute (or give Veneration to) the Holy and
Venerable Images (of Christ and his Saints) and anathematize such as were not
of the same mind; as he expressed himself in the vote he gave, after he had by
the Sentence of the Popes Legates, and the consent of the Synod been restored
to his Seat, upon his repentance. This is recorded of Gregorius Bishop of
Neocaesarea in the Acts of the Council of Nice to his immortal Glory. May it be
imitated with no less Glory by the Rector of St. Andrews. May he take to
himself what St. Ambrose said to Theodosius, Secutus es errantem, sequere
poenitentem. This I heartily pray for, and to this end shall take the pains to
show with what little Reason he abets the Arguments of that false Synod, and
derides the Answers of the Nicen Fathers. If in doing this, I make his vanity
appear here, (as elsewhere I have done) it is but what St. Austin tells us, S.
Aug. in Psalm. 36.
we ought so much the more to endeavor toward those who oppugn the Church, by
how much the more we desire their salvation. And I know not how possibly
himself could have laid it more open than in the Ironical Title of That Wise
Synod, he gives that very Council to which his Leader in the Charge of
Idolatry, (the before mentioned Gregorius) submitted himself, as to a most
lawful Council, confessing, that what those Fathers so unanimously taught was
the Truth, and the Tradition of the Catholic Church. Now what they taught,
was, Act 7.
this, that the Images of Christ and his Saints were to be placed and retained
in Churches, that by seeing them, the Memory and Affections of the Beholders
might be excited toward those who were represented by them: as also to salute
and give an honourary adoration (or respect) to the said Images, like as is
given to the figure of the Holy Cross, to Chalices, to the Books of the H.
Gospels, and such like sacred Utensils: but not Latria, which (as true Faith
teaches) is due only to God. What he could find in this definition, for which
the Fathers deserved from him the title of Fools, I cannot imagine, unless he
will have it to be Idolatry to reverence the Books of the Holy Gospels, or the
sacred Utensils of the Altar. But in this the Council is vindicated by Eminent
Divines of the Church of England. Epil. 3. p. p. 363. li. 3. c. 36.
For Mr. Thorndike freely (...), that he must maintain as unquestionable, that
the Council of Nice enjoins no Idolatry. And Dr. Field affirms that the Nicene
Fathers mean nothing else by adoration of Images, but embracing, kissing, and
reverently using of them; like to the honor we (says he) do the Books of Holy
Scripture. Whereupon Bishop Montague says, Let Doctrine and Practice go
together, Gagg. c. 48. p. 3^9.
and we agree. Dr. St. perhaps will rank them for this in the same Predicament
of -- with the Nicen Fathers. But herein his vanity and presumption will
appear, though less, than in condemning a whole General Council. A farther
discovery of it, he makes in deriding the answers given to the Objections of
his Constantinopolitan Fathers. Let us see what they are, and with what reason
he does it.

. 3. First, says he, When the Fathers of the Synod at Constantinople had said,
that Christ came to deliver us from all Idolatry, and to teach the Worship of
God in Spirit and in Truth, they bravely answer, that then it is impossible for
Christians (meaning I suppose particular Christian) to fall into Idolatry,
because (he should have added, as the Council does, the Prophets had foretold,
that all Idolatry should be extirpated by the preaching of Christ and his
Apostles, and) his Kingdom was always to continue, and the gifts and graces of
God are without repentance: Which would as well hold, says the Doctor, against
the prevalency of the Turk, as Idolatry among them. And is not this bravely
answered by the Doctor? Does he think that there are as great Promises in the
Scripture, for the Turks not overrunning Christendom, as there are for the
Gates of Hell not prevailing against the Church? Or that the Church, which is
Christ's Kingdom, could apostatize so far as to enjoin and allow the belief and
practice of Idolatry, and the Gates of Hell not prevail against it? If he will
not maintain these impieties to be true, Zach. 13. 2.
nor deny what God has said by the Prophet Zachary, Behold, the days come, and
I will destroy the names of Idols from off the earth, and the memory of them
shall be no more: and this not for four or five hundred years, but to the end
of the World, for the Kingdom of Christ is to continue always, and his graces
are without Repentance; let him give Glory to God, and acknowledge his charge
of Idolatry to be false, and that Christ has done what he came to do, that is,
(as his Constantinopolitan Fathers confess) to deliver us from all Idolatry.

. 4. The second thing he makes the Fathers of the false Synod at Constantinople
to urge, is, That the Devil not being able to reduce the World to the former
Idolatry, endeavors underhand to introduce it, under a pretense of
Christianity, bringing them again to the Worship of the Creature, and making a
God of a thing that is made, when they have called it by the Name of Christ.
The words here cited were taken out of St. Gregory Nissen, in the Oration he
made upon his Brother St. Basil; and Epiphanius in the Name of the Council of
Nice, charges them to have adulterated both the meaning and words of the Saint,
by putting the name of Christ, instead of that of the Son. For whereas St.
Gregory's Discourse there was against the Arrians, proving them to be
Idolaters, because they acknowledged Christ to be a Creature, and yet, adored
and served and put their trust in him, they wickedly pervert his words against
the Images of Christ, which although Christians retain in memory, and reverence
out of love to him, that is represented by them, yet they neither call them
Gods, nor serve them as Gods, nor at any time put their hope of salvation in
them, as the Arrians did in the Son, although they believed him to be a
Creature. The Dr. thought it not to his purpose to take notice of this Juggle
of his Constantinopolitan Fathers, in putting the name Christ for Son: No, it
might put us in mind of his own dexterous managing the words and sense of
Authors cited by himself, as I have showed in the foregoing Chapter. Only, when
Epiphanius makes the difference between the Arrians and Catholics to consist
in this, that the Arrians trusted in Christ, and gave properly divine honor to
him; but Catholics did not so to the Images of Christ, but only worshipped them
for the sake of the Object represented by them. Sum. 3. p. 9. 25. a 3.
He comes in (p. 79.) with a But Aquinas and his followers have at large
proved, that where any thing is worshipped merely for the sake of another, it
must have the same kind of worship given it, which they give to the thing
represented by it: For as Aquinas observes, the motion of the Soul toward an
Image, as it is an Image is the same with that which is toward the thing
represented by it: Therefore Epiphanius and the Nicen Fathers are in the same
case with the Arrians, whom they acknowledge to be Idolaters.

5. I remember the Dr. in his Preface tells his Reader, that his design is to
argue closely. How much he has failed in the performance of his design, (if
ever he had any such) I have shown in almost every argument he brings: And for
the present argument, there are so many failings in it, that a Junior Sophister
in the Schools would have given it the name not of one, but of many Fallacies.
For to make the consequence good, he ought first to have proved, that the Nicen
Fathers were of the same opinion with Aquinas and his followers: or that their
Argument was so evident a D^monstration, that they could not but be guilty of
culpable ignorance if they did not see it. 2dly, That Aquinas and his followers
did conclude themselves in virtue of so evident a proof, to be Idolaters; or at
least they ought to have done so, for giving the same Worship or Reverence to
Christ and his Image; to Him, absolutely for himself; to his Image, relatively,
or merely for his sake, as they explicate themselves. 3dly, That the Arrians
were Idolaters upon this very account, that they gave only relative Worship to
the Son, and not properly Divine Worship, which St. Gregory Nissen says they
did, because though they acknowledged him to be a Creature, yet they adored,
and served, and put their trust in him as God. These things he ought to have
proved, to make his own consequence good, viz. Therefore the Nicen Fathers are
in the same case with the Arrians, whom they acknowledge to be Idolaters. But
to tell us; that because Epiphanius and the Nicen Fathers said, they only
worshipped the Images of Christ for his sake who was represented by them: and
because (not They, but) Aquinas and his followers have at large proved that
when Christ is worshipped by his Image, the same Worship or Reverence is given
to him and his Image; Therefore Epiphanius and the Nicen Fathers were in the
same case with the Arrians, that is, Idolaters; is such a piece of Logic (if
good) as would have served Diogenes (had he known it) to conclude all the
Platonists in the world to be blind. For thus he might argue from the Doctors
Topics; The Platonists, and all Philosophers, affirm that for a man to see,
there must necessarily be some union between the Object and the Eye, that is,
something must pass from the Eye to the Object, or from the Object to the Eye.
But Aristotle and his Followers have at large proved, that this cannot be done
by emission of Rays from the Eye to the Object, as the Platonists would have
it; but by Immission of Species from the Object to the Eye: Therefore all the
Platonists in the world are blind. What greater Sophistry can there be, than
when there are different Opinions how the same thing may be done, and one of
them really absurd, at least seemingly so to others, to make him who does the
thing to be guilty of all the absurdities which follow from such an Opinion?
Yet such is the Doctors manner of arguing in this place: All Catholics agree
that an Image may be worshipped for his sake whom it represents; St. Thomas and
his followers will have this to be done by the same act by which the Prototype
is worshipped: Others who take a different way of explicating the thing, look
upon this as absurd, and think they can prove it to be Idolatrous: and Dr. St.
from hence concludes Epiphanius and the Nicen Fathers, because they say only
what all Catholics agree in, viz. That they worshipped the Images of Christ
only for his sake who was represented by them, to be Idolaters. The Reader I
suppose by this time sees the fallaciousness of this kind of arguing: and that
the Doctor may feel it, (if seeing be not enough) I shall press him with his
own Argument in a Point which himself affirms. To show what kind of Reverence
we give to holy Images, and that it is not Idolatrous, I instanced in Moses and
Joshua's putting off their Shoes in reverence to the Ground where they stood,
because it was Holy. To this the Doctor answers, p. 105. First, That for this
there was an express Command; but in the case of Image Worship there is as
plain a Prohibition. But let this pass, though I have manifestly proved the
contrary. What I fix upon at present, is his Second Answer, in which he
avouches, (abstracting from any Prohibition or Command) that the special
presence and appearance of God, does sanctify a place to so high a degree,
that we may lawfully testify our Reverence toward it, and this Reverence so
testified toward the Ground by Moses and Joshua in putting off their Shoes, I
suppose himself will grant, was not given to the Ground for it self, but merely
for His sake who appeared there present in a special manner, that is for God's.
This supposed, I subsume according to his Logic: But Aquinas and his followers
have at large proved, that where any thing is worshipped or reverenced merely
for the sake of another, it must have the same kind of reverence given it,
which they give to the thing which sanctifies it by its presence; for they do
not only maintain that the same reverence is to be given to the Cross on which
Christ suffered, Sum. 3. p. q. 25. a. 4.
because it represents him to us as crucified, but also because of his presence
or conjunction to it; upon which account they say the King and his Garment are
worshipped with the same act of Civil Worship. Therefore Moses and Joshua were
Idolaters for giving reverence to the Ground merely for his sake who sanctified
it with his presence. The Consequence (though horrible to any Christian Ear) is
parallel to that of the Doctor against Epiphanius and the Nicen Fathers; and if
it have any force against these, it must have the same against those. Thus is
the Doctor fallen into his own Trap. Neither can he save himself by having
recourse to an express command in the case; because Gods special presence is
given by him there as a distinct reason why reverence might lawfully be given
to the Ground for his sake who was present; and if it were Idolatry in it self
to do so, because Aquinas and his followers have at large proved, that where
any thing is reverenced merely for the sake of another, it must have the same
kind of reverence given it, which they give to the thing which sanctifies it
by its presence: it follows that God commanded Moses and Joshua upon his
grounds to do an act which in it self is Idolatry; and this sounds no less, if
not more horrible to a Christian Ear, than the former. Let him then take his
choice, whether he will allow what Aquinas and his followers have at large
proved for good, or no. If he grant it, he must show the disparity, why Moses
and Joshua were not as much Idolaters according to his Principles, as
Epiphanius and the Nicen Fathers. If he deny it, let him tell us with what
conscience he could condemn Epiphanius and the Nicen Fathers for Idolaters,
upon Grounds which himself denies to be good and solid. Thus much to the form
of the Doctors Argument. As for the distinction it self of Absolute and
Relative Latria (with which St. Thomas and his followers explicate their
Doctrine) I shall have occasion to speak of it hereafter. In the mean time the
Reader may p^ously believe, that to give Relative Latria to the Image of
Christ, is no more Idolatry, than to give Relative Regal honor to the Kings
Garment, is Treason.

. 6. The third thing he urges from his Constantinopolitan Fathers, is, the
great Absurdity (as they call it, and he applauds them for it, p. 80.) of
making an Image of Christ for Worship, because Christ is God and Man; therefore
the Image must be of God and Man: which cannot be, unless the Deity be
circumscribed within the created flesh, or there be a confusion of both Natures
after their Union, both which are blasphemies condemned by the Church. To this
Epiphanius answers two things; 1. That the Name of Christ is significative of
both Natures, and that an Image represents only the Humane Nature, and agrees
only in name, and not in substance with the Prototype. 2. That the Divine is
no more circumscribed within the Humane Nature in its being represented in an
Image, than it was in its being laid in the Manger, or nailed to the ^ross. And
consequently that the Objection either of circumscription of the Divine Nature,
or confusion of both Natures, was vain and frivolous. I, but says the Doctor,
What does this Answer signify, unless there be an equal presence or union of
the Divine Nature of Christ with the Image, as there was with the Humane
Nature? And I would gladly know what this Answer of his is to the purpose,
unless he think that nothing may be worshipped with relation to God, unless it
have as great an Union with the Person of Christ, as his Humane Nature had? He
will not deny, I hope, that the special presence and appearance of God does
sanctify a place to so high a degree, that we may lawfully testify our
reverence toward it, and yet that presence or union is not equal to that of
the Divine Nature of Christ with his Humane. It is not only Union, but
Representation also, that may occasion Worship; and so we see the King is
worshipped by his Picture, as representing him, though it have not so close an
union with his Soul as his Body has. But what sticks in the Doctors mind (if I
mistake not) is, how Christ God and Man, can be worshipped by an Image which
represents him only according to his Humane Nature? To this I have spoken
already in the fifth Chapter; and himself may satisfy his Reader in the point,
by telling him how the King, who consists of Soul and Body, can be worshipped
by a Picture which represents him only according to the Lineaments of his Body.

. 7. In the fourth place, his Constantinopolitan-Fathers urge, that If the
Humane Nature of Christ be represented in the Image of Christ to be worshipped
as separate from the Divine; this would be plain Nestorianism. And what says
Epiphanius to this? That never any man well in his wits, when he saw the
Picture of a man, thought that the Painter by drawing him, had divided his Soul
from his Body, that is, that he had not only drawn the man, but hanged and
quartered him too? Was ever time so fondly misspent as in proposing and refuting
such pitiful kind of Sophistry, as this of the Doctors
Constantinopolitan-Fathers? And yet He says, the Good Nicen Fathers (where he
means by Good, what he meant before by Wise) not knowing what to answer, deny
the Conclusion, and cry, They Nestorians? No. They lie in their Teeth. Thus He.
But what the Nicen Fathers answered like Good men and True, was this, that
though the Images of Christ (like other Images) represent only the external
Lineaments of his Humane Nature, yet when they look upon them, they understand
nothing but what is signified by them. For example, When he is represented as
born of the Virgin (which is, I suppose, what the Doctor means by the Birth of
the Virgin. p. 81.) what they conceive in their Minds, is not his Humane Nature
as separated from the Divine, but one Emmanuel, true God and Man: and therefore
were far enough from b^ing guilty of Nestorianism in the use of Images. Here
the Doctor cries out, Alas for them! that they should ever be charged with the
Worship of Images, who plead for nothing now but a Help to their profound
Meditations by them! And may not I much better say, Alas for him! who, if they
Worshipped the same which they conceived in their Minds, could not see their
Worship (which is an Act of the Will) must be as free from Nestorianism, as
their Understanding. But he had had nothing to reply, if he had not thrust in
those Words of his own, (to be Worshipped as separate from the Divine Nature)
For they are not in the Objection, as it stands Recorded in the Council.
However, they signify little to his purpose, because the Will is carried to
the Prototype as it is conceived in the Understanding, nor does it give to the
Image the Worship due to the Principal, because the Image is not Worshipped at
all for its own sake, but for the Principal's.

. 8. The Fifth Argument which he makes his Constantinopolitan Fathers produce,
is from the Institution of the Eucharist, which they call Christ's Image because
instituted in Commemoration of him. And whereas he said, Do this in remembrance
of Me, He did, as it were, tell them, That no other Figure or Representation
under Heaven was chosen by Him, as able to represent His being in the Flesh.
This, they say, was an HONORABLE Image of his Quickening BODY, made by Himself,
which he would not have of the shape of a Man, to prevent Idolatry. And as the
Body of Christ was really sanctified by the Divine Nature; so this Holy Image
is by Adoption Deified, or made Divine through sanctification of Grace. This is
the sense of the Argument; to which Epiphanius answers, that from the Fury they
were possessed with against the making of Images, they were driven into another
madness, of calling the Eucharist an Image, contrary to the Scriptures and
Fathers. And the Doctor knows that it is a sufficient Answer to an absurd
Objection, to show that the Objector was driven to run into an Absurdity to
maintain his Cause. What the Constantinopolitans would have inferred from
thence, was, that because Christ (as They asserted) made the Eucharist an Image
of his Body, therefore no other Image might be made or Worshipped. But this
They did not, but left it perhaps (as too hard a Task for Themselves) to be
undertaken by so Great an Admirer of Them and their Doctrine, as my Adversary:
and at his Door it lies. Only he is desired to bear in mind against a fit
season, that the Eucharist with Them is an HONORABLE IMAGE, made by Christ
Himself, and therefore if he will not desert his Leaders, he must give honor
to it, nay Divine Honor, because although his Beloved Constantinopolitans call
the EUCHARISTICAL BREAD an IMAGE, yet they confess it in the same place to be
NO FALSE IMAGE of Christ's Natural Flesh, but by virtue of the Priestly
Consecration, it is made his Divine Body.

. 9. In the sixth and last place he jumbles together no less than Eight
Arguments or rather Bare Assertions of his Constantinopolitan Fathers, all
which Epiphanius denies and refutes as frivolous and false; as any one may see,
who either considers the Objections in themselves; or will take the pains to
read the Answers to them at large in the sixth Action of the Council of Nice.
Which though my Adversary call weak and trivial, yet it is no sign he thought
them so, when he omitted to set them down.

CHAP. VIII.
The Doctors Objection from the Council of Frankford examined, and shown to be
no Advantage to his Cause.

. 1. AFter the matter of the Veneration due to Holy Images, had been discussed,
and defined, as you have seen, in the second General Council of Nice, the
Doctor fearing that his Irony of that Wise Synod, would not stick fast enough,
unless backed with a greater Authority than his own, tells his Reader that it
was condemned by the Council at Francford, called together by Charles the
Great, Anno 794. He should have added, By the Command of the Apostolic See, as
it is in Hin^marus; but that had been an apparent disadvantage to his Cause,
Li. contr. Laud. Episc. c. 20.
and therefore better left out. Nevertheless the fact it self he looks upon as
an apparent advantage to it. And thereupon he endeavors to show by many
Conjectures, that the Fathers at Francford did expressly reject the Council of
Nice, and that not out of misunderstanding its Doctrine, as some rashly, he
says, imagine: but that really they intended to condemn the Doctrine it self
there defined. His proofs are, (p. 84.) Because the Acts of that Council, he
says, were very well known to the Author of the Caroline Book; and because the
Copy of the Nicen Council was sent them by Pope Adrian; whose Legates also
presided in the Council of Francford, and might easily rectify any Mistake, if
they were guilty of it. Besides, none of the Historians of that time do take
notice of any such Error, and the second Canon of Francford published by
Sirmondus, expressly condemns the Council of Nice. To this he adds, That the
same Council was rejected here in England, and the Synod of Paris, called by
Ludovicus Pius, condemned expressly Pope Adrian for asserting a superstitious
Adoration of Images. Lastly, he confirms it from the Doctrine of the Caroline
Books, (whose design, as Binius confesses, was against all Worship of Images)
and of Agobardus published by Baluzius, who ingenuously, says he, confesses,
that Agobardus says no more than the whole Gallican Church believed in that
Age.

This is the sum and force of his Argument, and to manifest the insufficiency
of it in order to his design, (supposing the matter of fact to be true, viz.
that the Council of Francford did reject that of Nice, which diverse learned men
not improbably deny) I shall show first, that de facto there was a
misunderstanding of the Doctrine of the Council of Nice. Secondly, That
supposing there had been no mistake, but that the Synod at Francford had really
condemned the Doctrine of Nice, yet had it been no advantage to his Cause.

. 2. First, there was a misunderstanding of the Doctrine of the Council of
Nice. And to make this evident, I shall need no more than to compare what was
taught in the Council of Nice, with what was condemned in the Council of
Francford. What the Council of Nice taught, I have set down in the precedent
Chapter, viz. That the Images of Christ and his Saints were to be placed and
retained in Churches, etc. and that an honourary adoration (or respect) was to
be given to the said Images, like as is given to Chalices, and to the Books of
the H Gospels; but not LATRIA, which (as true Faith teaches) is due only to
God. This was the plain and open Definition of the Council of Nice. Let us now
see what it was that the Synod of Francford condemned. Allata est in medium
Quaestio, etc. A Question was proposed in the Council (says the Author of the
Caroline Book) concerning the late Synod of the Greeks held at Constantinople
(a mistake of the place, for Nicaea) about the adoring of Images: In qua
scriptum habebatur, In which there was written, that those should be
anathematized, who did not give service and adoration to Images of the Saints,
as to the Divine Trinity. Now, says the said Author, our most Holy Fathers
denying by all means Service and Adoration, did both contemn and unanimously
condemn the said Synod. This is what the Fathers of the Synod at Francford
condemned, as it stands represented by the Author himself of the Carolin Book,
to whom my Adversary says, that the Acts of the Council were very well known,
and by Goldastus in Sir Henry Spelman, Council. To. 1. p. 307.
who cites them as the very words of the Council, and I suppose by Sirmondus
also; for had he published any thing else, the Doctor would not have failed to
let us know it. And now I appeal to any indifferent Reader, whether there were
not a great misunderstanding of the Doctrine of the Council of Nice. For had
the Fathers of Francford rightly understood that the Council of Nice declared
only an honourary Worship to be given to Images, like as to the H. Cross and
to the Books of H. Scriptures, etc. and not Latria, or the Worship due only to
God, they could never have condemned it for defining that the same Service and
Worship was to be given to Images as to the Divine Trinity. And therefore Mr.
Thorndike ingenuously professes, that It is to be granted, that whosoever it
was that writ the Book against Images under the Name of Charles the Great,
Epilog. part. 3. p. 363.
did understand the Council to enjoin the Worship of God to be given to the
Image of our Lord. But it is not to be denied that it was a mere mistake, and
that the Council acknowledging that submission of the heart which the
Excellence of God only challenges, proper to the H. Trinity, maintains a
signification of that esteem to be paid to the Image of our Lord. It is evident
then there was a grand mistake: And to omit what Bellarmin and others say of
the ocsion of it, De Concord. sacerd. and Imp. li. 2. c. 17. ex edit. Baluzii.
Conc. Nic. Act. 3.
Petrus de Marca (the late learned Archbishop of Paris) very probably judges it
to have risen from the words of Constantinus Bishop of Constantia in Cyprus,
unskilfully rendered by the Latin Translator. For (as he well observes) the
Council of Francford did not condemn the plain and open Definition of the
Council of Nice, but (as the Canon it self of Francford speaks) Quod scriptum
habebatur, for that there was found written in the Acts of that Council, that
the Worship due unto God, was to be given to Images. And the Author of the
Caroline Book tells us, that this was found written in the Sentence of the
aforesaid Constantinus, whom therefore he condemns of precipitancy and folly in
these words, Infauste and praecipitanter sive insipienter Constantinus
Constantiae Cypri Episcopus dixit, suscipio and amplector honorabiliter sanctas
and venerandas Imagines, and quae secundum servitium adorationis quae
substantiali and vivificatrici Trinitati emitto. But instead of precipitancy
and folly in Constantinus, he should have laid the fault upon the ignorance of
the Translator, or his own, if not his malice. For the sense in Greek is plain
and facil to be this: Suscipio and honorarie amplector sanctas and venerabiles
Imagines. Et adorationem secundum Latriam soli supersubstantiali and vivificae
Trinitati impendo. I receive and with honor embrace the holy and venerable
Images (of Christ and his Saints) but for adoration of Latria, I give it only
to the supersubstantial and Life-giving Trinity. From whence it is is plain how
ignorantly or maliciously rather it was said by Calvin, Instit. lib. 1. c. 11..
16.
that the same Constantinus professed he did reverently embrace the said holy
Images, cultumque honoris, qui vivificae Trinitati debetur, se illis
exhibiturum, and that he would give that Worship to them which is due to the
Holy Trinity; when what he professed, was the quite contrary. Such Arts as
these were enough to make a man suspect a good Cause, much more to desert a bad
one. But whether this were the occasion or no, it is evident (as I showed
before) that there was a great mistake, and while the matter of fact is
evident, my Adversary labors in vain to argue from Conjectures, that it was
not possible, especially since the Copy of the Acts of the Nicene Council, was
so unskilfully if not maliciously translated, as to minister matter of mistake;
and though the Popes Legates could not persuade the Francford Fathers from
being engaged in it, yet it is certain they reclaimed against their proceedings;
and if the Fathers at Francford persisted in their mistake, what wonder if the
Historians of that time, who favored them, took no notice of it? Or if the
English Historians ran into the same Error, as it is manifest they did, by
what Hoveden reports, Hoveden Annal. P. Prior. ad Anno 792.
that the English Bishops believed the Doctrine of the Council of Nice to be,
that Adoration was to be given to Images, which the Church of Christ abhors?
That the Author of the Caroline Book, and Agobardus after him, did not content
themselves with what the Council of Francford had condemned, viz. That Worship
was not to be given to Images, as to the Holy Trinity; but denied any
veneration at all to be due to them, (as the Doctor will have it) hinders not,
but that the Council of Francford condemned that of Nice upon a
misunderstanding of its Doctrine, as I have evidently showed.

. 3. Secondly, But now supposing there had been no mistake, but that the
Fathers at Francford (as my Adversary would have it) had really condemned the
Doctrine of the Council of Nice, yet I affirm it had been no advantage to his
Cause, because as himself (p. 84.) says, The Popes of Rome sided with the
Worshippers of Images, that is, confirmed the Doctrine of the Council of Nice,
whereas they opposed and rejected the condemnation of it by the Fathers of
Francford. That the Popes Legates contradicted it in the Synod, Cent. 8. c. 9.
is confessed by the Magdeburgenses; and that the Pope himself opposed it, is
manifest from the Confutation he wrote of the Caroline Book; and that no
Decrees of any Council could be valid without the Popes consent, was so
undoubted a thing among all Christians, that the Author himself of that Book
durst not deny it, but on the contrary affirms it to have been the sense even
of the Fathers of Francford, as acknowledging and professing the last Judgment
of Controversies to belong to the Bishop of Rome; and upon this account they
affirmed the Council of Nice was to be rejected, Baron. An. 794.
viz. for that it had not been confirmed (as they pretended, though falsely) by
the Pope. And if the Fathers of Francford looked upon it then as an advantage
to their Cause, that the Pope (as they pretended) had not sided with the
Worshippers of Images, that is, with the Nicen Fathers, how comes the Doctor to
look upon it now as so apparent an advantage to the same Cause, that the Pope
(as he confesses) sided with them? What I can discover here, is nothing but a
great improvement of confidence, to allege that for an Advantage which in
Church Affairs is the greatest prejudice upon Earth. But if the Popes
confirming the Council of Nice, were no advantage to his Cause, as little is
it, that the Council at Francford denied it to be Occumenical, because the
Greeks only were there present, and none of the other Provinces were called;
for what weight soever the Doctor may conceive that Exception to have carried
at that time, yet it is certain now it has no force at all, since the Council
it self has for many hundreds of years been accepted as a true and lawful
General Council, and its Doctrine as Catholic by all the Provinces of
Christendom, and the contrary to it condemned for Heresy. And this is no other
(...) what Mr. Thorndike answers to two Objections urged from St. Epiphanius
and the Council of Elvira, Jus^ (...) chap. 19.
that granting they held all Images in Churches dangerous for Idolatry (of
which, says he, there is appearance) it is manifest they were afterward
admitted all over. From whence it follows that what Dr. St. argues from the
Synod of Paris under Ludovicus Pius (which was indeed but a Conference of some
Learned Men) condemning Pope Adrian for a superstitious adoration of Images;
Anno 825.
From the Doctrine also of the Author of the Caroline Book, and that of
Agobardus, which Baluzius, says he, confesses to be no more than the whole
Gallican Church believed in that Age, is no advantage at all to his Cause,
because in supposition that they then did look upon the very true Doctrine of
the Council of Nice, as dangerous, and impugn it as such, by reason of a very
evil superstition, the same Baluzius says, had possessed the minds of some
persons in that Age, viz. that the same Worship was to be given to Images as to
the Blessed Trinity; yet afterward the Doctrine of the said Nicene Council
prevailed all over, and was received as an Apostolical Tradition by the
Gallican Church it self; like as the Doctrine of Non-rebaptization of Heretics
was received in the African Church, although it had been condemned there before
in a Council by St. Cyprian. But upon a diligent survey of Baluzius his
Discourse in that place, Baluzius in notis ad Abogard. tit. de Imag. p. 88.
I do not perceive his meaning to be what the Doctor would have it, viz. that
what Agobardus wrote was the belief of the whole Gallican Church in that Age:
but that it was the Judgment and Design of the French Bishops at that time, to
extirpate by all means the abovementioned Superstition which then reigned,
although in doing it they might seem to run into the other extreme, of denying
any Worship at all to be due to Images; all the whole business of the use of
Images, being (as the Author of the Account very well observes, p. 18.) but a
matter of Discipline and Government. For had he meant that what Agobardus
wrote, was no more than the whole Gallican Church believed in that Age; how
could the same Baluzius tell us, that the French Bishops at that time, although
they seemed to remove all Worship from Images, yet allowed them to be kept,
that the Faithful by seeing them, might be excited to imitate those Holy
Persons they represented: Papyrius Masson. in Synopsi Agob*
Whereas Agobardus went so far as to affirm that they were kept for Ornament to
delight the eyes, but not for the instruction of the people; nay, that they
were not to be painted upon the Church-Walls? Was this the Belief of the
Gallican Church in that Age, when Jonas Aurelianensis wa^ commanded by
Ludovicus Pius ^o (...) against Claudius ^aurinensis for casting them out of
the Church? Surely the little care there was taken to preserve the Canon of the
Council of Eran^ford against Image Worship, or ^ather the unanimous concurrence
to suppress it (if there were ever any such Canon, for it lay in obscurity for
above seven hundred years together, till it was published, as my Adversary
says, about the middle of the last ^entury, by Du Tillet) as also the
prevalency of the contrary Belief in the Gallican Church, as it is at this day,
without any noise or opposition, are no great Presumptions to men who have any
insight into the Affairs of Religion, that the said Church in that Age believed
(as Dr. St. would have us believe from the Confession of Baluzius) that no
Veneration was to be given to Holy Images. It is upon the contrary supposition,
that Baluzius endeavors to excuse Agobardus and some other French Bishops of
that Age, as transported with zeal against a Superstition which, he says, had
then prevailed among some Persons in giving the same Worship to Images as to
the Holy Trinity. And for himself, he professes that he is much pleased with
the Decree of the Council of Cambray, Anno 1565. That the People be taught that
no Worship ought to be given to an Image, for the matter or elegancy of the
work, etc. but for the Thing represented by it, to which the Worship and Honor
is chiefly referred; and that the Mind or Intention of him that prays or
worshippeth be carried to the thing signified, and not terminated on the sign,
which can neither hear, nor see, nor understand. Thus much ^o the Doctors
Objection from the Council of Francford, a Passage (take it which way you will)
so difficult and obscure, by reason of the various Opinions of Authors, and
seeming, if not real Contradictions in Historians, that for one whose design is
to blunder, not satisfy his Reader, a fitter Topic cannot be found, unless it
be that which follows of the Calves, as he has perplexed it with his
groundless Conjectures.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Doctors Third Proof, from the Judgment, as he pretends, of the
Lawgiver. His speculation concerning the Golden Calves manifes^ly repugnant to
the H. Scriptures and Fathers. Mr. Thorndike's Judgment of the Meaning and
Extent of the Second Commandment.

. 1. THe Third Reason Dr. Stilling fleet brings to prove that God in the second
Commandment has expressly prohibited the giving any Worship to himself by an
Image, is taken, says he, (p. 92.) from those who were best able to understand
the meaning of it: and among these, none so competent a Judge as the Lawgiver
himself. Here we have a solid Principle indeed to work upon, and if the Doctor
would give me leave to infer from it, I would argue thus: But the Lawgiver
himself commanded the Ark and the Cherubims to be placed in the Temple, with
respect to his Worship; Therefore he did not expressly prohibit in the second
Commandment the giving any Worship to himself by an Image. For it cannot be
^onceived that himself would introduce (...) allow such a practice as should be
contrary to its meaning. But I must not forestall, but attend my Adversary: and
the substance of what he discourses upon that Principle, is this, That the
Israelites were condemned by God of Idolatry, for worshipping the Golden Calf,
and yet they did not fall into the Heathen Idolatry by so doing, but only
worshipped the true God under that Symbol of his presence. If you ask him how
he knows for certain that the Israelites did not fall back into the Heathen
Idolatry; when it is certain that in Egypt they worshipped the Idols of the
Egyptians, Ezekiel. 20. 7, 8? He tells you upon his word, that they had not the
least pretense of infidelity as to the true God; and yet the very Text he cites
to prove it, tells us they pretended their despair of Moses returning, as a
sufficient reason to move Aaron to make them Gods who should go before them. If
you ask him how he knows for certain, that the Calf was intended to be only a
Symbol of Gods presence? He tells you, We (that is himself and his Master
Calvin) cannot imagine the people so sottish, Calv. Instit. li. 1. c. 11. n. 9.
Nec tam incogitantes erant Judaei* says Calvin, to desire Aaron to make them
a God in the proper sense, as though they could believe the Calf newly made, to
have been the God, which before it was made, brought them out of the land (...)
Egypt. And yet they can both of them very easily imagine Catholic Christians
to be so sottish as to terminate their Worship upon a Block, or a hewn Stone,
though (...) the same time they deny any Divinity to be in them, or have not
the least pre^ence of Infidelity as to the True God. But (be their Imagination
as much at the devotion of their Passion as they please) could not the People,
taking it for granted (as he says they did) that Moses was not to be heard of
more, fall into a dislike or a distrust of the God whom Moses had taught them
to worship, and so run with their thoughts into Egypt, and require of Aaron to
make them a God to go before them, like unto the Gods which they had seen and
worshipped there? That this was their Intention, and not to make a Symbol only
of the presence of the true God, the very making of the Calf, which was done in
imitation of the Golden Bulls of Egypt, the Symbols (as the Doctor calls them)
of their chief God Osiris, sufficiently evinces. And for this it is they are so
frequently reprehended in Holy Scripture. Deuteronomy. xxxii. 15. He (that is, Israel)
forsook God which made him, and went back from the God of his Salvation; and
verse. 18. Thou have forsaken the God which made thee, and have forgotten the
God thy Creator. Psalm. cv. 19. They made a Calf in Horeb, and worshipped the
Molten Image. Thus they changed their Glory into the similitude of an Ox that
eats Grass. They forgot God who had saved them, who had done so great things
in Egypt, wondrous works in the Land of Cham, and fearful things in the red
Sea. And again, Acts vii. 39, 40. Our Fathers, says St. Stephen, would not
obey, but thrust him (that is, the true God) from them, and in their hearts
turned back again into Egypt, saying unto Aaron, Make us Gods to go before us,
etc. And they made a Calf in those days, and offered sacrifice to the Idol, and
rejoiced in the work of their own hands. This is what the Scripture testifies
that the Israelites did, viz. that they forgot the God which made them; that
they thrust him from them, and in their hearts turned back into Egypt; that
the Molten Calf (which they had made after the pattern they had seen there) was
an Idol, and that they offered sacrifices to this Idol: And must we now deny
all this to be true, because Calvin and Dr. St. cannot imagine the People to
have been so sottish? Is this to make Scripture the Rule of Faith, or
Imagination to be the Rule of Scripture? Let the Reader observe here for his
Instruction that according to Dr. St.'s behavior here and elsewhere, if he
meet with any passage in Scripture that thwarts his Imagination, he must
understand it in a sense agreeable to what he can imagine, that is, as best
pleases his own fancy. And This (how ^unningly soever He and his Partisans
disguise it) is indeed the only Ground from which they take their measures in
the Interpretation of Scripture, as Mr. E. W. has clearly proved in his Book
called Protestancy without Principles. And although His performance, among
others, be likened by the Doctor to the way that Rats answer Books, by gnawing
some of the leaves of them: yet an Impartial Reader will compare it rather to
the execution done by the Worm in Jonas, which smote the Gourd, and it
withered. But to return to the Israelites, and their Golden Calf.

. 2. Did the Fathers understand the same by it which Calvin and the Doctor do?
Could They not imagine the People to be so sottish as to ascribe their
deliverance, and the Miracles wrought in it, to this New God? Nothing less.
There is no cause to wonder, says St. Athanasius, at the Pharisees madness, S.
Athan. in illud, Quicunque dixerit verbum. Tom. 4.
in imputing the works of Christ to the Devil, because their Fathers were of
the same mind before them; for being but newly gone out of Egypt, they
attributed the benefits which God had bestowed on them, to the Calf which
themselves had made, saying, These are thy Gods, O Israel, which brought thee
out of Egypt. You will ask, says St. Hierom, how they offered sacrifices in
the Wilderness, not to God, but to their King, whom they call Lucifer? St.
Hierom in Amos, cap. 5.
And the Answer he gives is, that from the time they transformed their Gold
into a Calf, saying these are thy Gods, O Israel, which brought thee out of
Egypt, it is manifest, that all what they did, they did not to God, but to
Idols. In like manner St. Chrysostom. After the people had heard those words,
St. Chrysostom. Tom. 5. Hom. 5. de Poenit.
I am the Lord thy God, Thou shall have no other Gods beside me; They made a
Calf, and rejected God. They did not acknowledge him to be the Lord, but
disowned their Benefactor, saying unto Aaron, Make us Gods to go before us: And
then, as if he had foreseen the difficulty Calvin and my Adversary have of
imagining how the people could believe the Calf newly made to have been the
God, which before it was made brought them out of the Land of Egypt, He objects
to himself, If they were Gods, why did they say, Make? For how can those be
Gods which are made? And then answers, Sic malitia obsaecans sibi ipsi
repugnat, and semetipsam extinguit. That, It is the nature of malice to blind
the mind it possesses to that degree, that it makes it contradict and destroy
it self.

. 3. This is what the Holy Scripture and the Fathers say expressly of the
Israelites making and worshipping the Calf. That they were Idolaters in so
doing, we confess; but that their Idolatry consisted only in worshipping the
True God under that, as a Symbol of his presence, we utterly deny. And till the
Doctor can prove it, by as great, if not greater Authority of Scriptures and
Fathers, than I have done the contrary, he will never prove from this fact of
theirs, that God has expressly prohibited in the second Commandment the giving
him any Worship by an Image. What he does is, to tell us that he cannot imagine
the people to have been so sottish, as to believe the Calf newly made to have
been the God, which before it was made, brought them out of the Land of Egypt:
or to think the Gods of Egypt had wrought those Miracles for them in their
deliverance. But these are Conjectures of his own Fancy, without any Authority
of Scripture or Fathers; nay expressly against them, as I have showed. And
although Aaron perhaps, and some of the Wiser among them might not be so
sottish, yet it is certain (as the Doctor confesses of his Wiser Heathens) they
were so weak as to concur with them in the external practices of their
Idolatry. But then he tells us again, (p. 94.) that the people took it for
granted that Moses, by reason of his forty days absence, was to be heard of no
more; and therefore they fell upon devising the fittest Symbol for the presence
of God going before them; and herein the greatest number, says he, being
possessed with the prejudices of their Education in Egypt, where Golden Bulls
were the Symbols of their chief God Osiris, they pitched upon that, and forced
Aaron to a compliance with them in it. And all the proof he brings for this,
is, that immediately before Moses his going up to the Mount, the last Promise
God made to them was, that he would send his Angel before them, Exodus xxiii.
20, 23. as if those who had forgotten the God that made them, could not also
forget this Promise; or at least think that He had forgotten it, or was not
able to perform it; and so fall upon devising the making of a God like those
they had seen in Egypt, whose Presence and Conduct they might have continually
with them. This follows much more clearly from the prejudice of their Education
in Egypt, than what the Doctor has devised for them; for they never devised any
such thing to themselves, as is manifest out of the Scriptures and Fathers
before alleged. And when I consider the Israelites, a people without Learning,
oppressed for four hundred years together by the most Idolatrous Nation in the
World, and serving their Gods, as it appears they did, out of Ezekiel. xx. 8. the
prejudice which this custom had wrought in them, and their readiness upon every
slight occasion, to turn back with their hearts into Egypt; lastly, the
Character which God himself gives of them, Deuteronomy. xxxii. 28. that they were a
Nation void of counsel, neither was there any understanding in them. When, I
say, I consider all this on the one side; and the quaint device the Doctor
would transfer from his own head into theirs, of making the Calf only for the
Symbol of the presence of the true God, on the other: I cannot but look upon it
to be much of the same nature with those subtle fetches which Historians, to
show their own skill in Politics, devise, rather than discover, in the Actions
of those Persons (though never so stupid) who are the subject of their History.
How many Plots and Designs have Tacitus and others framed for them, which they
never dreamed of themselves? much less were the Israelites guilty of any such
subtle speculation as Calvin and the Doctor have invented for them. The highest
pitch of their Fancy, if it staid not in the Image it self, was to magine some
Deity, like those of Egypt, to insinuate it self into the Calf (as the
Egyptians believed of their Gods) from thence to give Oracres, and conduct them
into the Land of Promise; and not as the Doctor devises for them, that they
looked upon it only as a Symbol of the true God, whom now they had thrust from
them and forgotten. To make out this device, which had no other foundation but
in his own fancy, he is forced to invent a new kind of Idolatry, distinct from
the Heathen Idolatry; Because there is no intimation (says he, p. 95.) made of
their falling into the Heathen Idolatry. But why then does he charge the Church
of Rome with Idolatry upon this account, (p. 3.) viz. that she requires the
giving to the Creature the Worship due only to the Creator? Is not the giving
Divine Worship to a Creature, the same as to make it a false God? And is it not
Heathen Idolatry to worship a false God? Either then he must retract the ground
upon which he builds his Charge of Idolatry; or he must stand to it stiffly
without flinching, that both Catholics, now, and the Jews then were Heathen
Idolaters. For he does but contradict himself whilst he makes us guilty only
of Christian Idolatry; and yet does us no kindness at all, whilst he charges us
to terminate the Worship due only to God, upon the Creature. Oh, but, says he,
when afterward the Israelites fell into Heathen Idolatry, the particular names
of the Gods are mentioned, as Baal-Peor, Moloch, Remphan, etc. What then? Is it
the Idol's having a Name, that makes the Worshippers Heathen Idolaters?
Aristotle tells us, that words are but the signs of the conceptions of our
mind: and if they conceived or believed the Calf to be a God, were they not as
much Heathen Idolaters for worshipping it without a Name, as the Egyptians for
worshipping it under the Name of Apis? The only difference I find is, that the
Egyptians by long practice were become Masters of their Trade, in making Gods,
whereas the Israelites by this one Act were Novices only in that Art.

4. What has been said of the Golden Calf in the Wilderness, may in like
manner be applied to the Calves which Jeroboam set up at Dan and Bethel, viz.
that the People did not look upon them as Symbols only of the presence of the
true God, but that, as St. Hierom says, they forgot the Law of God, S. Hierom
in Ose^, c. 4.
and wholly devoted themselves to Egyptian Idols. And the same is affirmed by
the Author of the Commentaries under the name of St. Ambrose, viz. S. Ambr. in
Romans 1. Tom. 3.
that the Egyptians worshipped a four-footed Beast, whom they called Apis, in
the likeness of a Calf: Which Evil of theirs, says he, was imitated by
Jeroboam, in setting up the Calves in Samaria, to which the Jews offered
sacrifice. But this, says the Doctor, was not so agreeable to his End, nor so
likely to succeed: And why not? Was not his end to secure the Ten Tribes to
himself, so that they might not think of returning to unite themselves any more
to the House of David? And what more likely way to effect it, than the making
them such Idols as their Fathers had worshipped in Egypt and the Wilderness?
What he aimed at, (Achitophel-like) was to make the breach irreconcilable, and
this of making them Calves he looked upon as the properest means to that end,
considering the inclination of that People, whose eyes, as the Scripture says,
Ezekiel. xx. 24.
were after their Fathers Idols. I, but the Occasion, says he, of the Kingdoms
coming to him, was from Solomon's falling into Heathen Idolatry, and this would
make him more cautious of falling into it, especially at his first entrance.
And I believe it would have done so, had he been a Good Josias, and not a
wicked Jeroboam. But why the Doctor should think him so tender conscienc'd,
whom God himself upbraids for having made to himself strange and molten Gods,
and cast him behind his back, 3 Kings xiv. 9. Or why he should think him so
scrupulous, when the Scripture says, that he sacrificed to the Gods which he
had made, 3 Kings xii. 32. and that he ordained him Priests for the high
places, and for the Devils, and for the Calves which he had made, 2 Paralip.
xi. 15. I cannot imagine. The Ingenious Author of the Causes of the decay of
Christian Piety, chap. 15. made a different Judgment of the matter, when to
show that Divinity has long since been made the Handmaid to Policy, and
Religion modeled by Conveniences of State; he immediately adds for an
example, that The Golden Calves became venerable Deities, when they were found
apt to secure Jeroboam's jealousies. But had this been Jeroboam's Intention,
how much better, says the Doctor, had he then argued that they had been
hitherto in a great mistake concerning the true God, and not merely as to the
place of his Worship, which is all he speaks against; for he continued, says
he, the same Feasts and way of Worship which were at J^rusalem? 1 Kings xii.
32. And what wonder if so great a Politician as he was, ju^g'd it not fit to
leave off on the sudden all that had been in use before? Sudden Changes from
one extreme to another, whether in the Natural or Politic Body, are always
looked upon as dangerous. And therefore the first Reformers nere in England,
when they designed a Service only of Bread and Wine, thought it expedient to
retain the Names of the Body and Blood of Christ, and many of the ancient
Prayers and Ceremonies, which the nicer Brethren boggle at at this day, as
Pelicks of Popery, and Politic Inventions to make the Bread and Wine go down
the better. But for Jeroboam, he told the People plain enough what he meant,
when pointing to the Calves, he bid them behold the Gods which had brought them
up out of the Land of Egypt. And the Text cited by the Doctor 1 Reg. xii. 23.
speaks but of one Feast he ordained like unto the Feast that was in Juda;
though the Doctor will have it, that he continued the same Feasts and way of
Worship which were at Jerusalem. But Ahab's sin, he says, was much greater
than that of Jeroboam: It was so; but will absolve Jeroboam no more from the
guilt of Idolatry, (which the Scripture calls spiritual Adultery) than one man's
committing adultery with many, will free another from the guilt of the same
crime, who commits it but with one: 2 Kings ^. 16.
Nor does Jehu's zeal for the Lord (nay though it were for his Lord, as the
Doctor, not the Scripture, reads it) exempt him from Idolatry in following the
steps of Jeroboam, any more than the lawful Act of Matrimony acquits a Husband
from the Crime of Adultery, who defiles his Neighbors Bed. But, How then,
says he, came the Worship of the true God in the ten Tribes to be set in
opposition to the Heathen Idolatry in 1 Kings xviii. 21? No otherwise surely
than by the force of imagination. For when Elias said unto the people, How long
will ye halt between two Opinions? If the Lord be God, follow him; but if Baal,
then follow him. The sense is plain, that he meant to recall the people to the
Worship of the only True God, whom he preached to them, and in the manner he
himself did worship him; and not that he intended to set the Israelites
sacrificing to the Calves at Dan and Bethel (which is what the Doctor means by
the Worship of the true God in the ten Tribes) in opposition to the Worship of
Baal. For in the very next Chapter the Prophet himself supposes such a general
Apostasy of the ten Tribes to the Worship of Baal, that he complains as if he
alone were left alive, who had not consented to his Worship; as appears by the
Answer which God made him, that he had yet seven thousand left in Israel which
had not bowed their knees to Baal, 3 Kings xix. 17, 18. How then could Elias
set the Worship of the true God in the ten Tribes in opposition to the Worship
of Baal, when he supposed all that were remaining of the Ten Tribes, except
himself, to have forsaken the true God to follow Baal? As for the Embassy of
the Samaritans to the King of Assyria, that a Priest might be sent unto them
from the Captivity, the reason is plain why they sent to him, and not to the
King of Juda, because they feared his displeasure, should they have kept
Correspondence with his Enemy. Moreover they thought the God of Israel to be
only a Topical God; and therefore they call him the God of the Land, 4 Kings
xvii. 26. as distinct from the God of Juda. Now what the Text says, is, that
the Priest when he came, taught them how they should fear the Lord; but there
is no mention at all made of his teaching them to worship him in the Calves, as
Symbols of his presence, which was the only thing for the Doctors purpose, had
it been there.

. 5. Having thus answered all the Doctors Conjectures, or rather Monceius his,
as to the greater part of them, (for it is with his Hei^er he plows) by which
he endeavors to make the World believe that the Israelites intended the making
of the Calves for no other end, but only to worship God in them as Symbols of
his presence, and shown them to be perfectly groundless; for a farther
discovery of the weakness of his D^scourse, let us suppose it, after all, to be
as he would have it; It cannot be denied, but the Calves were originally
Symbols of Osiris, the chief (but false) God of the Egyptians; and himself
confesses (p. 94.) that upon this account the Israelites made choice of them
for the fittest Symbols of the presence of the true God: Suppose, I say, they
looked upon them as such, and that they were condemned of Idolatry for
intending to worship the true God in them, I affirm, it follows no more from
hence, that God has expressly prohibited in the second Commandment to give him
any Worship by such Symbols or Images as are not the Symbols of false Gods;
than it would follow from a King's condemning such Persons of Treason, as
should pretend to worship Him by honoring the Image of an Usurper, that he had
expressly prohibited the giving him any Worship by his own Image. In fine, if
this discourse of the Doctors may be allowed for good, I see no reason why he
might not as well justify the grossest of Idolaters, the Egyptians, in their
worship of L^cks and Onyons, from the guilt of Heathen Idolatry, as the
Israelites in worshipping the Calves: for, proceeding in his way, it were but
to imagine, they could not be so sottish as to believe them to be Gods in the
proper sense, but that they looked upon them only as Symbols of Gods kindness
to them, in providing them Sauce as well as Meat, though out of Reverence to
those Deities they would eat neither of them.

. 6. To conclude this Point of the meaning of the Second Commandment, he tells
us, that the Jews thought the Prohibition to extend to all kind of Images for
Worship. And I would gladly know whether we must stand or fall by the
Interpretation of the Jews? It was their Opinion that the Prohibition extended
not only to the worshipping, Vasq. in 3. d. Th. disp. 103. q. 25. c. 1.
but also to the making all kind of Images. And will the Doctor therefore
condemn the Professions of Painting and Carving, Conc. Nicen. Act. 6.
as unlawful, and (as his Constantinopolitan Fathers call them) blasphemous?
Well, but Vasquez, says he, acknowledges, with other Divines of the Roman
Church, that it is plain in Scripture, that God did not only forbid that in the
second Commandment which was unlawful by the Law of Nature, Vasq. in 3. d. Th.
disp. 104. q. 25. c. 3.
as the worshipping an Image for God; but the worshipping the true God by any
similitude of him: But to whom do they say he forbids it? Does not Vasquez say
expressly, c. 2. that it was to the Jews? which the Doctor conveniently leaves
out. And do not those Divines in the very words cited by himself plainly
declare the Prohibition of worshipping God by any similitude of him, to be but
a Positive Precept, when they so clearly distinguish it from the Prohibition of
worshipping an Image for God, which they say, was unlawful by the Light of
Nature? And if they looked upon that part of the Prohibition as a mere Positive
Precept, does he think they thought it obliged Christians? Their Doctrine and
Practice evince the contrary. And if Divines agree not among themselves how far
this Precept obliged the Jews, what matter is it, so they agree that what is
forbidden in it to Christians is that which is unlawful by the Law of Nature?
The opposition then which the Doctor would make between my Assertion, and that
of other Catholic Divines, is altogether impertinent; for taking it as a
Natural Precept and Immutable, they say the same that I do, that it only
forbids the worshipping of Idols. To what he alleges of the Primitive
Christians being declared Enemies to all Worship of God by Images, which, he
says, is at last confessed by Petavius, Petav. Dogm. Theolog. Tom. 5. lib. 15.
c. 13. s. 3. c. 14. 5, 8.
one of the most Learned Jesuits they ever had, when he affirms, that for the
first four Centuries, or farther, there was little or no use of Images in the
Temples or Oratories of Christians, (not to dispute the matter of fact, of
which he confesses there was some little use; nor the truth of the Doctors
relating the words of Petavius, of which there is some little reason to doubt,
from what he did before with Trigautius) I shall give him the Answer of Mr.
Thorndike, Just Weights, chap. 19.
one of the most Learned Divines among the Protestants, that at that time there
might be jealousy of Offense in having Images in Churches, before Idolatry was
quite rooted out, of which afterward there might be no appearance. And
therefore they were afterward admitted all over; for it is manifest, says he,
the Church is tied no farther than there can appear danger of Idolatry. And
since he has given in occasion to mention this Learned Person, I shall
conclude this Point with his Judgment concerning the meaning and extent of the
Second Commandment, that the Reader may see how diametrically opposite Dr.
St.'s discourse is, to the Sentiment of so Eminent a Divine in the Church of
England. Thus then Mr. Thorndike.

. 5. The second Commandment, setting forth God for a God that is jealous of his
People whether they worship him or not, Just Weights, chap. 23.
manifestly supposes their Covenant to forsake all other Gods beside him: a
Contract of Marriage between Him and his People. Which if it be so, it is no
less manifest, that the Images which the Precept supposes, are the
Representations of other Gods, which his People were wont to commit Adultery
with, by Worshipping them for God. For seeing it is manifest how much Idolatry
was advanced by Imagery, (though it may be without it) there can be no marvel
that there should be a peculiar Precept against it. Wherefore it is manifest
that Jews by the Letter of this Precept are tied from all Images which their
Elders, who had the power of limiting what is lawful, and what is not by the
Law, should declare to be unlawful: But to think that their declarations ought
to bind Christians, were to imagine that Christians ought to be Jews. -- And
then a little after, he goes on. For Christianity, says he, having put
Idolatry to flight, which the Law never pretended to do, it is not to be
imagined, that the having of Images can make a man take those for God, which
they represent, so long as the belief of Christianity is alive at the heart.
For neither was it Idolatry, though it were a breach of this Commandment, for a
Jew to have such Images as were forbidden by their Elders, not taking that for
God which they represented. But what honor of Saints departed, or what signs
of that honor, Christianity may require, what Furniture or Ceremonies the
Churches of Christians, and the Public Worship of God in them, may require,
now all the world professes Christianity, and must honor the Religion which
they profess, this the Church is at freedom to determine by the Word of God,
expounded according to the best agreement of Christians.

This is Mr. Thorndike's Discourse, in which the Reader may observe,

1. That to think the Declarations of the Jews ought to bind Christians, were
to imagine that Christians ought to be Jews.

2. That all things forbidden to the Jews by this Commandment, were Not
Idolatry.

3. That the Images which the Precept supposes, were the Representations of
other, that is, false Gods, which his People were wont to worship for God.

4. That what Furniture (viz. of Images, the matter he there treats of) or
Ceremonies the Public Worship of God may require, is left to the Judgment of
the Church to determine.

5. and lastly, That the Opposition in this Point between Dr. St. and Mr.
Thorndike, is not only concerning the obligation of the Jews (as between
Catholic Divines) but of Christians also, in order to this Commandment. So
that some are of opinion, however Dr. St. ^eem to direct his arrows against the
Church of Rome, yet he meant at least by rebound to shoot them at Mr.
Thorndike. And had he made it any part of his business to answer his Arguments,
I might easily have been induced to have embraced their Opinion. But those
remaining untouched, I cannot but look upon this Discourse of that Learned
Person, as a kind of Prophetical Confutation in the year 1662. (when he printed
that Book) of all which Dr. Stillingfleet brings in 1671. for the proof of his
Charge of Idolatry against the Church of Rome in the matter of Images. As for
his new way of answering the Testimony I alleged of St. Austin's Judgment (of
the sense of this Commandment) by asking me how I am sure that it was his
constant Judgment, I have at large refuted it in the Third Chapter, to which I
remit the Reader.

CHAP. X.
What kind of Honor the Church gives to Holy Images, explained: and the
Doctors mixing School Disputes with matters of Faith, shown to be sophistical.

. 1. TO clear the Doctrine and Practice of the Catholic Church from his most
Unjust Charge of Idolatry, I told the Reader, That the Honor we give to the
Sacred Images of Christ and his Saints, was an inferior or Relative Honor
only, not Latria, the Worship due to God, but a certain Honourary Worship,
expressed by kissing them, or putting off our Hats, or kneeling before them:
much like the Worship which is given to the Chair of State, or the Reverence
which Moses and Joshua gave to the Ground, by putting off their Shoes, etc.
That this was the meaning of the Council of Nice, Of the Church, l. 3. c. 36.
is confessed by Dr. Field and Mr. Thorndike, as I have showed p. 124. And that
the Council of Trent means no more, is manifest from the words of the Council
related above, Chap. 2. as also for that Sess. 25. it refers us expressly to the
Council of Nice. Yet because the Doctor is resolved to quarrel the distinction
of Absolute and Relative Worship, that the Reader may see what is meant by it,
I shall desire him to take notice, first, That Adoration or Worship being an
Act of the Will; as the Will can love one thing for it self, because of the
Perfection it is endowed with, and another thing not for it self, but purely
for that others sake to whom (...) belongs. So likewise it may adore or worship
a thing, either for it self, that is, for some intrinsecal Excellency in the
thing, for which it deserves Worship; and then it is said to worship the thing
absolutely, because for it self. Or it may worship it for another's sake, that
is, for some Excellency in the Person to whom the said thing has a Relation or
Union: and then it is said to worship such a thing with a Relative or Inferior
Worship, because purely for that Persons sake. And because Intellectual Beings
are capable of having some Excellency in themselves, for which they deserve to
be worshipped, as Virtue, Sanctity, Wisdom, Power, etc. and Inanimate Beings
are capable of bearing a Relation to a Person endowed with such Excellencies,
it follows that as Intellectual Beings may have Absolute Worship given to them;
so Inanimate Things relating to them, may for their sakes have a Relative
Respect, or Honourary Adoration given to them; and that so far from being
injurious to the Person to whom they belong, that it would be looked upon as a
disrespect and affront, if in due circumstances it were not done. Such a kind
of Relative Worship it is we affirm to be due, and to be given to the Images of
Christ and his Saints, when we kiss them, or put off our Hats before them.
Secondly, I must desire him to observe (as Mr. Thorndike does very well) that
the words Adoration, Epil. p. 3. p. 3^3.
Worship, Respect, Reverence, or howsoever you translate the Latin word
Cultus, are or may be in despite of our hearts equivocal; that is, sometimes
they may signify one kind of honor, and sometimes another: Sometimes that
which belongs to God, and sometimes that which belongs to the Creature. And the
cause of this equivocation, he says, is, the want of words; vulgar use not
having provided words properly to signify conceptions which came not from
common sense. And from this equivocation in the Words Adoration, Worship, etc.
the greatest part of the Difficulties which occur in this, take their rise. Now
when the Doctor should set himself seriously to confute the aforesaid
Explication, he puts his Reader into a fit of laughing with a Drollish
Parallel, p. 100. that to give this Inferior and Relative kind of Worship to
the Image of Christ, that is, to honor and reverence it for his sake, is just
as if an unchaste Wife should plead in her excuse to her Husband, that the
person she was too kind with, was extremely like him, and a near friend of his,
and that it was out of respect to him that she gave him the honor of his Bed.
But to lay open the unparalleled fondness of this Comparison, there needs no
more than to appeal to any married man for his Opinion in the case, viz.
Whether he think it a matter of like Resentment to find his Wife kissing his
Picture as it hangs at her Breast, as to surprise her in Bed with a Friend of
his, though never so like him? Some things done out of respect are very well
taken, and cannot in reason be otherwise, by the Person for whose sake the
respect is given; of this kind I take the wearing of her Husbands Picture to be
in a Wi^e, or her being kind (though not too kind) to his Friend for his sake.
But others there are, which would be very ill taken, though pretended to be
done with never so much respect: And of this kind I suppose it would be, to
give the Honor of her Husbands Bed to another, though never so like him. No
man surely well in his Senses, can look upon these two with an equal Concern.
And yet if the Doctor will make his Comparison hold good, he must prove the
whole state of married Mankind do, or ought to do so: At least to infer any
thing against us, he must show it not possible to give any Honor or Respect
(even inferior) to the Image of Christ for his sake. For if this be possible,
it will follow, that as in a Chaste Wife it is a laudable expression of the
Honor and Respect she bears her Husband, to kiss his Picture, or wear it near
her Heart; So it will be no less in a Christian toward Christ, to give an
Honourary Respect ^o his Image for his sake. God indeed has declared himself,
as the Doctor says particularly jealous of his Honor in this Commandment,
that he will not give his Glory to another, but has reserved all Divine
Worship as peculiar to himself; but where has he declared that we may not
^estifie the giving Him Divine Worship by kissing his Image, or the Books of
the H. Gospels, or other things relating to Him? The Object of Jealousy is a
Rival, or what has relation to, or union with him; not what may serve to
express Affection and Respect to the Person who ought to be loved: And
therefore a Jealous Husband will neither permit his Wife to admit his Rival
into her Company, nor his Picture into her Closet; yet never thinks her an
Adulteress for carrying his own in her ^osom. The Images which the Precept
supposes, were as Mr. Thorndike says, the Representations of other Gods,
which his people were wont to commit Idolatry with. And the Doctor, though in
the Reply I challenged him to do it, neither has nor can produce any
Prohibition of giving to the Images of Christ and his Saints a relative Respect
o^ Worship for his sake. And in case he could, yet that I hope would prove it
no more to be Idolatry in a Christian to kiss, for example, the Image of Christ
crucified, than it would be Adultery in a Wife out of respect to her Husband,
(though he should forbid it) to kiss his Picture. Disobedience there might be
in either case, but Idolatry or Adultery in neither.

. 2. Having prepared his Reader with so just a Comparison, and told him by the
by, of the distinction of Absolutely and Relatively being very subtly applied
in Scotland to saying the Lords Prayer to a Saint, which in reality needed no
such distinction, as signifying no more, than saying the Pater Noster to God,
with an intention directed to such or such a Saint, to desire him to become
Joynt-Petitioner with us for what we beg in it; He wonders, in the next place,
(p. 101.) very much we stick at any kind of Worship to be done to Images. For
his part, were he of our mind, he should as little scruple offering up the Host
to an Image, as saying his prayers to it, and he doubts not to come off with
the same distinctions. For if I do it, says he, to God absolutely and for
himself, and to the Image only improperly and relatively, wherein am I to
blame? This is his Discourse, and the Reader may observe in it, 1. That he has
not read, or at least takes no notice, that the answer in the ordinary
Catholic Catechism, to the Question, Whether we may pray to Images? is a
downright No, by no means: and that the Council of Trent Sess. 25. has
declared that we are not to ask any thing of an Image. Let the Reader judge
whether this were ignorance or no. 2. That he cannot contain himself any where
within bounds of Mediocrity, but must always run into extremes, which side
soever he take. He cannot be a Church-of-England-man, but with the
Presbyterians he must deny Episcopacy to be of Divine Right, and any honor to
be due to the Eucharist or Altar, etc. Neither will he be a Papist without
offering up the Host and saying his prayers to an Image. So that if He become a
Proselyte, He cannot content Himself with the Common Idolatry of the Papists,
in kissing or putting off their Hats to the Images of Christ, but will needs
make Himself twice a greater Idolater than they are. How much He would be to
blame in so doing, He will better understand when He is become a Proselyte. In
the mean time it may suffice Him to know, that the Church of God has no such
custom: for however the material action of Sacrifice may be done for several
ends and intentions; yet when it proceeds from an intention to profess a total
submission of our selves to God, as the Supreme Author of Life and Death,
(which gives it the formality of a Sacrifice) it is used and taken by the
public Use and Custom of the Church, for an acknowledgement of the absolute
Worship due to God, and not of Relative to an Image: and that more especially
in offering up the Host, that is, the Body and Blood of Christ, the true
Christian Sacrifice, the Nature and Dignity whereof requires that it be
offered to God alone. As for the Rule of St. Basil, S. Bas. li. de Spiritu
sancto. cap. 18.
upon which he would ground his Practice (and which I quoted very sincerely,
though he craftily insinuate the contrary to the Reader) viz. That the Worship
of the Image is carried to the Prototype; Mr. Thorndike has told him very
well, that what Signs of Honor or Ceremonies the Public Worship of God may
require, the Church is at freedom to determine; and so only such expressions of
Honor are to be given to Images as the Church allows. What therefore I should
advise him, were I worthy, and would he be of our mind, should be to lay aside
what the Apostle calls languishing about Questions and strife of Words, 1 Timothy
vi. 4.
and (as a Modern Author phrases it) to use Ecclesiastical good manners to the
H. Images of Christ and his Saints, and say his prayer^ and offer Sacrifice (as
other Catholics do) to God alone. ^t is Duty and Discretion in things we
cannot understand, to follow the Apostle's Rule, Sapere ad sobrietatem, to be
wise unto sobriety. But it is no less than insolency and madness, and that in
the highest degree, S. Aug. Ep. 118.
says St. Austin, to dispute whether that be to be done or no, which is
practiced by the whole Church through the World, as this Custom of giving an
Honourary Respect to the Images of Christ and his Saints, has been confessedly
for many hundreds of years.

. 3. But before the Doctor can or will become a perfect Proselyte of the Church
of Rome, he desires seriously (it seems he was but (as I guessed) in a fit of
Drolling before) to know of me, whether any Worship does at all belong to the
Image, or no? Because, says he, if there be any Worship due (as the Council of
Trent says there is) to the Image, either it is the same that is given to the
Prototype, or distinct from it. If it be the same, then proper Divine Worship
is given to the Image: If distinct, then the Image is worshipped with Divine
Worship for it self, and not relatively, as I would have it. And was it not
subtly done to tell us, that if the Worship given to an Image be distinct
from that which is given to the Prototype, (God) then the Image is worshipped
with Divine Worship for it self? The words had been more express, but the sense
had been the same, had he said: If an Image be not worshipped with Divine
Worship, then it is worshipped with Divine Worship: for the Worship due to God,
is Divine Worship, and that which is distinct from it, is not Divine Worship.
So hard a thing it is for one, who intends mischief, to meddle with such
edge-tools as School-distinctions are, and not cut his own fingers. And this is
(...) first time my Adversary has done so. However he will not lay them down
yet (...) if it be the former. i. e. the (...) Worship that, says he, is
condemned of Idolatry by Bellarmine, because the Creature is equally worshipped
with God: and if the latter, i.e. distinct, P. 102, 103.
this is oppugned by Vasquez (a man of great Reputation too, and of as
s^arching a Wit as Bellarmine) as a certain kind of Superstition or Idolatry,
because Man expresses submission to an Inanimate Thing. From whence he
concludes that it is in men's choice what sort of Idolatry they will commit who
worship Images, but in neither way can they avoid it. And here it is he thinks
he has pinched us sore, and yet will not give us leave to cry out upon himself
and his Partisans for their insincere and sophistical mixing the Disputes and
Niceties of the Schools with the Doctrine of the Church. But how little the
Faith and Practice of the Church is concerned in them, I shall let the Reader
see by a Parallel example in a passage relating to Civil Worship. A Gentleman
at Court passing through the Guard-Chamber, saw a Countryman there engaged in
a Dispute with three or four of the Yeomen. The Clown, it seems, would have
gone into the Presence covered. They pulled him back, and told him when he went
into that Room, he must pull off his Ha^. He asked them very pertly, To whom,
or to what, for he saw nothing but a Chair and a Canopy? They told him, It was
the Kings Chair of State, and he must do it to the Chair out of respect to the
King. The Countreyman here (perhaps he had read Dr. St.'s Argument, or heard
him preach it, for such kind of preaching has been the ground of that part of
Quakerism) began with a serious countenance to demand of them, whether any
Worship at all were due to the Chair or no? For his part, he was a Loyal
Subject of His Majesty's, and had really a scruple in the case. For if any
Worship were due to it, it was either the same which is given to the King, or
distinct from it. If the same, then proper Regal Worship would be given to
something beside the King, which were Treason to do. If distinct, then the
Chair would be worshipped with Regal Honor for it self, and not relatively,
which were for a man to submit himself to a piece of Wood: And he had so much
esteem for his Manhood, that he would not debase it so far, for all their
Halbards. Here the Yeomen of the Guard bid him leave his quibbling, and do his
duty; which he refusing to do, unless they would satisfy his scruple, they
took him by the shoulders and thrust him out of doors. The passage no doubt was
pleasant, but withal so parallel to the Doctors proceeding in this matter, that
I cannot but seriously desire to know of him, whether he judge it a sufficient
excuse for the Clown not to put off his Hat, because he did not, or would not
understand what kind of Worship was due to the Chair. Or, (to put the example
in a thing relating to the Worship of God, of which I shall speak more in the
next Chapter) whether Moses and Josue might have refused to have put off their
Shoes in reverence to the Ground where they stood, till they had first been
satisfied, whether it were the same Worship they gave to God, or distinct from
it? That they did lawfully testify their Reverence toward the Ground, is
affirmed by himself, p. 105. and if they were not retarded from doing it by the
Doctors Dil^mma, no more ought Christians from testifying their Reverence to
the Images of Christ and his Saints. Let Plato and Aristotle with their
followers wrangle as much as they will about the manner how we come to see; the
former contending that it cannot be done by the Object's uniting it self with
the Eye; the latter asserting as strongly, that it cannot be done by the Eye's
sending forth Rays to the Object: Must we therefore stand still with our Eyes
shut, till it be agreed between them by which of the two ways we are to see? At
this rate we must neither see, nor hear, nor feel, nor move, till it be
accorded between Philosophers how these Operations are performed, which will be
never. Let the Schoolmen then dispute as much as they please about the manner
how Honor is given to an Image, yet honest Nature will teach us to do it for
his sake who is represented by it, with as much security, and as little danger
of erring, as any of the aforesaid Operations. What the Councils declare in
this matter (and to them it is the Doctor himself confesses p. 209. that we
must appeal for the Churches sense) is that we are not to give Latria, the
Worship due only to God, but a honourary Respect or Adoration to Holy Images,
as to the Books of Holy Scriptures and other things belonging to God.

. 4. This is what the Church requires of her Children to believe, and this is
all that a Catholic Controvertist is bound to speak to. Nor do the Arguments
the Doctor brings in reality deserve to be answered otherwise than Zeno's
Arguments against Motion were answered by Diogenes. For Zeno proves every jot
as subtly that a man cannot move an inch without breaking his neck, as the
Doctor does that we cannot honor the Image of Christ without falling into
Idolatry. Nevertheless I shall yield so far to the Doctors importunity,
(because he pretends to be serious) as to return an Answer to his Captious
Demand, Whether the Worship given to the Image be the same that is given to the
Prototype, or distinct from it? And I am the rather induced to do it, in St.
Thomas his way, who bolds that the same Reverence is given to Christ and to his
Image: because I find my Adversary himself (in case any Honor or Veneration be
due to the Image, as the Council affirms there is) p. 79. very well inclined to
allow of St. Thomas his Reason for it, because, as the said St. Thomas well
observes (says Dr. St.) the motion of the Soul toward an Image, as it is an
Image, is the same with that which is toward the thing represented by it. When
therefore he objects, that if it be the same, then proper Divine Worship is
given to the Image, I deny the Consequence, because although it be the same as
to the substance of the Act, yet it falls upon the Image after an inferior
manner, as a thing relating to God, and purely for his sake. Hence it is, that
St. Thomas his followers distinguish in the same Act of Worship a double
notion; the One of Absolute Latria, as it tends to God Himself; the other of
Relative Latria, as it reflects upon the Image for his sake. Now to help the
Fancy in so nice a Speculation, some instances are used of other Acts which
tend to different Terms or Objects relating to one another; which though not in
all things parallel, yet serve to show how the same indivisible Act may include
different habitudes or respects, the one inferior to the other. Is it not an
Act of Christian Charity to help our Neighbors Horse or his Ass out of a
ditch, and yet if we consider the Act as precisely tending to relieve the
Horse, it is not Charity, but an inferior kind of love, (if we may so call it)
or rather compassion of the Beast? And do not the Saints in Heaven see God and
the Creatures by the same Act of Beatifical Vision, and yet the Act as
considered precisely in order to the Creatures, is not Beatifical, but of an
inferior kind to it self, as terminated upon the Essence of God? In like
manner say these Divines, although the Act or motion of the Soul be the same to
the Prototype and the Image; and as terminated upon the Prototype, it be
Absolute Latria; yet as it falls precisely upon the Image, it is not so, but a
Relative or inferior Veneration for the Prototype's sake. As for what he urges
out of Bellarmin against its being the same because it is, Bellarm. de Imagli.
2. c. 24.
says the Doctor, of the nature of Latria (Bellarmin says true Latria) to be
given for it self. It is evident Bellarmin takes the word Latria to signify
only that Worship which is given to Sovereign Excellency for it self; whereas
Saint Thomas and his Followers qualify it with the addition of Relative, which
is of a diminishing nature, to signify that the Worship is given to the Image
by the same Act, but after an inferior manner for the Prototype's sake. So
that the whole dispute in effect is rather de modo l^quendi, of the manner of
speaking, than of the thing it self. For Bellarmin himself in the precedent
Chapter maintains expressly, Cap. 23.
that the Image may be worshipped with the same Worship as the Prototype; For,
says he, he that adoreth a Person, adoreth also all such things as are united
to him; as he that adoreth the King in his Garment, adoreth together with him
his Garment also. And where as the Image is conceived at the same time as
united with the Prototype which is adored, it follows that the Image it self
is adored but per accidens, says he, because it is neither the person adored,
nor the reason of adoring, but a thing conjoined to the Person who is adored.

Thus much to the Doctors Question in a Point belonging to the Schools, and not
at all to Faith; for although neither St. Thomas, not Bellarmin, nor Vasquez,
nor any other Schoolman, had ever disputed, Whether Worship be given to the
Image by the same Act by which it is given to the Prototype, or a distinct one,
yet Christians would have understood well enough by the Church's declaration,
that they are not to give the Worship due only to God, to an Image, but only a
Honourary Respect or Veneration for his sake, as to other Holy things. Whether
the Doctor will be satisfied with what I have said to one side of his Dilemma,
I cannot tell; but I shall give him occasion in the next Chapter, if he please,
to speak to both; at least I expect he should use the same candor with me, that
I have done with him, to let me know which Side he will take, for one he must.

CHAP. XI.
Of the Instances brought to explicate the nature of the Honor given to
Images; from the like Reverence given to the Chair of State* to the Ground, to
the Ark, to the Name of JESUS, etc. The weakness of the Doctors Evasions laid
open, and his own Arguments returned upon him.

AFter I had in my Reply declared what kind of Honor it is which Catholics
give to the Images of Christ and his Saints, I added, as a farther Explication
of it, that it was much like the Honor given to the Chair of State, or the
Kings Picture, or his Garment; or to come nearer to the subject such as was
given to the Ground by Moses and Josue's putting off their Shoes; to Gods
Footstool, by the Jews adoring or falling down before it: and by Protestants
themselves to the Name of JESUS, to the Eucharist and the Altar. By these
Instances, he says, I thought to escape; what I thought was, that I had
explicated clearly enough by them the nature of the honor we give to Images:
but how much he finds himself entangled in them, and how ^ore they pinch him on
every side, whilst they force him to say and unsay; to shuffle, and shift, and
make use of all his little Artifices, to free himself, but in vain, will appear
from the Examination of the several Evasions, rather than Answers, he gives to
them.

. 1. For the honor given to the Chair of State, (and we may suppose he means
the same of the Kings Picture and Garment) he says, that our dispute is not
concerning Civil Worship, but Divine. And here, in the first place, he imposes
upon his Reader, for the Dispute between Catholics and Protestants, is not
whether Divine Worship may be given to Images, for that they acknowledge to be
due to God alone; but whether they may not give an inferior or honourary
respect and veneration to them for his sake? This I said was much like the
honor given to the Chair of State; that is, as we honor the Chair for the
Kings sake, and yet do not give the same Regal honor to the Chair, as to the
King; so in like manner we honor Christ's Picture or Image, and yet give not
the same Divine honor to the Image as to Himself, but an inferior Respect and
Reverence, as has been above declared. The Comparison then you see is only
about the way or manner of giving Honor, which may be the same to God and the
King, although the Honor so given be very different; and therefore for the
Doctor to tell his Reader, that the instance was in a matter of Civil Worship,
is just, as if when St. Austin to persuade his friend Honoratus to believe the
Mysteries of Religion without seeing them, Li. de utilit. Cred.
because he did the like in many things in order to this present Li^e, he
should have answered him, that he mistook the case, for their dispute was ^not
about Humane Faith; which is one of those Answers the Adag^ terms (...),
nothing to the purpose. But though he say our dispute is not concerning Civil
Worship, yet it is observable, he does not tell us clearly, whether he hold it
lawful to give any such Worship to the Chair or no. If he do not, I grant he
proceeds conformable to his own Principles against the Worship of Images, and
so leave him to dispute it with the Guard. If he do, the Countryman (of whom
I spoke in the precedent Chapter) sets upon him with his own Argument; that
either the honor he gives to the Chair, is the same with that which he gives
to the King, or distinct from it. If it be the same, then proper Regal Worship
is given to the Chair. If distinct, then the Chair is worshipped with Regal
Worship for it self, etc. and it is in his choice to take which part of the
Dilemma likes him best. But to press the Instance yet closer: If he, do
acknowledge that Civil Honor is given to the Chair of State, let him give a
sufficient Reason, why a like proportionable Reverence (call it by what Name
you will) may not be given to the Image of Christ. This will be to speak to the
purpose, but that was not his intention, and therefore he flies for refuge to a
frivolous supposition, that I would not say that were any honor to the King,
in case he had absolutely forbidden it, as we have proved, says he, God has
done in the case of Images. As for that pretty self-denying Ordinance of a
Prince's forbidding any Reverence to be given to his Picture or Chair of State,
(which perhaps the Doctor thinks very sit should be enacted in conformity to
what God (he says) has forbidden in the second Commandment) were it, I say,
enacted, I grant as formerly that to disobey it would be to dishonor the King,
as the disobeying any other Law would be; but that hinders not but the Act
intrinsecally and of its own nature would be an Act of Reverence to the King;
for, H^nor, as the Phisopher says, est in honorante, Honor resides in the
mind that gives it. And for any Command of God forbidding to honor the Images
of Christ and his Saints, besides that I have shown that Assertion of his and
his Partisans, to be in every respect groundless* yet for the satisfaction of
the true Protestant Reader, I shall add one Observation more upon that
subject: and it is this, that the Compilers of the 39 Articles (in which is
contained the Doctrine of the Church of England) sufficiently insinuate they
could find no such Command, when they rejected the Adoration of Images, Art. 22.
not as Idolatry (as the Doctor does) but only as a fond thing, vainly
invented; nor as repugnant to the plain words of Scripture, (as they profess
very roundly, though without ground, when they come to speak of
Transubstantiation) but as being rather repugnant to the Word of God, Art. 28.
which qualification of theirs plainly gives us to understand, that they had
done their endeavors to find a Command, but could meet with none; for had they
made any such discovery either in the Second Commandment, or elsewhere in the
Word of God, they would not have spared to tell us of it, and have cried it
down for flat Idolatry, as the Doctor does. In the mean time it is pleasant to
see, what Veneration this Champion of the Church of England has either for the
Compilers of those Articles, or for the Articles themselves, when what they
call only a fond thing, a vain Invention; he condemns as Idolatry, most
damnable Idolatry: and Magis^erially declares it to be expressly prohibited in
the second Commandment; when they after the best enquiry they could make,
pronounce only Problematically that in their Judgment, they thought it to be
rather repugnant to the Word of God, than conformable to it. So much does a
Pigmy upon a Giant's Shoulders (the modest Emblem of Novel Wits) see farther
than the Giant himself, upon whose Neck he presumptuously sets his feet.

. 2. The second Instance was of the Reverence which God commanded Moses and
Josue to give to the Ground whereon they stood, by putting off their shoes,
because it was Holy. After a short descant upon the former erroneous Ground,
viz. that he thinks there is some little difference between what God has
commanded, and what he has forbidden, p. 105. After this short descant, I say,
and one Note in it above Ela, that there is as plain a Prohibition against
giving honor to the Image of Christ, as in the case of Moses and Jesue there
was an express Command to do it to the Ground. (Alas for the Compilers of the
39 Articles, that they could not see it!) At length he gives Glory to God, and
tells us, that the special presence and appearance of God does sanctify a
place to so high a degree, that we may lawfully testify our Reverence toward
it. Who will not here admire the force of Truth, which after long standing out,
makes all her Adversaries submit to her power? What could the Doctor have said
so much to the ruin of his own Cause, and the establishing of ours, as to
confess that Moses and Josue might and did lawfully testify their Reverence
toward the Ground? I can easily believe his Passion blinded him so far, that
he did not foresee the Darts he threw so spitefully against the Images of
Christ, would recoil (as they do) with double force upon his own head. For a
subtle Logician like himself, would ask him here, whether this Reverence he
speaks of, were Absolute or Relative, that is, were testified to the Ground for
it self, or merely for God's sake who appeared there present? His Answer, I
doubt not, would be, that it was not to the Ground for it self, but merely out
of respect to God. And what would his Opposer do here, but first turn his own
Comparison upon him, p. 100. that this was just as if an unchaste Wife should
plead in her excuse to her Husband, that the Person she was too kind with, was
a near Friend of his, and that it was out of respect to him, she gave him the
honor of his Bed? And then make a grave application upon it, as the Doctor
does, That if such an excuse will not be taken by a Jealous Husband, how much
less will such like pretenses avail with that God who has declared himself
particularly jealous of his honor, and that he will not give his Glory to
another, but has reserved all Divine Worship as proper to himself, and no such
fond excuses of relative and inferior Worship will serve, when they encroach
upon his Pregrogative? Neither would this subtle Disputant be content to stop
here, but would farther add, that for his part he could see no reason, why had
he been in Moses and Josue's place, but he might with as little scruple have
offered sacrifice to the Ground, as put off his shoes to it. And he should
think himself hardly dealt with, if he did not come off with the same
distinction. For if he did it to God absolutely, and for himself, and to the
Ground only improperly and relatively, wherein were he to blame, in the
Doctors Principles? Let him deal as he pleases with this Personated Sosta.

For my own part, (to pursue his Method of arguing a little farther, that the
Reader may see whether it leads) I desire seriously to know of him whether any
Reverence was due to the Ground or no? P. 102.
If none at all, to what end did they put off their shoes, which if the Ground
(as he says of Images) had any sense in it, would think was done to it? Why
was there an express Command to require it? And why does the Doctor himself
determine that they might lawfully testify their Reverence toward the Ground
because it was sanctified or Holy, if none were due? If there were any due,
whether it were the same which was given to God, or distinct from it? If it
were the same, then proper Divine Worship was given to the Ground; if distinct,
then the Ground was worshipped with Divine Worship for it self, and not
relatively. Again, either it was Divine Worship, or an Inferior Worship
distinct from it. If it were Divine Worship, then the Argument he urges out of
Bellarmin, (p. 103.) returns upon him, that it is the nature of Divine Worship
to be given for it self; and therefore if it were given to the Ground, the
Creature was equally worshipped with God, which certainly was Idolatry. If it
were not Divine, but an Inferior Worship, distinct from that which is given to
God, then Vasquez, (a man of great Reputation too, and of as searching a Wit as
Bellarmin) comes upon him, that he that so gives it, incurs the crime of
Idolatry, because he expresses his submission to a mere inaninate thing, that
has no kind of excellency to deserve if from him. So that upon the whole, what
follows in Doctor St.'s Logic is, that it was in Moses and Josue's choice what
sort of Idolatry they would commit, when they testified their Reverence to the
Ground, but in neither way could they avoid it. I cannot expect he will set
much by the Authority of Bellarmin and Vasquez; but what I expect and in
justice may exact from him, is, that he will answer their Reasons, at least one
of them, if he embrace the other; or else give a sufficient reason himself why
this manner of arguing is absurd against the Reverence he confesses due to the
Ground, and not against the Reverence we assert to be due to Holy Images. If he
fly to the old shift, of an express Command for the one, and a pretended
Prohibition for the other, no relief is to be had from thence; for besides his
giving Gods special presence here as a second and distinct reason why they
might lawfully testify their Reverence toward the Ground, whether there were
any Command or no; yet taking in the Command, the Argument has still the same
force as before. For either the Reverence they were commanded to testify
toward the Ground, because it was Holy, was the same which they gave to God,
or distinct from it. If the same, then proper Divine Worship was given to the
Ground by Gods Command; If distinct, then the Ground was worshipped with Divine
Worship for it self. Both Idolatry in their own nature according to his
Principles: And consequently it is now in his choice, whether he will blame
Moses and Josue for committing, or God for commanding them to commit Idolatry.
If it were Idolatry in the nature of the thing to put off their shoes in
reverence to the Ground, God's Command could not make it to be otherwise. And
if it were not Idolatry in it self, neither is it to give a like honor to the
Image of Christ. From whence it follows to the utter ruin of all he has
argued from his pretended Prohibition, that as no Command of God can make that
to be not Idolatry, which is so in the nature of the thing; so no Prohibition
(if there were any) could make that to be Idolatry, which has not in it the
true and real nature of Idolatry. Here the Ax is laid to the Root, and if ever
the Doctor will speak home to the purpose, it must be upon this point. He must
speak to the nature of the thing, and not stand pointing at the Sky, as Polus
did, to persuade the World he sees a siery Dragon, and that all are blind who
see it not, when there is nothing but pure Air. What he faintly suggests at
present, as some little difference between the case of giving reverence to the
Ground, and that of giving the like to Images, viz. that God was present in the
place by a special appearance, but is not so in Images, is (to use his own
Comparison, that he may see how sit it was to the matter he applied it) just as
if an unchaste Wife should plead in her excuse to her Husband for giving a
Friend of his the honor of his Bed, that she did it not when he was absent,
but to testify her greater respect to him, at a time when he was particularly
present: and can any one think but that such an excuse as this would be taken
by a Jealous Husband? He adds for a farther difference, that the Reverence then
required, was not kissing the Ground, or bowing to it, much less praying to it,
but only putting off their shoes. And I wonder what Edition of the Council of
Trent he makes use of, to ground this calumny of praying to Images, so often
repeated by him; for in all those printed in Catholic Countries, we are told
we are not to ask any thing of them: and I wonder no less by what Rule he makes
putting off the shoes to be a sign of less reverence, than kissing the Ground,
or bowing to it. The Rubric of the Missal prescribes it to be done but once a
year by the Priest upon Good Friday to testify a greater Reverence to the
Image of our Crucified Lord. But I shall not dispute it with him, only I
persuade my self, that if the Common Prayer Book should ordain the Minister
when he goes up to the Communion Table either to put off his shoes, or to bow
to it, he would scruple much more to go barefoot, than to nod to it with his
Shoes on.

Two other pretenses of difference he brings not unlike the former; The first,
that in kising the Ground, or bowing to it, if these things had been done to
the Ground, the danger had not been so great as to Images. The other, that the
Reverence of Holy Places and Things, is of a quite different nature from the
Worship of Images. For the first of danger, he may leave that (as Mr. Thorndike
has told him) to the Judgment of the Church. And for the second, Holy Places
and Things may have several Relations to God, according to the different uses
for which they serve in order to his Worship; and yet the Reverence given them
may be proportionably alike, that is, an inferior Respect and Veneration, and
not Latria, which is due to God alone. But how different soever he would make
it from that of Images, he must not think to escape; For if any be due at all
to Holy Places and Things, I suppose it is given them for God's sake, and then
all his own Arguments return upon him afresh; for either it is the same which
is given to God, or distinct from it; and which way soever he take, Bellarmin
or Vasquez will be upon him. Or none at all is due to them, and then he mocks
his Reader, when he tells him, that the Reverence of Holy Places and Things, is
of a quite different nature from the Worship of Images. And this is indeed what
lies at the bottom, how speciously soever he pretend the contrary here in
words, as will manifestly appear from his Answers to the following Instances.
For first,

. 3. To that of the Reverence given by the Jews to the Ark and the Holy of
Holies, where the Cherubins and Propitiatory were, he plainly enough denies
that any was given them. To prove there was, I produced first that Text of the
Psalm, Adore ye the footstool of God, for it it is holy, Psalm. xcviii. 5. (as
all the Ancient Fathers read it without scruple) or as their own Translation
has it, Fall down before his Footstool, for He (the Margin has it It) is
holy. And secondly, the Testimony of St. Hierom, who says expressly (Ep. 17. ad
Marcel.) Venerabantur olim, that the Jews in times past did worship or
reverence the Holy of Holies, because there were the Cherubins, the
Propitiatory, the Ark, etc. To neither of these does he vouchsafe any Answer at
all, but with an Ipse dixit, tells us, p. 106. that the Jews only directed
their Worship toward that place where God had promised to be signally present
among them; and signifies no more to the Worship of Images, than our lifting up
our Eyes to Heaven does, when we pray. Thus He, Oracularly, without either
Scripture, or Father, or Reason to abet him. But if Moses and Josue might
lawfully testify their Reverence to the Ground, because it was holy, why might
not the Jews do as much to the Footstool of God, because that also was holy?
Why was it placed in the Holy of Holies, and why were the People commanded to
adore, or bow down before it, but to testify their Reverence to it, and that a
much greater, in the Doctors opinion, than putting off their shoes, for they
were to adore it, or fall down before it: and all this, I hope, signifies
something more to the Worship of Images than the lifting up our Eyes to Heaven
does, when we pray; which might have been as well, if not better, without all
this Ceremony, in an open field.

For the Cherubins, he tells, That they were always hid from the sight of the
People; as if nothing could have Reverence given it, but what is seen: It may
reasonably be presumed, that himself will charge us with Idolatry for adoring
the Host, not only when we see it upon the Altar, but when it is recluded in a
Tabernacle, or covered with a Veil. Nor does he mend the matter when he says,
That the High Priest himself went into the Holy of Holies but once a year; for
if at that time it were lawful for him to testify Reverence to the Throne of
God there placed, it is as much as we desire; and if unlawful, it was more than
he ought to have done, though but once a year; for as St. Hierom says, Li.
advers-Vigilant.
Quod semel fecisse bonum est, non potest malum esse, si frequenter fiat; aut
si aliqua culpa vitanda est, non ex eo quod saepe, sed ex eo quod ^it
aliquando, culpabile est. What he adds of the Cherubins being placed merely as
Appendices to the Throne of God, was a means rather to increase than diminish
the people's reverence to them; and for their form, there needed no more be
known than what Calvin (in Exodus xxv. 18.) affirms of them, That they
represented Angels.

. 4. To bowing at the Name of JESUS. This Ceremony was appointed and allowed by
the Injunctions made in the time of Queen Elizabeth, Art. 52. and was defended
by Dr. Whitgift in his Defense against Cartright, Tr. 21. chapter 7. Ag. Rhem.
Test. Phil. ii. 10.
by Dr. Fulk, Dr. Andrews, (whose words are cited below) and others; and is at
this day publicly practiced in the Church of England, and that in Dr. St.'s
own sight, by such as esteem themselves the only true and genuine Sons of that
Church. This Instance I thought to be very pertinent, because first it is
allowed by Protestants, and so more easily understood; and secondly because of
the Analogy there is between Words and Pictures, a Picture being a Word to the
Eye, and a Word (as Aristotle calls it) a Picture to the Ear. Peri Herm. c. 1.
Another reason I had also, because the Doctor being inoculated into the Church
of England, or, (to speak his Dialect) a Revolted Presbyterian, I thought he
would not dare to disavow all reverence to the Sacred Name of JESUS. But I find
I was deceived; for he tells me plainly, I might as well have instanced in
going to Church at the Toll of a Bell, as in bowing at the Name of Jesus; for
as the one only tells us the time when, so the other only puts us in mind of
the Person whom we are to worship. This is plain enough, I confess (if it be as
mannerly) to tell us that no more Reverence is due to the most H. Name of
JESUS, when we hear it spoken, than to a Bell when we hear it toll. And the
Compari^on is somewhat more elevated, than if he had made it with Whittington's
fancying the Bells to call him back to be Lord Mayor of London. But was this
all that St. Paul meant, when he told us, That at the Name of Jesus (or as Dr.
St. himself reads it, p. 111. To the Name of Jesus) every knee shall bow? Phil.
ii. 10. Was it for this that God so highly exalted Him, that He gave Him a Name
which is above every Name, that it might have as much Reverence given It, as we
give to great Meg of Westminster? What would Bishop Andrews have said, had he
lived to hear this? Verily (says He in his Sermon upon the foregoing words of
St. Paul) God will not have us worship him like Elephants, as if we had no
Joints in our Knees. He will have more honor of men, than of the Pillars of
the Church. He will have us to bow our Knees, and let us bow them in God's
Name, and To his Name. For this is another Prerogative. He is exalted to whose
Person Knees do bow; but He to whose Name only much more. But the cause is
here otherwise. For his Person is taken up out of our sight; all we can do,
will not reach unto it. But his Name he has left behind to us, that we may
show by our Reverence and Respect to it, how much we esteem him; How true the
Psalm shall be, Holy and Reverend is his Name. But if we have much ado to get
it bow at all; much more shall we have to get it done to his Name. There be
that do it not; what speak I of not doing it? There be that not only forbear
to do it themselves, but put themselves to an evil Occupation, to find faults
where none is, and cast scruples into men's minds, by no means to do it -- And
again a little after. But to keep us to the Name. This is sure; the words
themselves (of St. Paul) are so plain, as they are able to convince any man's
Conscience. And there is no Writer (not of the Ancient) on this place that I
can find, (save he that turned all into Allegories) but literally understands
it, and likes well enough we should actually perform it. Thus Dr. Andrews, (a
very Learned Bishop of his Church, as Dr. St. himself calls him, p. 101.) And
can any legitimate Son of that Church hear him preach, that no more Reverence
is due to the Name of JESUS, than to the tolling of a Bell, and yet cry him up
hereafter for a Pillar of that Church (unless it be in the Bishop's sense
abovementioned) whose practice he exposes as ridiculous, by so unhandsome a
Comparison? I remember at the beginning of the Long Parliament one of the first
Wounds given to the Church of England was from a Book whose Title (as I read it
posted up in Westminster Hall) was Jesu-Worship Confuted; and whether the same
might not have been put for a Marginal Note to this Answer of the Doctors, I
leave to Judgment of the Reader. Give me leave to speak a Word to you, Sons of
the Church of England; what if the Doctor should come upon you for reverencing
the Name of JESUS with your Hat or Knee, as he does upon us for honoring in
like manner his Image, viz. p. 102. that the Reverence you give to that Holy
Name, is either the same you give to God or distinct from it. If it be the
same, then you give proper divine worship to the Name; and if it be distinct,
then the Name is worshipped with divine worship for it self; and it is in your
choice what sort of Idolatry you will commit who worship the Name of JESUS, but
neither way can you avoid it? If you tell him that the Reverence you give that
H. Name is not the worship due to God, but a Relative and inferior respect for
his sake; he will tell you again, as he did me in the case of Images, p. 100.
that this is just as if an unchaste Wife should plead in her excuse to her
Husband, that the Person she was too kind with, was extremely like him, and a
dear friend of his, nay had his very name, and that it was out of respect to
him, that she gave him the honor of his Bed. I do not hear that he has
pressed this argument upon you; and if he do not, I cannot but wonder, his zeal
for God's honor suffers you so long to go on in your Idolatrous practice; and
much more, if he comply with you himself in showing any reverence to that Name,
for though like a wiser Christian (there being degrees among Christians, as
well as Heathens,) he differ extremely from the Vulgar in his Opinion of
Religion, yet this is to concur with them in the external practice of their
Idolatry and so he falls under the same censure with his wiser Heathens, p. 73.
On the other side if he do it no^, Sermon. 9th. of the Resurrect.
Bishop Andrews has told him he has just reason to fear, least the Knee that
will not bow, be stricken with something, which shall make it not able to bow;
and for the Name, that they that will do no honor to it, when time of need
comes shall receive no honor by it. But to conclude this Point. If it be the
sense of the Sons of the Church of England, that they intend to give no more
reverence to the most Holy Name of Jesus, when they hear it read, than to a
Bell, when they hear it toll, I confess I was mistaken in alleging this
Practice of theirs for an Instance. But if they acknowledge more is due to that
sacred Name, than to a Bell, and yet not so much as is due to God himself, I
have the end for which I brought it, which was to let them see what kind of
worship it is we give to the Images of Christ, such as is given by themselves
to the Name of Jesus. For we make Images no more the Objects of our worship,
when we kneel before them, than they do that Holy Name, when they bow at it.

5. The Fifth Instance was of the Reverence given to the Sacramental signs in
the Supper by kneeling before them; which if the Bread and Wine had any sense
in them (as he says of Images, p. 102.) would think were done to them. And
what says my Adversary to this, Marry, that this of all things should not be
objected to them. If you ask him why? He tells you, because they have declared
in their ^ubrick after the Communion, that thereby no adoration is intended or
ought to be done either unto the Sacramental Dread and Wine, there bodily
received; or any corporal presence of Christ's Natural Flesh and Blood; for the
Sacramental Bread and Wine remain still in their very natural substances, and
therefore may not be adored. For that were Idolatry to be abhorred of all
faithful Christians. I confess I reflected up in this Rubric, when I put down
Kneeling at the Euc^arist for an Instance; but I could not imagine the Doctor
would make it a matter of Triumph over the Church of England. It is not yet
more than a dozen years, since this Rubric was inserted into the Communion
Book, and the occasion is well known to have been a design to gain scrupulous
and dissenting Parties to a conformity in so innocent a Ceremony. And because
the Church of England has been so kind to those who dissented from her, as to
declare no adoration is intended by it to the Bread and Wine, or any corporal
presence of Christ's Natural Flesh and Blood; Will the Doctor be so unkind, as
to make her say, that no Reverence at all is due to that Holy Sacrament? that
this of all things in the World ought not to have been objected against them?
What! will he make them fall below Calvin in their respect to that Sacrament,
who says, Just. lib. 4. c. 17.
it is to be received with reverence, as the Pledge of our Holy Union with
Christ? Is it not time now to remind him, as I promised above, p. 138. how his
Beloved Constantinopolitan Fathers call it an Honorable Image of Christ's
quickening Body? And thereupon invite all those (and among them the Doctor,
unless he will leave himself out, as he did these words) all those I say to
rejoice and exult with confidence, who desire, worship, and offer it for the
Salvation both of Soul and Body? Though He style me very ineptly a Revolted
Protestant, yet I have so much respect for those learned Persons who made that
Rubric, as to think they meant by Adoration, what the word now signifies by
use in English, that is, Divine Worship proper to God alone: and not, that no
more Reverence should be used toward the Bread and Wine in the Church, than
there is to the Remainder of it at home, by some seemingly- Revolted
Presbyterians (I cannot believe them to be truly Sons of the Church of
England.) Now what the sense of that Church was, and still is, unless the
Doctor will have us suppose these Modern Divines to have prevaricated from
their Fathers, Bishop Jewel tells us in these words. Reply against Hard. p. 379.
We only adore Christ says he, as very God, but we Worship also, and Reverence
the Sacrament, we Worship the Word of God, we worship all other like things in
such Religious wise to Christ belonging. The same is witnessed by Bishop
Morton, Of the Mass. l. 7. c. 2. S. 3.
Under the degree of Divine Worship, we our selves yield as much to the
Eucharist, as St. Austin did to Baptism, where he said (Epist. 164.) We
reverence Baptism wheresoever it is. Nor is this delivered by them as their
private Opinion, but as the sense of the Church of England, as appears by their
words. And if you ask, how they can excuse themselves from Idolatry, you have
the Answer of Bishop Jewel; Reply. p. 409.
that the Sacraments be adored, but the whole honor rests not in them, but
is passed over from them to the things signified. So that it seems I was not
much mi^^^ken, when, to parallel the Reverence given by Catholics to Images, I
instanced in that which is given by Protestants to the Sacramental signs by
kneeling at the Eucharist; for they do not only allow a like Reverence, but
maintain it also with the same distinction: Nor will the Doctor ever be able to
persuade his Parishioners out of it, till he can make them leave their usual
Expression, when they speak of this Sacrament that they do not receive it as
Bread, but as the Body of Christ.

. 6. The 6th. and last Instance was of Reverence given to the Altar by bowing
to it; a practice of great Antiquity, as Dr. Heylin shows in his defense of the
Modern Practice of it in the Church of England against Burton, p. 25. This Dr.
Still. says, is of the same nature with the putting off our Hats, while we are
in the Church; And what is this to say? Himself admits a Reverence to Holy
Places, (p. 105.) and surely the Church, the House of God is one of them. Here
then we find him incline to admit a Reverence due to the Altar; and if it be of
the same nature with putting off our Hats while we are in the Church, as he
does the one, so he may lawfully do the other. But then, as if he had granted
too much, he presently draws back, and tells us, This is only determining a
natural act of Reverence, that way which the ancient Christians did use to
direct their Worship: (which as far as I can understand the words) is not of
the same nature with putting off our Hats when we are in the Church, but with
going to Church when the Bell tolls, which is to give no more Reverence to the
Altar, than to the Bell. But who can unfold the Riddle, and tell me what he
means by a natural Act of Reverence that way which the ancient Christians did
use to direct their Worship? If he mean by that way the local situation of the
Altar in the East, which was the way the ancient Christians used to direct
their Worship, and that Nature teaches us to direct our Worship that way;
although the Altar (for example) in St. Andrew's, may serve for such a
determination, because it is placed in the East; yet he must give another
reason why those in the Savoy bow toward the Altar, where it is seated in the
North, because it does not there determine a Natural Act of Reverence that way,
which the ancient Christians used to direct their Worship, which was toward
the East. But if he mean by that way, a like manner of Reverence to the Altar,
as was used to be given by the Ancient Christians, he will find in the
aforecited place out of Dr. Heylin, that they acknowledged an honor and
veneration due to the Holy Altar, and testified that honor by bowing and
kneeling to it. In fine, whatever the meaning of the words be, to speak to the
practice it self, either he condemns those of the Church of England who profess
and testify their reverence to the Altar by bowing to it for Idolatry, or no.
If he do, they are at age to answer for themselves. If he do not, an Inferior
or Relative honor may be given to it for his sake whose Throne it is, under
the degree of Divine Worship due to God alone; and as the allowing this will
render him a true Son of the Church of England; so the allowing the like to the
sacred Images of Christ will make him in this point a perfect Proselyte of the
Church of Rome, whose Councils have decreed that we are not to give to the
Images of Christ and his Saints Latria, or the worship due to God, but a
honourary respect and veneration, as to the Books of H. Scripture, and other
Holy things. But what himself may justly fear, should success crown his
endeavors in putting scruples into poor simple Men's minds to with draw them
from the Reverence they owe to the Sacraments of Christ, his Saints, his Name,
his Image, his Altars, and such like Holy things relating to his Worship, is,
that the Event (whatever the design be) of his labors will be no other (as
those Pious and Learned Doctors of Rhemes long since observed, and we see at
this Day in a great measure fulfilled) than to inure Men by degrees to lose all
honor and respect to Christ himself, to abolish all true Religion out of the
World, and to make them plain Atheists. The Chair of State is not more an
Ornament to the King's Palace, than the Respect given to it is a Fence against
the Contempt of his Person. He that passes by that with his Hat on, thinks
himself excused upon the same account from putting it off to the King himself.

The End of the First Part.
THE SECOND PART OF THE ADORATION OF THE Most Blessed Sacrament.
CHAP. I.
The Practice of the Primitive Church in this Point; The Doctor's Argument to
prove it to be Idolatry, built upon an Injurious Calumny, that Catholics
believe the Bread to be God. The sense of his first Proposition cleared, and
the Proofs he brings for it, refuted.

. 1. HAving cleared the Doctrine and Practice of the Catholic Church from my
Adversaries Unjust Charge of Idolatry in the Worship or Veneration she gives to
the Images of Christ, I come now to show the Injustice of a like accusation he
brings in upon account of the Adoration she gives to Christ himself in the most
H. Sacrament of the Altar: A th^^g so universally practiced and recommended by
the Fathers of the Primitive Church, both Greek and Latin, that who so will
condemn the practice of it at this day in the Church of Rome, must have the
confidence to involve the Church of that time in the same Condemnation with it.
Among other Apostolical Traditions, which were delivered to the Church without
Writing, St. Basil reckons the words of Invocation, Li. de Spir. S. c. 27.
when the Eucharistical Br^ad and Cup of Blessing were showed. Dialog. 2.
And Theodoret affirms expressly, that The Mystical Symbols are understood to be
what they are made, and are believed and adored, as being the things they are
believed. In Epitaph. Gorgoniae.
S. Gregory N^zianzen reports of his Sister Gorgonia as a great testimony of
her devotion, that in a certain sickness she had, she went with Faith to the
Altar, and with a loud voice besought him, who is worshipped upon it, for
remedy, giving him all his Titles or Attributes, and remembering him of all the
miraculous things which he had done. And the same no doubt was done by St.
Monica the Mother of St. Austin, in her daily devotions at the Altar, at which
she used to assist without pretermission of any one day; Confess. li. 9. c. 13.
and from whence she knew, says he, that Holy Victime to be dispensed, by
which the (...) writing was blotted out, which carried our condemnation in it.
To this Sacrament of our Redempti^^ she had tied her Soul fast by the Bond of
^^ith. And in this she did no more, (...) what her Son teache^^ upon the 98th.
Psal^^, S. Aug. in Ps. 98.
where expounding (...) words of the Psalmist, Adore ye his Footstool, to be
meant of the Earth, and by the Earth, to be understood the Flesh of Christ, he
adds, that whereas Christ walked here in the Flesh, and gave us that very
flesh to be eaten for our Salvation, and no man eats that Flesh, unless he
have first adored, we find, says he, how such a Footstool of our Lord may be
adored; and that we do not only not sin in adoring, but we sin in not adoring.
Viz. that Footstool of our Lord, by which he said before was meant his most
Holy Flesh. And from whom did he learn this Doctrine, but from the same Master,
from whom he learned Christianity. St. Ambrose, who treating of the same place
of the Psalmist, Li. 3. de Sp. Sto. c. 12.
says, By the Footstool is understood the Earth, and by the Earth the Flesh
of Christ, which we adore also at this day in the Mysteries, and which the
Apostles adored in our Lord Jesus. Upon this Account it is, that St.
Chrysostom exhorts Christians to this duty by the Example of the Wisemen:
Hom. 24. in l. ad Cor.
These Men, says he, though Barbarians, after a long Journey adored this Body
(of our Lord) in the Manger, with great fear and trembling; Let us imitate what
they did. Thou see Him not in the Manger, but on the Altar. And then again by
the Example of the Angels, who, says he, assist the Priest at the time of
offering the Holy Sacrifice; Li. 6. de Sacerd.
and the whole order of Heavenly Powers list up their Voices; and the place
round about the Altar is filled with the Quires of Angels, in honor of Him who
lies upon it. And therefore it is called by St. Optatus, S. Opt. li. 6. f. 61.
the Seat or Throne of the Body of our Lord. Thus these Holy Men, not as
private Doctors delivering their own Opinions, but as Fathers, testifying and
transmitting to Posterity the Doctrine and Practice of the Church of their time,
which was so notorious in this point of the Adoration of the Eucharist, that
the Heathens because they knew Christians made use of Bread and Wine in the
Mysteries, objected to them, (as St. Austin reports,) S. Aug. lib. 20. contr.
Faust. c. 13.
that they worshipped Ceres and Bacchus. And hereupon Mr. Thorndike (Epil. 3.
p. page 351.) ingenuously says, I do believe that it was so practiced and done
in the ancient Church, which I maintain from the beginning to have been the
true Church of Christ -- For I do acknowledge the testimonies that are produced
out of St. Ambrose, St. Austin, St. Chrysostom, St. Gregory Nazianzen: with
the rest, and more than I have produced. And now it is in the Reader's choice,
whether he will condemn so great and Holy Men, and with them the Church of that
time, of Idolatry for adoring our Lord Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar, or
will absolve Uj for doing what they did. It is with them we must stand or fall.
And the Doctor's argument will make neither or both Idolaters. But before I
speak to that, and that the Reader may see what force it is like to have,
behold how he ushers it in.

. 2. I proceeded, says he, to the Adoration of the Host, and here the argument
I proposed, was to take off the common answer, viz. (of Catholics) that it
cannot be Idolatry, because they believe the Bread to be God. This is what the
Doctor exposes in the front of his Rejoinder to public view. And if the Reader
meet with such sophisticate Ware in the Mouth of the Sack, What may he expect
when he comes nearer to the bottom? The argument I proposed, says he, was to
take off the Common Answer, (viz. of Catholics) that it cannot be Idolatry,
because they believe the Bread to be God: And that too, just as the Worshippers
of the Sun believed the Sun to be God; For upon the same ground he says, it is
that they who believe the Sun to be God, and worship him on that account, would
be excused from Idolatry too. The unhandsomness of this Proceeding I fairly
hinted to him in my Reply, whereas I might justly have called it a most
injurious calumny; and it became an Ingenuous Writer, either to have justified
his charge; or (if he could not do that, nor yet had humility enough to retract
it,) to have waved at least the repeating it in his Answer. But this he is so
far from doing, that without any proof at all, what he did but insinuate before
in the Body of his Argument, he lays down now expressly in his Rejoinder, as the
Ground of his charge of Idolatry in this matter. Wherefore I must now challenge
him to prove it, viz. that it is the Common Answer of Catholics that their
Adoration of the Eucharist cannot be Idolatry, because they believe the Bread
to be God; or if that be too much, to produce at least any one Catholic
Author, who ever excused himself from Idolatry upon that account. Nothing is
more notorious than that Catholics believe the whole substance of Bread to be
converted into the Body of Christ, and consequently Bread not to be there.
Wherefore to do both himself and us right, he should have said, the Common
Answer of Catholics, when they are charged with Idolatry in the Adoration of
the Host, is not, that it cannot be Idolatry, because they believe the bread to
be God; but because they believe no bread at all to be there, but the Body of
Christ true God, into which it is changed. This had been to speak Truth; but
withal it had been to stifle his argument in its birth, by choking his
Parallel between Catholics and those who worshipped the Sun, supposing it to
remain still the Sun. And why should be scruple more to preserve his own Child,
than the Egyptian Midwives did to save those of other People?

The Argument, as it is artificially proposed by himself, runs thus, that Upon
the same Ground that Catholics would excuse themselves from Idolatry, p. 109.
because they believe the bread to be God: they who believe the Sun to be God,
and worship him on that account would be excused from Idolatry too; which who
so reads would think it intended directly to excuse the worshippers of the Sun
from Idolatry. But because his Intention is to make it fall with a reversed
blow upon Catholics, and conclude them guilty of Idolatry, that the Reader may
see the force of the Argument, I shall reduce it to form, as it may serve to
infer that Conclusion. And this it is. If the Worship of the Sun by those who
believe the Sun to be God, and Worship him on that account, be Idolatry* then
the Worship of the bread in the Eucharist, by those who believe it to be God,
and worship it on that account, is Idolatry. But it is the Common Answer of
Papisls, (says Dr. St.) that they believe the bread to be God. Therefore they
are Idolaters. This is the sum of this mighty Argument; and there needs no
more to overthrow it, but to deny as most notoriously false, the second
Proposition, that Catholics believe the Bread to be God, as the Worshippers of
the Sun believed the Sun to be God. Others may judge of it, as they please, but
for my part I should wonder extremely, how the Doctor could have the confidence
to advance so palpable a calumny the second time, but that I see, what a^t and
courage are necessary to uphold so unjust a charge. Perhaps he will reply, his
meaning was, that Catholics believe that to be God, which he and his Partisans
believe to be mere bread. But then what a rare consequence is it to say, the
worshippers of the Sun were Idolaters, because they worshipped for God what
themselves believed to be the Sun: Therefore Catholics are Idolaters, because
they worship that for God, which Dr. St. and his Partisans believe to be but
bread? Which is just, as if an Arrian should conclude both Catholics and
Protestants to be Idolaters, for worshipping Christ, because they worship him
for God whom the Arrians believe to be but a pure creature.

. 3. This is all which needed to have been replied to the Argument, to show the
inconclusiveness of it: but to prevent what I thought was likely to be objected
by my Adversary, I added two things. 1. That Catholics are not mistaken in
their belief of the Bread's being changed into the Body of Christ, as having
the same grounds and motives, and a like divine Revelation to believe this, as
to believe that Christ is God, and consequently to be adored. Hereupon I
affirmed that the Doctor's argument, altering only the names, would be of as
much force from the Pen of an Arrian against the Adoration of Christ for God,
as it was from his own, against the Adoration of him in the Eucharist. And I
think sit to repeat the argument here, for the same reason, for which the
Doctor seems unwilling to hear of it. What that was, the Reader will see
below,. 5. of this Chapter. The argument as I then proposed it was this. The
same argument which would make the grossest Heathen Idolatry lawful, cannot
excuse any Act from Idolatry; But the same argument by which Protestants make
the worship of Christ (a pure Man, says the Arrian; I should have said,
creature, and I thank the Doctor for minding me of it,) not to be Idolatry,
would make the grossest Heathen Idolatry not to be so. For if it be not
therefore Idolatry, because they suppose Christ to be God, then the worship of
the Sun was not Idolatry by them who supposed the Sun to be God. 2dly, I added,
that supposing Catholics should be mistaken in their belief, yet Dr. Tailor an
eminent Man among the Protestants, denies it would follow from thence, that
they were Idolaters. And I shall repeat his words, when I come to speak to that
Point. The Doctor, to make good his Argument against these Answers (which he
calls only appearances of answering) undertakes to prove four things. 1. That
supposing there were the same Revelation of Christ's Divinity, and of his
Presence in the Eucharist by Transubstantiation, yet there could not be the
same reason for the Adoration of the Host, as for worshipping Christ himself.
2. That there are not the same motives and grounds to believe the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, that there are to believe that Christ is God. 3. That
supposing they are mistaken in the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, this does
not excuse them from Idolatry. 4. That the same Reason which would excuse them,
would excuse the most gross Idolaters in the World. These are the heads of what
he rejoins in this matter, Great and Glorious things, if they can be made out.
But how far the performance comes short of the undertaking, will appear by the
ensuing Answers to the several Propositions, and wh^t he brings in proof of
them, in order as they lie.

. 4. The Doctor's first Proposition: Supposing there were the same divine
Revelation of Transubstantiation, p. 111.
(that is, of Christ's Presence in the Eucharist, by the change of the Bread
into his Body) and of His Divinity, yet there could not be the same reason for
adoration of the Host, as of Christ himself. The first thing we are to consider
here, is, what he means by the word Host, whether Christ himself under the
species or accidents of Bread; or the Accidents themselves. If he mean Christ
under the Accidents, the Question is, whether the same adoration be due to
Christ in the Sacrament, as out of it? If he mean only the Accidents, the
Question is, whether the same adoration, that is, as much or as great adoration
is due to them as to Christ himself? The first he knows is affirmed by us, the
second denied, because as was said before of Images (p. 190.) although Christ
and the Accidents be worshipped by the same Act of Adoration, yet as considered
precisely relating to the Accidents, it falls upon them after an Inferior
manner. And it became a Generous Adversary, (as he shows himself to be, in
supposing the same divine Revelation for Christ's Presence in the Eucharist, as
for his Divinity, which he needed not have done) to have told us clearly his
meaning in this Point. But this he thought not fit to do, but to blend both
senses confusedly together, that when he found himself pressed in one, he might
sly for refuge to the other. The Catholic sense is this, that the same or as
great adoration is due to Christ in the Sacrament, as out of it. Against this
he objects two things. 1. That there is a plain Command in Scripture for the
One, and none for the other. 2. That the One gives us a sufficient reason for
our Worship, the other does not. To the first I answer (as he foresaw very well
I would) that a General Command (such as those cited by himself, Let all the
Angels adore him, that is, Christ, Hebr. 1. 6. and to his Name every Knee is to
bow, Phil. 2. 10.) does extend to him wherever he is present: as a like command
of honoring such a Person for King would do, wherever he should be known to
reside: And this I take to be Intimation enough that we are to worship Christ
under the Accidents supposing him present there. And whereas he says this
Answer proves no more his worship in them, than in a Turf, or any other piece
of bread, because Christ, says he, being God is every where present, (as if
his being God made him every where present, as he is supposed to be in the
Sacrament;) This was but an Artifice to divert the Reader from the matter in
hand, which is not about the worship of God, as every where present, but as
hypostatically present in the Flesh: And so the Question between us, is,
whether in case there be a general command to worship the Son of God made Man,
we may not as lawfully do it to him (supposing a divine Revelation, that he is
so present) in the Sacrament, as the Apostles and others adored him, when he
was conversant among them? To this Question I Answer affirmatively, and he
Negatively, unless he can see a plain Command to do it to him, as present in
the Sacrament. And who can but wonder to see him now so scrupulous in giveing
adoration to God made Man, (believing him to be really present in the Host)
unless he have an express command to do it; who professes of himself (p. 101.)
that were he of our mind in the matter of Images, he should not stick to offer
up the Host it self, that is, God-Man really present under the Sacramental
signs, in Sacrifice to a block or a hewn stone, without any command at all
either general or particular to do it? But to remove this scruple; as I have
endeavored to do some others, it may suffice to tell him, that although our
worship be not to be guided by our fancies, but the will of God; Yet where
there is a general command without any Exception, to worship the Word made
Flesh, there he has given a sufficient Indication of the lawfulness of doing
it, wherever we are certain by Faith that He is so present. What particular
command had the Wisemen to adore Him in the Manger, or the Thief upon the
Cross? Was it not enough that they had a Divine Revelation, that He was the Son
of God, to move them to adore Him with Divine Worship? Or is he less adorable
under the Sacramental signs, than bound up in swadling-cloths, or covered with
blood and spittle? Surely it was happy for the Wisemen and the Thief, that
they had not Dr. St. to direct them what to do. For had they followed his
Casuistry, they must have suspended their Adoration for want of an Express
Command in their particular cases.

. 5. But he had not advanced above a Leaf farther, when it seems he perceived
the weakness of this Answer; and therefore to piece it out, he tells us, (p.
115.) that in case of Christ's visible appearance to us in any place, we need
not a particular command in such a case to make it lawful to adore him. But
that which goes against the grain of his sense and reason, is, that he should
do it to him under a Veil, though he be more certain by Faith, that it is He
that is there present, than if he saw him with his eyes. This is such a
self-denial, as is not to be expected from flesh and blood. And if you ask him
why there is not the same reason of believing Christ to be present, as seeing
him? He answers with a distinction much more subtle, than that he alleged out
of Scotland, for saying the Lord's Prayer to a Saint, p. 101. that in matters
of pure Revelation, where the matter proposed to our Faith can be no Object of
sense, as Christ's Infinite presence in all places as God; there he may firmly
believe, and worship Him upon the credit of Divine Revelation: but speaking of
the visible presence of Christ, where honor is given on the account of the
divine nature, but he can be known to be present only by his Humanity in this
case I say, says he, (and his Ipse dixit must be of no less authority than
that of Pythagoras) I say, the evidence of sense is necessary in ord^r to the
true worshipping of the Person of Christ. Here is indeed an appearance of a
distinction, but such an one as quite overthrows his whole discourse, for if he
suppose (as he does at present) that the Humanity of Christ is really present
in the Sacrament, in such a way that it cannot be the Object of sense, he must
rank it among his matters of pure Revelation, and so not only firmly believe
it, but also give him worship suitable to his presence. When therefore he tells
us the question is concerning the visible presence of Christ, it is manifest he
either changes the state of the Question, or retracts what before he so
generously granted of his Invisible presence in the Sacrament. This then is
plain was but to delude the Reader, and not answer to the Question, which was,
Why there is not the same reason for worshipping Christ in the Sacrament,
believing him to be there upon the credit of a Divine Revelation, as if we saw
Him with our eyes. But to follow him a little in his wanderings, and speak to
the visible presence of Christ. In case he can be known to be present only by
his Humanity, Why must the Evidence of sense be necessary in order to his
worship? Was he not so present in the Womb of the Virgin, after the Angels
message? Was he not so present in his Ascension after he was intercepted from
his Disciples sight by a Cloud? Was he not so present, before he opened the
Eyes of the two blind Men, who sat by the way side, Matthew. 20. 30.? And is he
not believed by all Christians to be so present at the right hand of his
Father? And might none of these worship him, because they could not see him? If
he pretend a difference in the cases, because in all them he was the Object of
sense either before or after: but as he exists in the Sacrament he can be no
Object of sense; he must grant his presence there to be a matter of pure
Revelation: and so falls upon the other edge of his distinction, that in
matters of pure Revelation, where the matter proposed to our Faith can be no
Object of sense, there firm credit is to be given to the divine Revelation, and
worship also suitable to his presence. But to go one step further, In case a
thing be knowable by evidence of sense, May it not also be made known by Divine
Revelation? And will not God's Revelation ascertain us as well, if not much
better, than our Eyes? Who saw the World rise out of nothing? No less a
Philosopher than Aristotle (not to speak of others) held it never had any
beginning. And yet what Christian does not believe it had, more firmly upon the
account of God's Revelation, than if he had been present in some corner of the
spatium Imaginarium, and beheld the foundation of it with his Eyes? Upon the
whole then, which way soever the Doctor turn himself, unless he will maintain
(what he seems indeed to suppose all along in this discourse) that we are to
give more credit to our sense* then to God's revealed word, he must confess
that wherever there is a Divine Revelation of Christ's presence, (which at
present he supposes in the Sacrament.) there is the same, if not greater
Reason, to believe and worship him, than if he saw him as clearly as the
Wisemen did in the Manger, or the Thief upon the Cross. And consequently that
he was but too too Prodigal, in granting, that supposing a like Divine
Revel^^ion for Christ's presence in the Eucharist by Transubstantiation, as for
his being true God, yet there would not be the same reason to worship him
there, as when he dwelt visibly among us. All that he could devise to elude the
Parallel argument I urged from the Pen of an Arrian, Viz. that the Argument he
brings to conclude Catholics to be Idolaters, for their adoration of Christ in
the Eucharist, would be of as much force from the Arrians against the adoration
of him as God: All, I say, he could devise to elude this argument with,
standing to the true state of the Question, and supposing (as he does) a like
divine Revelation for both, was to say there was not an express command to
worship him in the Eucharist; which how pitiful an Evasion it is, I have showed
above. And yet as pitiful as it is, it may serve well enough to make an unwary
Reader believe, he concludes all the Papists in the World Idolaters for
worshipping our Lord Christ himself in the Sacrament. But why it should do so,
when nothing less than an express Prohibition could make them Idolaters in the
matter of Images, I cannot imagine.

. 6. The Second Proof he brings to show that, Supposing a like divine
Revelation for Christ's being present in the Sacrament, as for his being true
God, yet there is not the same reason of adoration, is p. 112. because the One,
he says, gives us a sufficient reason of our Worship, viz. his Divinity; but
the other does not, because all that He can believe then present, supposing
Transubstantiation, is the Body of Christ, and that is not the Object of our
Adoration. But this is altogether as weak as the former; for however that be
all he can believe, and more than he does believe, (God increase his Faith.)
yet Catholics believe much more, viz. that together with his Body in the
Eucharist are present his Soul, his Person, his Divinity, in a word, whole
Christ; and to his Person it is they terminate their worship as hypostatically
united with his Body. For as the Dr. himself says very well (p. 114.) although
the humane nature of Christ, of it self can yield us no sufficient reason of
adoration, yet being considered as united to the Divine Nature, that cannot
hinder the same Divine Worship being given to his Person, which belongs to his
Divine Nature, any more than the Robes of a Prince, can take off from the
honor due unto him. To elude this Answer (for now his chiefest hope consists
in seeking out ways to escape) instead of rejoining to it, upon the supposition
of Transubstantiation; he falls to dispute downright against
Transubstantiation it self, where he tells the Reader, that this Answer of
Christ's Body being hypostatically united with the Divine Nature, is indeed a
good argument to prove the Body of Christ cannot be there by
Transubstantiation. And I desire the Reader to be very attentive to the
argument as it is proposed by the Doctor; for otherwise perhaps it may cost him
the labor of a second reading. If the Bread, says he, p. 113. be converted
into that Body of Christ, which is hypostatically united with the Divine
Nature, then the Conversion is not merely into the Body, but into the Person of
Christ, and then Christ has as many Bodies hypostatically united to him, as
there are Elements consecrated: and so all the accidents of the Bread belong to
that Body of Christ which is hypostatically united with the Divine Nature.
Therefore the Body of Christ cannot be in the Sacrament by Transubstantiation.
This is his argument, which he calls a Good One. I am sure I may call it a
sublime One, and so sublime, that there wants only an Adversary of the same
humor with Mr. J. S.'s to set it out for a notable piece of new Mystical
Divinity. Dr. T. Preface to his Sermons.
For I do verily believe that neither Harphius nor Rusbrochius, nor the
profound Mother Juliana have any thing in their writings so seemingly un
intelligible, and contradictory, as this discourse of the Doctor's is really
such. For (beside the hard words of hypostatical union, consecrated Elements,
Conversion into the Person of Christ, etc. which quite put down Mr. J. S.'s
vulgar ones of Potentiality, Actuality, Actuation, supervene subsume, etc.)
First, He will have it to be the same Body, because it is that Body which is
hypostatically united with the divine nature. Then he will have it not to be
the same Body, because Christ would have as many Bodies, as there are Elements
consecrated. And then again it must be the same Body, because all the Accidents
of Bread belong to that Body, which is hypostatically united with the Divine
Nature. But this way of refining a discourse into Mystical Divinity is proper
only to confute demonstrations; and the argument I have to deal with is so far
from that, that it carries not the show of a Probability. For if the Bread be
converted into that Body of Christ which is hypostatically united with the
divine nature, and not merely into that, but into the Person of Christ, does it
follow that he has as many Bodies hypostatically united to him as there are
Elements consecrated? No more, than because the Bread, the Flesh, the Fish
which he eat upon Earth, were converted into the substance of his Body, and
hypostatically united to him, it follows, that he had as many bodies
hypostatically united to him, as there were several meats eaten by him. Before
Digestion or Conversion they were distinct; by Conversion they were made the
same body. But if this will not serve the turn, he wants not a false
supposition, to blind his Reader with, Viz. that we make the Elements, i.e. the
Accidents of Bread, (for we we will have nothing else remain after Consecration
in spite, he says, of all the reason and sense of the World.) the Object of
divine worship. But the falsity of this supposition I shall make appear in the
next Chapter; together with his mistake (if it be no more) of the meaning of
the Council of Trent.

CHAP. II.
The true State of the Controversy laid open, together with the Doctor's
Endeavors to misrepresent it. His manner of arguing against the Adoration of
Christ in the Eucharist, equally destructive to the adoration of Him, as God.

. 1. IN pursuance of his former design, my Adversary will now undertake p. ii4.
to prove yet further, that upon the Principles of the Roman Church, no Man can
be assured, that he does not commit Idolatry every time he gives adoration to
the Host. And this he hopes will abundantly add to the disco^ering of the
disparity between the worship given to the Person of Christ, and that which is
given to the Eucharist upon supposition of Transubstantiation. But before he
can come to this he must needs mistake, or rather misstate the Controversy,
which he does in most ample manner; when after a great many Preambles for three
whole Pages together, no more to the purpose, than the Flourishes of a great
Text-letter are to the force of a Bond, he tells the Reader at length that the
state of the Controversy between us, is, whether proper divine worship may be
given to the Elements, (i. e. the Accidents) on account of Christ's corporal
presence under them? But, (whatever Divines dispute concerning the Worship of
the Accidents) the Object of Catholics Adoration (as Dr. Tailor ingenuously
confesses) Viz. (What is represented to them in their mind, their thoughts and
purposes) in the B. Sacrament, is the only true and Eternal God hypostatically
joined with his Holy Humanity: And consequently the Question between us, is,
Whether supposing our Lord Christ to be really present under the Sacramental
signs, the same proper divine worship be not to be given to him there which is
due to his Person, wherever it is present by hypostatical union with his sacred
Humanity? Let the Doctor do thus, and we have no quarrel with him; which is an
evident sign, that the Question between us, is not, as he says; whether the
same Adoration ought to be given to the Accidents, which we would give to the
very Person of Christ? But what may not be venture to say, who had the
confid^nce to advance so notorious a calumny, as that it is our common answer
in this matter, to excuse our selves from Idolatry, that we believe the Bread
to be God? I told the Reader what he was like to find near the bottom of the
Sack, when he met with such sophistical Ware at the very top. But the Doctor
pretends he has something to say here in his defense; and it is this, that the
Council of Trent has expressly determined that there is no manner of doubt
left, Sess. 13. c. 5.
but that all Christians ought to give the same worship to this Holy Sacrament,
which they give to God himself. For it is not therefore less to be worshipped,
because it was Instituted by Christ our Lord, that it might be taken. But who
tells him that the Council here by the word Sacrament means only the Signs or
Accidents of Bread? Why may it not mean the Holy Victime which is dispensed
from the Altar, as St. Austin did, when he said that his Mother St. Monica had
tied her Soul fast to this Sacrament by the bond of Faith? If the Council may
be allowed to explicate its own meaning, we shall find the sense of the word to
be, the Body of Christ, and with it his Divinity, under the Sacramental Veil:
for, the reason it gives in the words immediately following, (which the Doctor
conveniently leaves out) of this adoration, is, because we believe the same God
to be present in it, of whom the Eternal Father said, Let all the Angels of God
adore him. And this is yet more plain from the 6th. Canon, where the Anathema
is denounced against those, who shall say, that in the most H. Sacrament of the
Eucharist, the only begotten of God is not to be adored with the worship of
Latria. But let the Council say what it will, Dr. St. says, that by the
Sacrament it must understand the Elements or Accidents, as the Immediate term
of that divine worship, or else the latter words, [that the Sacrament ought not
less to be adored, because it was instituted to be taken] signify nothing at
all. And why so? Do Catholics understand nothing by the Sacrament, but the
Accidents! Or was nothing instituted to be taken, but the bare signs of Bread
and Wine? Dr. St. is, or would be, an Author of great Authority; and from his
own Confession we have it, (p. 111.) that the Holy Sacrament according to
Catholics is the Body of Christ under the Accidents of Bread. These are his
own words: and if he will not believe the Council, let him believe himself,
whether he do so, or no, (...) proceeding upon his supposition, that proper
divine worship is to be given to the Accidents* he affirms, (p. 118.) that this
is not denied, that he knows of, by any who understand the Doctrine or Practice
of the Roman Church, I leave to the Reader to judge, when he shall have heard
what Bellarmin, an Author not unacquainted with the Doctrine and Practice of the
Church, says in this matter. Bellarm. de Euch. li. 4. c. 29.
There is not, says he, any one Catholic, who teaches that the External
Symbols per se, (that is, absolutely) and properly are to be adored with the
worship of Latria, but only to be reverenced with a certain inferior worship,
which is due to all Sacraments. What we affirm is, that Christ is properly and
per se to be adored with the worship of Latria, and that this adoration belongs
also to the Symbols of Bread and Wine, under which he is contained, as they are
apprehended united with him, in such manner as those who adored him apparl'd
upon Earth, did not adore him alone, but quodammodo, in a certain kind his
Garments also. For neither were they so scrupulous, as to require him to put
off his cloths, before they adored him, nor yet to separate him in thought from
them, at the time of adoration; but worshipped him absolutely, as then he was.
And then a little after, whatever difference, says he, there may be among
Divines about the manner of speaking, the Question is no other, but whether
Christ be to be adored with divine worship in the Eucharist? This is what
Bellarmin says; And, if the Doctor would not except against an Example from
civil worship, I should tell him, that his stating the Controversy between us,
concerning the adoration of Christ in the Eucharist, to be, whether the
Accidents be to be adored with proper Divine Worship which is due to God alone?
is just as if a Quaker should make the Question between him and a Protestant
concerning the worship of the King in his Robes to be, whether the Robes are to
be worshipped with the same Regal worship which is due only to the King's
Person? The subtilty, (such as it is) is Parallel in both: Only the Doctor has
the fortune to be applauded for what the poor Quaker would be laughed at, and
hissed out of the Court.

I cannot doubt but the Doctor (who is so well versed in Bell. as his
Objections show) had read these passages in him, when he subjoins, that
Catholics to answer their adversaries arguments, would seem to direct their
worship only to Christ, as under the Elements or Accidents; a pretty
self-conviction, if well observed, for who should we believe for the Doctrine
and practice of Catholics but themselves? But what he adds, that they yield,
that on the account of this corporal presence, that which appears ought to have
the same worship given to it with that which is supposed or believed, is
sufficiently convinced by what has been cited out of Bellarmin, in that
absolute sense in which the Doctor charges it upon us, to be a mere calumny,
(as Bellarmin calls it) for although he affirm, that when Christ is worshipped
under the Symbols, that adoration belongs also to the Symbols, yet he says it
is, in such manner, as the adoration given to him upon Earth in his apparel
belonged to his Garments; which he qualifies with a quodammodo, after a certain
manner; that is to say, not as it is given to Christ himself, but in an
inferior manner, as has been above declared, Part 1. chap. 10. p. 190.

. 2. After all this turning and winding to mis-represent the state of the
Controversy to be, whether on the account of Christ's corporal presence in the
Sacrament, that which appears (viz. the accidents of bread) ought to have the
same worship given to it with that which is supposed or believed, that is, with
Christ himself; He comes at length to show, that upon the Principles of the
Roman Church no Man can be assured, that he does not commit Idolatry every time
he gives adoration to the Host. To prove this, he makes use of a double Medium.
The first, That no Man can be secure that the Object is such as does deserve
divine worship. The second, That no Man can be satisfied, that he has a
sufficient reason for giving this worship to the Host. And they are both of
them impertinent to the present purpose, and quite overthrow his supposition;
for proceeding upon the Principles of the Roman Church, and supposing (as he
does at present) a divine Revelation for the presence of Christ true God and
Man in the Saccrament, he must either deny Christ himself to be adorable, or he
must grant, that the Object does deserve Divine Worship, and that there is
sufficient reason to give it. He that is too Prodigal in giving away, what in
time he may need himself, casts himself upon a necessity either of begging what
he gave, or pretending an Error in the Deed of Gift. And to these straits has
the Doctor brought himself, by his over-liberality in supposing a like divine
Revelation for Christ's presence in the Sacrament, as for his being true God.
His honor will not permit him to beg, what he so freely granted; and
therefore he takes the other course of pretending a double flaw in the
donation: and although his pretenses be excluded by the very evidence of the
deed, as it stands upon Record in his own Book, p. 111. yet I shall give them
the hearing, and show them to have nothing at all of proof in them.

1. He says, p. 120. No Man can be secure, that the Object is such as does
deserve divine worship: If you ask him why? He tells you, the Mass-Bell now
rings, the Host is to be adored, and if he should chance to believe his senses,
or harken to his reason, he becomes an Idolater by not being a Fool or a
Madman. Again, if he consider the miraculousness of the change; it is so
strange and sudden, he can hardly say that God becoming Man was so great a
wonder, as a little piece of Bread becoming God. If he be recalled from carnal
Reason to the Words of Christ, this is my body, he is told that Scripture is
very obscure, and dangerous for any one to be too confident of the sense of it;
If he be sent for the meaning of it to the unanimous consent of the Fathers; he
sees the World is as full of disputes concerning the sense of their words, as
of the Scriptures. Lastly, If he be counseled to lay aside his scruples, and
submit to the authority of the present Church, he finds that Catholics are not
agreed about that neither: Some think it enough, that it is defined by the
Pope; Others require the concurrence of a General Council, and that it be
confirmed wholly by the Pope, and does proceed in the way of a Council. So that
he sees he may spend all his life in the study and search of these things, and
yet never be satisfied in them, nor consequently in Transubstantiation it self,
which is now the Point he pretends he is not satisfied in: wherefore if this be
the only way of satisfaction, he must forbear giving adoration, or be guilty of
Idolatry in doing it. And does he not manifestly prove himself here to be in
the case of the Prodigal I lately mentioned, when supposing a like divine
Revelation of the presence of Christ in the Eucharist, as of his being true
God, he now spends no less than four whole Pages to prove that he cannot be
satisfied there is any such Revelation? Let Scholars judge of this illiberal
manner of proceeding, whilst I speak to the Argument it self. And, (not to tire
the Reader with particular Reflections upon the s^veral difficulties he starts
concerning the evidence of his sense, the miraculousness of the change, the
obscurity of Scripture, the consent of the Fathers, which have been answered
over and over by Catholic Writers,) to free my self from all scruples in the
case, I take the Authority of the present Church to be sufficient for me. For
however some Divines think it enough, that it be defined by the Pope who is
Head of the Church* Others require the concurrence of a General Council; and
that this General Council be wholly confirmed by the Pope, and does proceed in
the way of a Council: Yet I am sure that none of these are wanting in the point
of Transubstantiation. For it has been defined long ago both by Popes and
Councils, and received as lawfully defined by the whole Church Catholic, that
our Lord Christ is truly and really present in the Sacrament, by the conversion
of the Elements into his Body and Blood; and therefore (for any thing the
Doctor has said in this matter) I may securely give the same proper divine
worship to him there, which is due to his Person, without fear of Idolatry.

. 3. But because the Doctor professes that the end why he took this way, was a
hope he had, that it would abundantly add to the discovering the disparity
between the worship given to the Person of Christ, and that which is given to
the Eucharist upon supposition of Transubstantiation. I shall in the next Place
show, how he has failed of this End; and there will need no more to do it, but
to suppose a Socinian to take up his own argument, and retort it upon him in
the point of the worship of Christ, as God. And if he approve not my Answer for
good, it will be expected from him to give a better. Behold then a Socinian
proposing the argument in Dr. St.'s own Mood and Figure. The chimes now ring
all in to Church, where I must give the same divine worship to Christ, as to
the Eternal Father. But stay (says the Socinian) how can I be secure, that the
Object is such as deserves divine worship? If I should chance to believe my
senses, and hearken to my reason, which can discover nothing in him, but his
Humanity; I become an Idolater by not being a Fool, or a Mad man. Again, if I
consider the miraculous union of the Divine and Humane Nature in one Person; it
seems more strange to me, that Man should be God, than, what the Papists say,
that Bread should be converted into his Body. Must I rely on the bare words of
Christ, I and the Father are One; but I am told by no less a Man than St.
Peter, 2 Pet. 3. 16.
that there are certain things in Scripture hard to be understood, which the
unlearned and unstable deprave to their own perdition, and therefore it must
needs be dangerous for me to be too confident of the sense of it, in so
difficult a point. I have heard there have been great disputes concerning the
meaning of those words among the Primitive Christians; And What a case am I in
then, if those words do not prove it? Must I have recourse for the
interpretation of them to the unanimous consent of the Fathers? Alas, what
relief is this to my anxious mind! For I see the World is full of disputes
concerning the sense of their words, as well as the Scriptures. And I have
heard of a late Author, one Christophorus Sandius, who in a Set-Treatise
contends that the greatest part of those Fathers, who are esteemed Orthodox,
deny the Son to be consubstantially One with the Father. In this great
confusion, what ground of certainty have I to stand upon, whereby to secure my
mind from the Commission of a great sin? While I am in this Labyrinth, behold a
kind Catholic offers to give me case, and tells me these are doubts and
scruples, I ought not to trouble my self about: The Authority of the present
Church is sufficient for me. But how shall I know what he means by the
Authority of the present Church. For I find Catholics themselves are not
agreed about that neither. May I be sure, if the Pope, who is Head of the
Church say it? No, not unless he defines it? But may I be sure then? No, not
unless a General Council concur. But may I be sure if a General Council
determins it? Yes, if it be confirmed wholly by the Pope, and does proceed in
the way of a Council: But how is it possible for me to judge of that, when the
intrigues of actions are so secret: I see then, if this, or any of these, be
the only way of satisfaction, I must forbear giving the same adoration to
Christ, as to the Father, or be guilty of Idolatry in doing it. Behold here the
Doctor's argument returned upon himself; and if it have any force against the
adoration of Christ in the Eucharist, it must have the same against the worship
of Him as God. And what a case is Christianity in, if it depend upon his
solving his own Argument? But his scruples are not yet at an End.

CHAP. III.
Of Dr. St.'s Scruple about the Host's not being consecrated, for want of
Intention in the Priest; and His mistake of the true Reason of giving Adoration
to Christ in the Sacrament.

. 1. THe Doctor's next Scruple is about the Priest's Intention, or rather not
Intention to Consecrate; and I confess I never met with any Man so unevenly
scrupulous, as he is; that is, so resolute in some cases, (were he of our mind)
as in saying his Prayers to the Sun, and offering up the Host to an Image: and
yet so timorous in others, as in this of not daring to adore Christ himself,
(were he of our mind in the Point of Transubstantiation) as supposed present in
the Sacrament, for fear the Host should not be consecrated through defect or
malice of the Priest. Suppose, says he, (p. 123.) I am satisfied in the Point
of Transubstantiation, (by which you see he set himself to fight against it at
the same time that he told us he would suppose it) it is not enough for me to
know in general, that there is such a change, but I must believe particularly
that very Bread to be changed so, which I am to worship, And by what means can
I be sure of that? It is a very evil thing to be troubled with too many
scruples: While the mind is perplexed with them, the tongue runs unawares into
Contradictions. What is it else to say, that he is to worship that very Bread
which he must believe to be changed? What common sense will charge him to
honor that, which he must believe not to be there? This has a relish of the
old Leaven, that Catholics believe the Bread to be God: And I see a custom of
any thing, though it be self-contradiction will turn by degrees into a second
nature. But to let this pass, and attend to his scruple. Here he would seem to
return again to his former supposition of a like divine Revelation for Christ's
Presence in the Eucharist by Transubstantiation, as for his being true God: but
in reality he does but seem to do it. For, from his whole discourse, (p. 111.
etc.) where he supposes the same divine Revelation for Transubstantiation, as
for Christ's Divinity, it is evident he speaks not only of Transubstantiation
in general, but also in particular. What means else his first Proof, (p. 111.)
that there is a plain command in Scripture for adoring Christ himself, but not
the least intimation given that we are to worship Him in the Elements,
supposing Him present there. And again, what means his 2d.

Proof, (p. 112.) that the one gives us a sufficient reason of our worship,
viz. that he is the Eternal Son of God; but the other does not, supposing the
Bread to be really converted into the Body of Christ? Who sees not here that
the supposition is of the real and undoubted presence of Christ by the change
of the Bread into his Body? and that he does but endeavor, to take back by
parcels, what he unwarily gave away in the lump, when he raises doubts and
scruples about the certainty of the change of this or that particular Bread?
But let him contradict himself never so much, it makes nothing for us. We must
be guilty of Idolatry every time we hear Mass, unless we can be sure that there
is a change made of the bread into the Body of Christ in that very particular
Host, which is to be worshipped. And by what means can we be sure of that? For,
the Church, says he, (p. 124.) having declared that it is necessary, that he
that consecrates be a Priest, and that he have an intention of consecrating; if
either the Consecrator should chance to be no Priest, because not rightly
baptized (which is no unheard of thing) or not have an intention to consecrate,
they who worship the Host, must be guilty of Idolatry every time he celebrates.
This is the mighty scruple which torments his mind, and although the absurdness
of the Assertion, that another Man's defect or wickedness should make me incur
the crime of Idolatry whether I will or no, might suffice to make any
reasonable Man to depose so chimaerical a scruple, yet because he will not or
cannot do it, I would ask him* what kind of certainty it is he would have? If
no less than certainty of Faith, or evidence of sense will serve his turn, I
would ask again, what like certainty has a Child or a Husband that those
Persons whom they take, the one for his Father, the other for his Wife are so
in very deed? I cannot believe him so rigid a Casuist, as neither to permit a
child to do his duty to his Mother's Husband, till he have a Divine Revelation
that he is his true Father; nor a Husband to pay the conjugal debt, unless he
first have as much evidence as sense can give him, that Lia is not put in the
place of Rachel: and when that is done, perhaps a Divine Revelation may be
necessary to know whether she be not married before to another Man; for this
also is no unheard of thing. Who might not say here, as the Disciples did on
another occasion, Matthew. 19. 10. If the case of a Man with his Wife be so, it
is not expedient to marry? But as I said before, I cannot believe the Doctor
will be so rigid in this Point. But why then must we be tied up from giving
worship to Christ, as present in this or that particular Host, unless we be
certain either by evidence of sense or by Divine Revelation, that it is truly
consecrated? If the want of such a certainty ought to make us suspend our
Worship, I am sure the want of the like for true disposition, ought to make the
Communicant forbear receiving. But if he speak of such a certainty, as is
usually found in the aforesaid humane Actions, and others of the like nature;
why may not this suffice as well to secure Christians from sinning in their
adoration, as those other Persons in paying their respective duties? Does it
happen oftener that a Person supposed to be a Priest is no Priest, (because not
rightly baptized,) than that a Person supposed to be a Father is not the Man?
Or does it happen oftener, that a Priest cheats the People by having no
intention to consecrate, than that a light Hous-wife wheadles a second Man to
marry her, while her Husband unknown to him is yet alive? It is not in the
nature of Man to sin so frequently out of pure malice, as it is upon the
account of some profit or pleasure thence resulting. Why then must we be more
guilty of Idolatry (though the Host through defect, or Malice on the Priest's
side should happen not to be truly consecrated) than such a Person is of
Adultery, or a Child of undutifulness for having their own good Intentions
abused by the malice of others? Wantonness may make a Wife forget her duty; but
does not make a Child criminal in doing his, to him whom he believes to be his
Father; And the wickedness of a Priest (as there was one Judas among the
Twelve) may make him a Devil: but that cannot make me an Idolater. For whilst
my Adoration is directed not to the Bread, which I suppose not to be there, but
to the Person of Jesus Christ true God, whom I firmly believe to be in every
Host duly consecrated, and have not the least reasonable cause to suspect other
at present, the Action on my part has all that is requisite to make it good
and lawful; and is so far from being Idolatry, that it is a real honoring of
Christ, and will be so accepted. When Hephaestion was honored by a mistake for
Alexander, that great Prince was so far from condemning the Person as a
Traitor, that he took the honor as done to himself. And in case those Gentiles
who were so desirous to see our Savior, Jo. 12. 21. had either for want of a
Guide to direct them to the Person, or by the treacherous malice of a Judas
prostrated themselves at the Feet of some other: what reasonable Man would have
condemned them for Idolaters? And yet we poor unfortunate Roman Catholics, if
it should chance at any time to happen, that either the Priest be no true one,
or have no intention to consecrate, though our Intentions be never so sincere
to adore only our Lord Jesus Christ, must stand condemned of downright
Idolatry, for so the Doctor calls it (p. 124.) and that without any Proof at
all, but the old Ipse dixit, that without the Intention of the Priest in
consecrating, it can be nothing else.

. 2. The second Medium he takes (p. 125) to prove that upon the Principles of
the Roman Church no Man can be assured, that he does not commit Idolatry every
time he gives adoration to the Host, is, that no Man can be satisfied that he
has sufficient reason for giving this worship to it. And the substance of the
reason he gives, is, because if I worship Christ, says he, in the Sacrament,
it is upon account of his corporal presence, and he finds it generally agreed
by the Doctors of the Roman Church, that the humane Nature of Christ considered
alone, ought not to have divine honor given to it; and hotly disputed among
them, whether Christ's humane nature, though united to the divine, ought
abstractedly considered, to have any true divine honor given it. And what will
he infer from hence? That therefore he cannot be satisfied, that he has
sufficient reason for giving true divine honor to the humane nature of Christ
considered alone, or abstractedly, in the Sacrament? Much good may it do him.
But what is this to the purpose? Do Catholics adore the Humanity of Christ
alone, or abstractedly in the Sacrament? Do they separate, or abstract in their
minds and thoughts his Body from his Person, when they adore him there* No more
than the Wisemen did, when they adored him in the Manger, or the Apostles,
when they adored him after his Resurrection; Or, than he is adored now at the
right hand of his Father. All those Precisions and Considerations the Doctor
speaks of, are only in the Heads of the Schoolmen, when they are disputing, not
in the minds of Christians, when they are adoring. The Object they adore,
whether in the Sacrament, or out of it, is the only-begotten Son of God made
Man, without separating or abstracting one nature from another, any more than
we do the King's Body from his Soul, when we worship him. And as Mr. Thorndike
very well observes, Epil. 3. part. p. 350.
whosoever proposes not to himself the consideration of the Body and Blood of
Christ, as it is of it self, and in it self a mere Creature (which he that does
not on purpose cannot do) cannot but conceive it, as he believes it to be,
being a Christian: And consequently the primary reason of his adoration, is the
divinity there present. I, but says the Doctor, when I worship Christ as in the
Sacrament, I must worship him there upon the account of his bodily presence,
for I have no other reason, to worship him in the Sacrament, but because his
Body is present in it. And what may this mean? Have the Niceties and Precisions
of the Schools so perplexed his understanding, that he has lost the very first
Notions of Christianity? Is it not Christ's Body? Are they not the very words
of Christ, This is my Body? And is not Christ true God? How comes it to pass
then that he has no other reason to worship him in the Sacrament, but because
his Body is present in it? This indeed is the reason why his Divinity, as
hypostatically united to his Humane Nature, is present in the Sacrament; but
the reason of his being adored there is his Divinity, and not his Body.
Philosophy tells us, that it is one thing that makes a Man to be in a place,
and another, that makes him to be worshipped in that place: and yet he would
not be worshipped there for this latter, unless he were present by virtue of
the former. The speculation may not seem so clear to such as are not versed in
the Schools; but an example will make it plain. There is a Preacher in the
World much admired and honored by his Party in the Pulpit. That which makes
him to be present there, (or is the reason of his presence there,) is his
Quantity or Bodily Dimensions; but what he is admired for and honored, is his
Wit, his Eloquence, his Zeal against Papists, etc. These are the Qualities for
which I hear he is applauded, and I easily believe it. But if my Adversaries
discourse be good (whom I take to have as much Eloquence, and to be of as
subtle a wit, and of as flaming a Zeal as the other) I must tell his Admirers
they are in a very great Error, as to the reason of their admiration: and I
doubt not but to make it appear upon his own Principles. For I find it
generally agreed by all the old Philosophers, and by the Doctors also at
present of both Universities, that Quantity, or corporal dimension, considered
alone, ought not to have civil worship given to it: and I find it very
uncertain, whether the Body it self though united to the Soul, ought,
abstractedly considered, to have any true civil honor given it. But I am most
certain that the only reason why he is present in the Pulpit, is his Quantity
or Bodily dimensions; Therefore if they will honor or admire him in the
Pulpit, it must be upon the account of his bodily presence, or corporal
dimensions; and not for those other great parts and abilities for which they
have hitherto admired him in that place; for if they consider well, they have
no other reason to honor him, as in the Pulpit, but because his Body is
present in it. And I am of Opinion, that if any thing can cure them of their
Error, it will be the Parallel Argument, he brings against the worship of
Christ in the Sacrament. Viz. that because worship must be given him there upon
the account of his bodily presence, as the condition why his divinity as united
with his humane Nature is there present; Therefore his Bodily Presence and not
his Divinity united to it, must be the reason of adoration. As for what he
adds, (p. 127.) That supposing Transubstantiation his Divinity should be there
in a particular manner present to no End; I suppose he means by that particular
manner, the hypostatical union with his humane nature wherever it is: And does
it not well become a Master in Israel to affirm that such a presence of the
Divinity would be to no end, when and where himself supposes the Body of Christ
to be really and substantially present? There wants but one step more, to deny
that the hypostatical union of the Divine Nature to the Humane was necessary at
all, either for Christ's offering himself upon the Cross, or now at the right
hand of his Father; for although the Ceremony of offering him upon the Altar be
performed by the Priest, yet Christ himself is there also both Offerer and
Oblation, Priest and Victim, as the Fathers teach. [S. Greg. Niss. Orat. 1. de
Resurr. S. Ambr. in Ps. 31. 1. Chrysostom. Ho. 24. in 1. ad Cor.] Well, but the
Divinity of Christ makes not the least manifestation of it self in the
Sacrament to our carnal senses; And must this hinder us from giving him the
worship due to his Person? Is it not enough that we know Him to be there by
divine Revelation, as the Doctor at present supposes we do? What other
manifestation had the Divinity of Christ made of it self to the Baptist, when
before the appearing of the Holy Ghost he refused to Baptize him? An evident
sign that he reverenced him as the Son of God, Matthew. 3. 13, 14. Did not our
Savior himself, when St. Peter confessed him to be Christ the Son of the
living God, declare that Flesh and Blood had not revealed this to him, but his
Father which is in Heaven? And upon that very account pronounce Him Blessed?
Matt. 16. 17. But it seems the Blessing is now reversed, and instead of Blessed
are they that have not seen, and yet have believed, Jo. 20. 29. We must now
say, Blessed are they who will not believe unless they see, Dr. St. p. 561. n.
5. And what will the end of this be, but the banishing Faith and Christianity
out of the World?

. 3. After all these endeavors to wrest out of our hands the supposition he so
freely granted (p. 110.) of the same Revelation for Christ's Presence in the
Eucharist, as for his Divinity, he would bring the business at last to a
Composition, if we will beg of him to yield that the Body of Christ being
present, his Divinity is there present too. And I am not so nice, (if it will
come no cheaper way) as not to beg it of him, for Christianity's sake: but
then he adds that even upon this supposition, that Christ's Divinity is present
with his Body in the Sacrament, (p. 127.) his mind must still unavoidably rest
unsatisfied as to the Adoration of the Host. For, supposing the divine Nature
present in any thing gives no ground upon that account, to give the same
worship to the thing wherein he is present, as I do to Christ himself. But here
again he relapses into his former mistake of the Controversy, which (in spite
of the practice of Catholics, which is to adore Christ under the Accidents, in
like manner as he was worshipped in his Apparel,) he will have to be, that
proper divine worship is to be given to the Accidents: For, this is what he
means here by the Host. Let him state the Question as it ought to be, that is,
Whether Christ may not be worshipped under the Accidents, as well as in his
Garments? Or (if he will needs mix the Questions of the Schools with those of
Faith) Whether the Accidents may not be worshipped together with Christ, in
like manner as his Garments were worshipped together with Him? And the
Controversy will quickly be at an End. But, (not to tire the Reader with
following him in his Repetitions) his scruple, if I mistake not, at present,
is, why, supposing the divine nature present in any thing gives no ground to
worship every thing in which he is present; yet his presence in the Eucharist
should be a sufficient reason to worship the Accidents together with him? And
to this I give Bellarmin 's answer, lib. 4. de Euch. c. 30.
(which I take also to be the sense of Greg. de Valentia, in the place cited by
the Doctor.) Long aliter Christus est in Eucharistia, etc. That Christ is in
the Eucharist in a far different manner, than God is in other things. For in
the Eucharist there is but one only Suppositum, and that divine: All other
things there present belong to that, and in a certain manner make one with
that, though not in the same manner. (mark that) Hence it is that the whole is
rightly worshipped together, as we said before of Christ apparelled. But
although God be in all other things, yet not so, that he is one Suppositum with
them, nor is there such an Union between God and the Creature in which he is,
that they can be said to be in a manner One. By this it appears, that as Greg.
de Valentia deservedly calls this presence of Christ to the Accidents, an
admirable Conjuction, so the Doctor unjustly imposes upon Bellarmin, that he
grants as great an hypostatical union between Christ and the Accidents, as
between the divine and humane Nature; for although Bellarmin say, that all
things there present, in a certain manner make One with the Suppositum, yet he
declares expressly, that it is not in the same manner. But here the Doctor
complains of un-intelligible terms and notions used in this matter; And might
he not do the same with as much reason of the terms and Notions used by the
Schoolmen in explicating the mysteries of the Trinity and Incarnation? How
un-intelligible soever the School-terms appear to him, yet it is very easy to
understand that neither Greg. de Valentia, nor Bellarmin mean to give divine
honor to the Accidents for themselves; and yet much easier to understand what
Christian People mean, when they profess, the Object of their Adoration in the
Eucharist, to be the only begotten Son of God under the Accidents of Bread and
Wine. As for what he alleges out of Vasquez, that supposing the presence of
Christ to be the Ground of Adoration, it follows in his Opinion, that God may
very lawfully be adored by us in any created Being, wherein he is intimately
present; I have spoken to it in the 5th. Chapt. of the 1. Part: And as Vasquez
himself acknowledges the danger of that Doctrine if it should be commonly and
publicly put in practice by the People; (for possibly there may be another
consideration for Philosophical and Contemplative Men in their private
Devotions, as St. Leo there cited seems to grant) so if the Doctrine be Good,
what follows from thence is that Christ, being supposed to be really present in
the Sacrament, and in a particular manner by Transubstantiation, may most
certainly be adored in it. Vasquez was a Man of great learning, and of a
searching wit, but it is noted of him, as of Lactantius, that he was more
subtle in oppugning the Opinions of others, than solid in establishing his own.

CHAP. IV.
Dr. St.'s Fundamental Principle of judging of matters proposed to our Belief
by Sense and Reason, shown to be absurd in it self, and destructive to
Christianity.

. 1. WE come now to the Doctor's Second Proposition, that there are not the
same Motives and Grounds to believe the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, p. 130.
that there are to believe that Christ is God: which, he says, I affirm
without any appearance of reason. And he would gladly know what excellent
Motives and Reasons those are, which so advantageously recommend so absurd a
doctrine as Transubstantiation is, as to make any Man think he has reason to
believe it. He is sure, he says, it gives the greatest advantage to the
Enemies of Christ's Divinity, to see these two put together upon equal terms,
as though no Man could have reason to believe Christ to be the Eternal Son of
God, that did not at the same time swallow the greatest Contradictions to sense
and reason imaginable. This is a Topic, in which the Doctor wonderfully
delights himself (as all others have done before him who have deserted the
Faith of the Church.) We have it over and over at every turn; as if the whole
System of Christian Faith, and every particular Article of it, were to be
measured by the Standard of Sense and Reason; so that if any thing seem absurd
and contradictory to them, no grounds or motives can recommend it so
advantageously, as to make any Man think he has reason to believe it. This is
what lies at the bottom of his Discourse; and himself lays it down for the only
Principle o^ Criterium by which we are to judge of the Truth of Divine
Revelation, when in his second C^asse of Principles, he affirms, There can be
no other means imagined, p. 561. n. 5.
whereby we are to judge of the Truth of divine Revelation, but a Faculty in us
of discerning truth and falsehood in matters proposed to our Belief: which if we
do not exercise in judging the truth of divine Revelation, we must be imposed
upon by every thing which pretends to be so. The perfect discussion of this
Principle, I shall not engage my (...) in at present. The Men of Principles,
(as the Doctor calls them not without just cause) are likely enough to take it
into Consideration a second, and perhaps a third time too. At present it may
suffice to show briefly now absurd in it self, and how destructive to Christian
Religion this Principle of the Doctor's is, Viz. That we are to judge of the
truth of divine Revelation, (i.e. whether God have revealed such a thing, or
no) by exercising our Faculty of discerning truth and falsehood in matters
proposed to our belief: that is, by making our Reason the Judge, whether the
matter proposed to our belief be true or false. This is what I can understand
by the Doctor's words to be his meaning. If He can give them a better, I shall
be glad to find my self mistaken. But if this be, (as to me it seems to be) the
sense of his words, I am sorry that any thing so irrational in its self, and so
fatal to Religion, should proceed from the Pen of a Christian. For first, as I
said, it is absurd in it self, because it can by no means subsist, unless we
will equal Man's knowledge with that of God. For* if Man cannot comprehend the
depth of the knowledge and power of God, (that is, if God both know and can do,
more than Man can understand) it is evident, that the judgment of sense and
reason about the Truth of the matter proposed, can never be a ^it means to
assure him whether God have revealed it, or no; and it is as evident on the
contrary, that if it be sufficiently proposed and asserted as revealed by God,
though it seem never so absurd and contradictory to humane sense and reason, we
must submit our judgment to the belief of it, as True. 'T^s not all our
reasonings and syllogisms against the matter proposed, that can excuse us from
the Obligation of c^ptivating our Unde^standing to the Obedience of Christ. 2
Cor. 10. 5. That which seems a Camel to us, is not so much as a Gnat to the
knowledge and power of God, and therefore rather than give Him the lie, we must
strain our selves to swallow what seems to be the greatest Contradiction to
Sense and Reason Imaginable. Our first Mother Eve, by taking part with her
sense against Faith, destroyed her Self and Posterity by believing the Devil
rather than God; and what more suitable Penance for this Fault, or Cure for
this Pride, than for God to exact of us, that we should believe Him rather than
our sense? and this particularly in the point of Transubstantiation of the
Bread into the Body of our Redeemer; that as by following sense, and eating the
fruit of the Tree of the knowledge of Good and Evil, Death came upon all, both
of Soul and Body; so all may receive Life by denying the suggestions of Sense,
and eating the true food of the Body of Christ, under the form of Bread. 2dly,
It is destructive to Christianity, since if we must believe nothing, but what
our Sense and Reason can comprehend, we must lay aside our Creed, and neither
believe the Creation of the World, nor the Trinity of Persons, nor the
Incarnation of the Son of God, nor the Resurrection of the Dead: all which seem
to imply as many and great Absurdities and Contradictions, as the Doctor, for
his heart, can Object against Transubstantiation. It would be too tedious to
insist upon them all: Those who are curious may meet with them every where in
the Writings both of those who impugn, and of those who defend the Catholic
belief in those Points. Yet to give the Reader a clearer Insight into the
absurdness and malignity of this Principle of the Doctors, and how agreeable
this proceeding of his is in this Point to that of other Desertors of the
Church's Faith: I shall instance in some of the Contradictions objected against
the Mysteries of the Trinity and Incarnation; and that in the words of Dr.
Beaumont (now Master of Peter-House in Cambridge) in his most excellent Poem
called Psyche, or Love's Mystery. Verses I know, in a Book of Controversy will
seem as improper, and come as unexpected, as a Garden of Flowers in a rough and
craggy Des^rt; but a Traveller will not find fault with his Guide for leading
him thorough it, if he lead him not out of his way. My Adversary, without any
occasion given him, to please the Atheistical humor of the Wits of the Time,
could think fit to turn Spiritual Archy, and make sport with the Saints in so
profane a manner, as is no where to be paralleled in the worst of Play-Books.
And I hope after so many hard and spiny Questions of the Schools wherewith he
has perplexed the minds of his sober Readers, I may have leave to divert them
with citing a little Poetry, which does but express in Verse, what the matter
it self leads me to have said in Prose: See then how the aforesaid Dr. Beaumont
introduces a Cerinthian Heretic endeavoring to seduce Psyche (that is, the
Soul) from the belief of the Mysteries of the Incarnation and Trinity upon Dr.
St.'s Principles of Sense and Reason. Canto 15.


[213]
Blind Ignorance was grown so bold, Before Cerinthus came.
that she
Sought to persuade the World it had no eyes.
Making the lazy Name of Mystery
Instead of Demonstration suffice.
From this black Pit those monstrous Prodigies So Cerinthus calls the Mysteries
of the Trinity and Incarnation

Of Hood-winked and abused Faith did rise.
[214]
Who can imagine Heaven would e're ob'rude
Upon the Faith of Reasonable Men,
That which against all Reason does conclude,
And founded is on Contradiction?
Sure God so strange a Law did never give,
That Men must not be Men if they believe.
[219]
For though the Marvel-Mongers grant that He
Was molded up but of a Mortal Metal,
And that his substance was the same, which we
Find in our selves to be so weak and brittle:
Yet an Eternal God they make Him too,
And angry are, that we will not do so.
[220]
Thus the quaint madness of a dreaming Brain
Holds the same thing a Mountain and a Mite,
Fancies the Sun* (Light's Royal Sovereign)
To look like swarthy and ignoble Night:
Imagins wretched Worms, although it see
They crawl in D^rt, Illust^ious Kings to be.
[221]
But Heaven forbid, that we should so blaspheme
And think our God, as poor a thing as we.
How can Eternity be born in Time?
How can Infinity a Baby be?
Or how can Heaven and Earth's Almighty Lord
To Egypt fly for fear of Herod's Sword?
[226]
I know they strive to mince the matter by
Distinguishing his Natures. For their Art
Being ashamed of no Absurdity
H^mself from his own self presumes to part.
Yet we durst not admit a Deity,
Which must on a distinction builded be.
[227]
But how much more than Mad, their doctrine is,
And how transcending Pagan Blasphemy,
Who not content to make a God of This
Both Passible and Mortal Jesus, try
To thrust Him into one substantial knot
With his Eternal sire, who Him begot?
[228]
Two yet not Two, but One these Two must be,
Nay and a Third into the knot they bring,
The Spirit must come in to make up Three,
And yet these Three be but one single Thing.
Thus fast and loose they play, or even and odd,
And We a juggling Trick must have for God.
[229]
If God be One, then let Him be so still,
Why jumble we, we know not what together?
Did all the World not know their God until
This old blind Age discovered Him? Did neither
The Patriarks believe, nor Prophets see
Aright, because They took not One for Three?
[231]
Let Love and Duty make of Christ as high
And Glorious a Thing, as Wit can reach,
Provided that against the Deity
No Injury nor Sacrilege they preach;
If only on such terms He loved may be,
Him to neglect is Piety, say we.
And then a little after he concludes.
[234]
For If your Faith relies on Men, who are
Themselves but founded and built up of dust;
If yo^ by Reason's Rule disdain to square
Your P^ety, and take your God on Trust,
(Which Heaven forbid) You only are a Prize
Unto Impostor's fair-tongu'd Fallacies.
Thus does this Ingenious Person represent an Heretic in his true Colors,
arguing against the Mysteries of the Trinity and Incarnation, upon the
Principles with which Doctor St. (...) the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and
in terms so equivalent, that the Dr. seems but to have resolved into Prose what
the other wrote in Verse; as may appear from this following Parallel. It Is
Ignorance and Madness, says the Cerinthian Heretic, to believe that God can
be Three and One, and that Christ is God, Stanz. 213. 220. It Is Folly and
Madness says Dr. St. to believe Transubstantiation, (He becomes an Idolater by
not being a Fool or a Madman.) p. 120. The Mysteries of the Trinity and
Incarnation are monstrous Prodigies of abused Faith, says the Cerinthian,
Stanz. 213. Transubstantiation, says D. St. is so strange and sudden a change,
that he can hardly say, that God becoming Man was so great a wonder, as a
little piece of bread becoming God, p. 120. The Cerinthian affirms of the
Trinity and Incarnation, that they are against all reason, and founded on
Contradictions, Stanz. 214. Dr. St. affirms of Transubstantiation, that it is
absurd, and for a Man to believe it, he must swallow the greatest
Contradictions to Sense and Reason Imaginable, p. 130. In a word the Cerinthian
makes his Sense and Reason to be the Rule of his Faith, Stanz. 234. And Dr. St.
will believe nothing that seems to contradict them, p. 561. Only the Cerinthian
affirms the Doctrine of the Trinity and Incarnation to transcend
Pagan-blasphemy, which I do not see yet that Dr. St. ^ath ventured to say of
the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. Perhaps he will reply to this Parallel,
that the difficulties the Cerinthian objects against the Trinity and
Incarnation, are but seeming Contradict^ons; but those in the Point of
Transubstantiation are real ones: but then he must grant according to his
Principles, that whilst they seem to be Contradictions, they are not to be
believed by those to whom they seem so, that is, by the unlearned, who are the
greatest part. Or if they may notwithstanding believe those Mysteries, they may
much rather believe that of Transubstantiation, since it seems a greater
Contradiction, that the very self same Nature should be whole and undivided in
three distinct Persons, than that the same Body should be in many places; and
that the Invisible Word should be made Flesh, than that Bread should be
converted into that Flesh. How Dr. St. will extricate himself I know not; but
the way which Dr. Beaumont takes to secure the Soul from being startled with
these seeming Contradictions, is to introduce her Angel Guardian, Canto. 16.
conducting her to Christ's Catholic Church, the Ground and Pillar of Truth.
And upon this Ground it is, (For in his Preface, he recants aforehand, if any
thing throughout the whole Poem should happen against his Intention, to prove
discord to the Consent of Christ's Catholic Church) that he makes the Angel
persuade his Pupil to contemn all the seeming Contradictions, which crafty and
subtle Wits object against the Real Presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament,
if not against Transubstantiation it self. And because the Book is not every
where to be found (as not having been so often Printed as Dr. St.'s, because
there is no Profane Invective in it against the Persons and Lives of Gods
Saints) I shall venture to Transcribe another parcel of Verses out of it,
Canto. 12.
so proper to the present subject, as if written on purpose by the Ingenious
Author, to crush in the Egg those secret workings of Atheism and Irreligion,
which the aforesaid Principle is apt to breed in the Wits of this Age, under so
colorable a pretense, as that of not being fooled out of their Sense and
Reason.

[74]
When Jesus by his Water cleansed had
His Servant's Feet, and by his Grace their Hearts
Showing what Preparation must be made
By all who ever mean to have their Parts.
In his pure Banquet: down he sits again
And them with Miracles does entertain.
And then having described the Institution
of the Sacrament, he goes on.
[81]
Sweet Jesu! O how can thy World forget
Their Royal Savior, and his Bounty, who
Upon their Tables his own self has set;
Who in their Holy Cups fails not to flow,
And in their Dishes lie. Did ever Friend
So sure a Token of his Love commend?
[82]
Infallibly there do Thou flow and lie;
Though mortal Eyes discover no such thing*
Quick-sighted Faith reads all the Mystery,
And humble Pious Souls does easily bring
Into the Wonder's Cabinet; and there
Makes all the Jewels of this Truth appear.
[83]
She generously dares on God rely
And trust his Word, how strange so e're it be:
If Jesus once pronounces, This is my
Body and Blood; Far, far, be it, cries she,
That I should think my dying Lord would cheat
Me in his Legacy of Drink and Meat.
[84]
(His Word is most Omnipotent, and He
Can do what e're he says; and more than I
Can or would understand. What is it to me
If He transcends Humane Capacity?
Surely it well becomes Him so to do,
Nor were He God, if he could not do so;
[85]
Let Him say what He will I must deny
Him to be God, or else believe His Word;
Me it concerns not to verify
What he proclaims; I only must afford
Meek Credit, and let Him alone to make
Good, whatsoever He is pleased to speak)
[86]
Gross and unworthy Spirits sure They be,
Who of their Lord such mean Conceptions frame,
That parting from his dearest Consorts, He
No Tokens of his Love did leave with Them,
But simple Bread and Wine; a likely Thing,
And well-becoming Heavens Magnificent King.
[88]
Ask me not then, How can the Thing be done,
What power of Sense or Reason can digest it?
Fools as you are, what Demonstration
So evident as this, My God professed it?
And if you once can prove, that He can lie,
This Wonder, and Him too, I will deny.
[89]
What thank is it, that you can credit that
Which your own sense and Reason's eye reads plain?
Heaven's much to them beholden, who will not
Believe it higher is, than they can strain;
Who jealous are of God, and will not be
Induced to trust Him further than they see.
[90]
And yet had you these modest eyes of mine, The words of the Angel to the Soul.

You in this gloomy Cloud would see the Sun;
That Sun who wisely does disdain to shine
On those, who with bold prying press upon
His secret Majesty, which plainly I
Because I make no anxious search, descry.
[91]
This is the valorous Resolution
Of Gallant Faith: and this will serve to be
The Blessed Rule, by which all those must run,
Who are the Scholars of Humility.
Yet I must tell thee Psyche, itching Pride
Will not hereafter thus be satisfied:
And then having inveighed in the following Stanza's, against those, who will
needs be prying with the skill, they take for granted has filled their brains;
(that is with the Doctor's faculty of discerning Truth and falsehood) into the
manner how this Miracle is brought to pass, He concludes with these words in
favor of Transubstantiation.

[99]
It is in vain to tell these Wranglers how
Jesus could graft cold Stones into the stock
Of Abraham, and make them fertile grow
In Israelites; or that the Bread he took
In's daily Diet, was not wholly spent,
But part into his Body's substance went.
[100]
In vain to tell them, how into his Blood
The Wine he drank was changed day by day.
For though such speculations understood
With prudent Reverence might make easier way
Unto the Mystery; yet Wranglers will
Because they will be so, be Wranglers still.
This and much more to this Purpose, (which not to surfeit the Reader with too
many delicacies I omit) says the Author of that Illustrious Poem; in which to
the satisfaction of all that read it himself has made appear to the World,
what his Modesty made him willing to expect rather from others, that a Divine
Theme is as capable and happy a subject of Poetical Ornament, as any Pagan or
Humane device whatsoever. And would the Gallants of both Sexes employ as many
of their precious Hours in reading this excellent Piece, as they do in Romances
and Play-Books, I dare be bold to affirm, (though perhaps I shall not be
credited) They would find not only more substance, but more delight in this
than in the best of them. But to return to my present business. My design was
to let the Reader see, how far my Adversary's beloved Principles of Sense and
Reason, are from being fit Umpires, to judge of matters proposed as of divine
Revelation; particularly in what relates to the presence of our Savior in the
Eucharist, and I thought I could not do it better, than in the words of this
learned and Ingenious Author, whose whole Discourse seems but a Descant upon
those words of St. Chrysostom, when speaking of this Mystery to the People of
Antioch, Hom. 60. ad pop.
he says, Let us obey God in all things, and not gainsay Him, though what is
said, seem to contradict both our Imaginations and Eyes. Let his word obtain
more credit from us, than our thoughts or sight. And thus let us behave our
selves in the Mysteries (that is in the most Holy Sacrament) not beholding only
those things which lie before us, (viz. the Symbols of Bread and Wine) but
holding fast his words. For his Word is Infallible but our sense is easy to be
deceived. That never fails, but this most frequently mistakes. Because therefore
the Word says. This is my Body, let us obey and believe and behold Him with
the eyes of our Understanding. If the Doctor will not do so, but will have his
Readers to measure matters of Faith by the Rule of Sense and Reason, and not
trust God farther than they can see with them, I am sure he gives a far greater
advantage to the Enemies of the most Holy Trinity and Christ's Divinity by so
unChristian a Principle, than we can possibly do by asserting a like divine
Revelation for his being present in the Eucharist, as for his being true God,
notwithstanding the seeming contradictions that occur in it.

But perhaps the Doctor w^ll say, that I am mistaken all this while, and that
he meant no such thing by the use of Reason: For I remember now, that when upon
his Asserting, In his 3d. Answ. to the 1. Quest. p. 7.
that Catholics expose the Faith of Christians to a great uncertainty, by
denying to Men the use of their Judgment and Reason, as to the matters of Faith
prop^sed by a Church when they must use it in the choice of a Church: (which if
it say any thing to the purpose, it must be this, that because Men must make
use of their reason to find out the true Ground of believing (which Catholics
affirm to be the Church) therefore they must believe nothing which the Church
proposes as a matter of Faith, but what the Faculty in them (called reason) of
discerning Truth and Falsehood in matters proposed to our belief, shall judge to
be true in it self; for otherwise how does it follow that they expose the Faith
of Christians to uncertain^y?) when I say upon this assertion of his, I
supposed (and clearly enough I think) that the use he would have of reason, was
to believe nothing, but what his reason could understand, He assures me (p.
542.) upon his word that he meant no such thing, for I believe, says he, an
Infinite Being, and all the Doctrines revealed by it in H. Scriptures, although
I cannot reconcile all particulars concerning them to those Conceptions we call
Reason. But here I observe first, (as no very great sign that he means not by
the use of Reason, what I supposed) that he does not tell us of any one
particular Article he believes with that terrible condition, unless he mean he
cannot reconcile all particulars concerning the existence of a Deity; but
huddles them up in a blind Universal, that he believes all the Doctrines
revealed by God in the H. Scriptures; as if it were enough for a Christian to
believe in general all that God has revealed in Scripture, without troubling
himself about the Sense of any thing in particular, for fear of over-straining
his Reason to swallow something that may seem a Contradiction. And I confess
the Letter of the Scripture may be a sufficient Rule of such a Faith. 2dly,
This Assertion of his exposes the Faith of Christians to as great uncertainty
as that he charges upon Catholics; by its denying to Men the use of their
Judgment and Reason as to matters of Faith revealed by God in the Scriptures,
when they must necessarily use them to find out the Scriptures, and the
existence of a Deity. For whether the Scripture or the Church be supposed to be
the Ground of believing, the case is the same as to the Point of Reason. Men
must be allowed the use of their Judgment and Reason in the search of both. And
therefore he must either acknowledge his Charge to have been groundless when he
taxed Catholics for exposing Faith to uncertainty; or he must grant to Men,
(though it be with contradicting himself, which is much easier to do, than to
swallow the least seeming Contradiction in a matter of Faith) that they may and
ought to make use of their discerning Faculty, as to the truth or falsehood of
matters proposed to our belief, which I confess I take to be the same, as to
believe no more than their Reason can comprehend: and so if Reason chance to
meet with some seeming Contradiction, with which it is not able or willing to
grapple, the Article ought and must be exploded for such a monstrous Prodigy of
hood winked and abused Faith* as no Man can imagine God would e're obtrude upon
the Faith of Reasonable Men.

But here again perhaps he will say, that although God may impose upon us an
Obligation of believing against the Conceptions of our Reason, yet he cannot do
it against the suggestion of our sense, because, as he asserts, p. 540. This
would be to overthrow all certainty of Faith, where the matters to be believed
depend upon matt^r of Fact. But here I would desire to know what Angel from
Heaven revealed this Doctrine to him. Suppose in the case of the two Disciples
at Emmaus, that our Savior had vanished out of their sight, before he brake
bread, might he not h^ve told them afterward that it was He who had appeared
to them in a disguise, without overthrowing all the certainty of Faith, where
matters to be believed depend upon matter of Fact? St. Chrysostom above cited
I am sure was of another mind in the very point of Christ's real presence in
the Sacrament, when he bids us obey God in that mystery, though what he say
seem to contradict our thoughts and eyes. And so was St. Cyril too, when he
exhorts Christians not to consider it as naked Bread and Wine, for it (...)
Blood of Christ according to the words of Christ himself. And although sense do
suggest this to the^, (viz. that it is Bread) yet let Faith confirm thee. Do
not judge of the thing by thy taste, but know, and hold for most certain, that
this Bread which is seen of us, is not Bread, though the taste judge it to be
Bread, but the Body of Christ, and that the Wine which is seen by us, although
it seem Wine to the sense of tasting, notwithstanding is not Wine, but the
Blood of Christ. This is what these Holy Fathers teach in this matter; and with
great reason; for as God is not only God of the Hills, 3 Kings 20.
but also of the Valleys; So is he God not on^y of our Reason, but of our
Senses also. And if the Antidote his Goodness has pr^scrib'd to Cure our
Corrupt Nature, be prepared in such a manner as requires the captivating of our
Sense as well as of our Understanding, who shall question either his Wisdom or
Power? He has said, This is my Body, though it appear to us to be bread. And
this being but one Exception from the General Rule of Sensation; why that
should overthrow all certainty of Faith, more than so many exceptions, as the
Trinity and other Mysteries lay upon the General Rules of our Reasoning, I
leave to all Men of sense and Reason to judge. O but this is the strangest of
Miracles, and Miracles ought to be the objects of sense, I grant it of such
Miracles, as are done for the Conversion of Unbelievers; but this is not done
upon such an account, but for the Sanctification of those who believe already.
And for these it is enough that Christ has said, It is his Body. They know
very well the danger of not believing him more than their senses. And that
others may know it also, I shall set it before them in the words of St.
Epiphanius, no less than 1300. Years ago. We see (says he speaking of the
Blessed Sacrament) that It is neither equal, In Ancor. Circ. Med.
nor like in proportion or Image to his Flesh, to the Invisible Deity, to the
lineaments of a Body, for this is of a round form, and insensible according to
power. And yet because he was pleased to say through Grace, This is my Body,
every one believes his saying. For, who believes not that it is his very true
Body, falls from Grace and Salvation. Thus much to the Doctors Principles of
Sense and Reason. Let us now see what he says against the Grounds and Motives
of Transubstantiation.

CHAP. V.
A Check to the Doctor's bigg words against the Grounds of Transubstantiation;
with a new Example of reporting faithfully (as he calls it) the Words and Sense
of an Author.

. 1. TO show there are not the same Grounds and Motives for Christ's presence in
the Eucharist by Transubstantiation, as for his Divinity, my Adversary
instances in Three. 1. The Authority of the Roman Church. 2. Catholic
Tradition. 3. Scripture. And for the first of these, Viz. The Authority of the
Roman Church, if it have any at all, it stands against the Doctor for
Transubstantiation, and that so evidently, that he is forced to take the
confidence (p. 130.) utterly to deny that to be any ground of believing at all.
For my part I believe every sober Person of his own Party will judge he had
much better have said nothing at all. And I cannot but think how St. Austin,
who calls the Chair of Peter that Rock, In Ps. cont. Part. Donat. Ep. 162.
which the proud Gates of Hell do not overcome: and professes that the
Principality of the Apostolic Chair did always conserve its vigor in the
Roman Church, would have startled to hear one single Doctor so pertly deny it
to be any Ground at all of believing. How St. Hierome, who writing to Pope
Damasus, says, Ep. ad Damas.
I know that upon this Rock the Church is built; and whosoever eats the Lamb
out of this House is Profane, etc. would have whetted his style more against
him for denying her Authority to be any Ground of believing at all, than ever
he did against Vigilantius, for deriding Invocation of Saints, Veneration of
Relics, or Lighting Candles at Noonday in the Church, etc. And how St.
Irenaeus would have excluded him out of the Society of Christians, Li. 3. c. 3.
for this peremptory behavior, when he affirms it necessary for all other
Churches (convenire) to have recourse, and agree with the Roman by reason of
its more eminent Principality. That this was the Dignity and Prerogative of the
Roman Church in the time of these Holy Fathers, the Doctor himself cannot deny;
and if he pretend she is fallen from the Purity she then enjoyed, it is but
what the Donatists his Predecessors in this point, said above twelve hundred
years ago, when (as St. Austin tells us) they called the Apostolic Chair, Li.
1. cont. lit. Petilian. c. 51.
the Chair of Pestilence, because it opposed their Novelities, as it does his
at present. And although the Challenge have been often made, yet none of her
Adversaries have ever been able to show the time when she fell from he^
Primitive Purity, either into Schism, or Heresy. Nor yet before what Tribunal
her cause was examined, or by what Judge she has been condemned, unless by
themselves, who are her Accusers; whereas not only Piety, but even Natural
Reason teaches, that no particular Man is to be condemned, much less deprived
of what he stands possessed, till his cause be Juridically heard and sentenced.
Nor ought any Man to be Judge in his ^wn cause, much less to execute the
sentence given by himself: All which the New-Reformers in England, France,
Germany, etc. have done in denying the Authority of the Roman Church, and
setting up for themselves.

. 2. But now instead of making Good his Assertion, Viz. That the Authority of
the Roman Church is no ground of believing at all; he desires, he says, with
all his heart to see this Authority proved: which is just what all other
Accusers do when their Proofs fail, to call upon ^he Defendant to prove his
Title, which after a long Possession ought in all Law to stand Good and Valid,
till the Accuser can prove it to be otherwise. Cromwell might with much more
reason have summoned the King to prove his Title to the Crown after a
Prescription of 500. Years, than the Doctor can exact it from the Church to
prove her Authority, of which she has been in Possession a far longer time.
Olim possideo, Prior possideo was the Church's Plea in Tertullian's time. It Is
their part then to prove, who are the Accusers; yet Catholic Authors to
satisfy, if possible, the importunity of the Church's Adversaries, have receded
from the Rigor of this Plea, and written large Volumes in Justification of her
Authority; Particularly the two learned Cardinals, Bellarmin and Perron: And
now very lately Mr. E. W. (The Book is called Religion and Reason, and being
written particularly against the Doctor, expects his Answer.) These he may
consult at his leisure; I shall only at present remind him of what I have
proved already at his request in the first Chapter of the first Part, (to which
I refer the Reader,) Viz. That a Christian by virtue of his being so, is bound
to be of the Communion of the Roman Church: And then subsume; But every
Christian is bound to submit to the terms of Communion of that Church, whose
Communion by being a Christian he is bound to be of. Therefore every Christian
by virtue of his being so, is bound to submit to the terms of Communion
required by the Roman Church: And this the Doctor knows (for he often complains
of it as a great violence put upon his Sense and Reason) to be a submission to
her Decrees in matters of Faith; and particularly in the Point of Christ's
presence in the Eucharist by Transubstantiation, as well as of his being the
same True and Consubstantial God with his Father.

. 2. The Second Ground or Motive he Instances in, (and I suppose he will deny
this too to be any ground of believing at all) is Catholic Tradition. This
done, he bids me again, to prove if I can (as if it belonged not at all to him
who is the Accuser to prove his Action; or as if it had been some new point
which no Catholic Author had ever yet attempted to prove) that
Transubstantiation was a Doctrine received in the Universal Church from our
Savior's time: and here, he says, when I please he shall join issue with me,
And if I think fit to put the Negative upon him, he will undertake to instance
in an Age, since the first Three Centuries, wherein if the most learned Fathers
and Bishops (yea of Rome it self) be to be credited, Transubstantiation was not
believed. These are bigg words indeed, and the Doctor might have done well to
have remembered what the King of Israel answered to the proud message of the
King of Syria, 3 Kings 20. 11.
Let not him that girdeth on his Harness, boast himself as he that puts it
off. But it is no new Artifice in our Adversaries, then to speak biggest, when
there is least cause for it; as I shall make appear my Adversary does in this
matter from the very Confession of Protestants themselves: Which kind of proof
is looked upon by all sober Men, as very proper both to satisfy the Judgment
of an Impartial Reader, and also to abate the boasting of over confident
Spirits. For, as Bishop Hall says, One blow of an Enemy dealt to his Brother,
Peace of Rome, Ep. dedic. fol. 1.
is worth more than many from an adverse hand. And upon this account it is,
that when Bellarmin makes use of the like proof, (that is, undertakes to prove
the Roman Church to be the true Church of God, by the Confession of
Protestants,) Dr. Field says, surely if he can prove, Of the Church p. 182.
that we confess it to be the true Church, he needs not to use any other
arguments. Let us see then what Protestants say in this Point. And first that
Transubstantiation was a Doctrine received in the Universal Church from the
time of Berengarius, that is 600. Years ago, is scarcely denied by any that I
know of. Mr. Fox himself acknowledges, Act. Monum. Printed Ann. 1526. p. 1121.
that about that time the denying of it began to be accounted Heresy, and in
that number, says he, was first one Berengarius, who lived about Anno 1060.
And Mr. Perkins allows it a longer Date, when he says that during the space of
900 Years the Popish Heresy had spread it self over the whole World. Expos.
Symh. p. 266.
2dly, That it had remained in quiet possession from the Year 850. (that is 200
Years before) until the time of Berengarius is confessed by Joachim Camerarius;
Hist. Narrat. p. 161.
as also that although it had been called into Question before by the prlvate
Writings of some, yet the first that publicly impugned it was Berengarius.
3dly. That Damascene in the beginning of the 8th. Century, and Theophylact (who
though he be not so ancient, yet his Authority is much esteemed by learned Men,
because he is looked on as an Abridger of St. Chrysostom) did plainly incline
to Transubstantiation, is confessed by Ursinyus. Commonefact. p. 211.
So is it of St. Gregory in the 6th. Age by Dr. Humfrey, Jesuitism. p. 2. Rat.
5. p. 626.
when he says, that he and St. Austin the Apostle of England, brought
Transubstantiation into the English Church. In the fifth Age Eusebius Emissenus
is taxed by the Centurists, to have spoken not commodiously (viz. for their
purpose) of Transubstantiation. Cent. 4 c. 10. Col. 985.
The like is affirmed by them Cent. 5 col 517
of St. Chrysostom in the same Age, and of St. Ambrose Cent. 4. c. 4. col. 295.
in the fourth; of S. Cyprian in the third by Ursinus, Commonefact. p. 211. and
218.
of Tertullian and Origin in the second by the forenamed Centurists, Cent. 3.
col. 58. 260.
and S. Ignatius in the first is acknowledged by sundry Protestants Hamelman.
de Trad. Apost. c. 746. Chemn. Exam. part. 1. p. 94.
to have said of certain Heretics of his time, That they do not admit
Eucharists and Oblations, because they do not confess the Eucharist to be the
Flesh of our Savior Jesus Christ, which Flesh suffered for our Sins; an evident
sign that all those who held the Flesh of Christ to be true Flesh, and not
Fantastical, believed also the Eucharist to be that very true Flesh.

This is what Protestants themselves confess of the most eminent Fathers of
God's Church in each Age from our Saviors time concerning the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, as I find them cited in two Treatises, the one called The
Protestants Apology for the Roman Church; the other, The Progeny of Catholics
and Protestants; whose Authors I never heard were taxed of insincerity in their
quotations: And if it be true, what Dr. Field says of Bellarmin, that if he
could prove that Protestants confess the Roman to be the true Church, he needed
not to use any other arguments, I might supersede any farther proof of this
matter, and leave the Doctor to join issue with his Fellow-Brethren.

But the Reader perhaps may desire to see the Testimonies themselves of those
Fathers, which were so pregnant as to force such learned Men of the Protestant
Party to confess that they taught the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. And in
order to his satisfaction in this Point, I shall set down one Testimony of each
Father in the same order as they stand cited above, and but One to avoid
Prolixity.

TESTIMONIES OF THE FATHERS FOR TRANSUBSTANTIATION.
IN the beginning of the Eighth Century, St. Jo. Damascen, li. 4. de fid. c.
14. The Bread and Wine and Water are by the Invocation and Coming of the Holy
Ghost, changed supernaturally into the Body and Blood of Christ: And with him
agrees Theophylact, The Bread is transformed by the Mystical Benediction, In
cap. 6. Joan.
and the coming of the Holy Ghost, into the Flesh of our Lord.

At the end of the Fifth and beginning of the Sixth Century, St. Gregory. Our
Creator well knowing our Infirmity, Paul. Diacon. in ejus vita.
by that Power, with which he made all things of nothing, by the Sanctification
of his Spirit, converts the Bread and Wine mixed with Water (their proper
species or figure remaining) into his Flesh and Blood.

In the Fifth Eusebius Emissenus, and St. John Chrysostom. The former says,
Before Consecration, there is the Substance of Bread and Wine, Sermon. de corp.
dom.
but after the words of Christ, it is the Body and Blood of Christ. For what
wonder that he who created them with his Word, should convert or change them
after they were created? The latter, The things we propose are not done by
Humane Power: Hom. 83. in Matthew.
We hold but the place of Ministers, but he that sanctifies and changes them
is Christ himself.

In the Fourth Century St. Ambrose* and because this is the Age I suppose the
Doctor pitches upon, when he says he will undertake to instance in an Age,
since the first three Centuries, Wherein if the most learned Fathers and
Bishops who lived in it are to be credited, Transubstantiation was not
believed; I shall be somewhat larger in citing the words of St. Ambrose, and
also add other Testimonies of Fathers of the same time to his, that the Reader
may see what Issue his Undertaking is like to have in this matter. First, Then
St. Ambrose, as if he foresaw my Adversaries objection, li. de Initiand. c. 9.
puts it down in these formal words. You will say perhaps, How do you prove to
me that I receive the Body of Christ, when I see another thing? And the way he
takes to Answer it, is by comparing the change made here in the Nature of the
Bread, with the examples of those miraculous changes, which were wrought by
Holy Men of Old in the Natures of other things, as of Moses's Rodd being turned
into a Serpent, the Waters of Egypt into Blood, etc. From whence he infers,
that if the Benediction of those who were but pure Men, was of such force, as
to change Nature, What must we say of that divine Consecration, where the very
words of our Lord and Savior do operate? -- Thou have read, says he, of the
works of the Creation, how God spoke the Word and they were made, he commanded
and they were created, (that is, produced out of nothing) The Word therefore of
Christ which of nothing could make that to be which was not, can it not change
those things which are (viz. Bread and Wine) into that which before they were
not, (viz. his own Body and Blood?) surely it is not a less matter to give new
natures to things out of nothing, than to change them after they are made. --
Again, You will say perhaps, my Bread is usual Bread, No, (says he) this Bread
is Bread before the Sacramental words; li. 4. de Sacram. c. 4.
When the Consecration is performed, of Bread is made the Flesh of Christ. --
He spoke the Word and it was made; he commanded and it was created. -- And that
we may not doubt he meant it was made his true Flesh, he says, As our Lord
Jesus Christ is the true Son of God, li. 6. c. 1.
not as Men are by Grace, but as the Son, of the substance of his Father; so it
is his very true Flesh, as himself has said, which we receive, and his very
true Blood which we drink. This and much more does St. Ambrose write of this
subject; so that no Man need to wonder, if the Centurists say, he wrote not
well of Transubstantiation: Cent. 4. c. 4. col. 295.
And I have either read or heard it reported of Calvin that he wished the Devil
had struck the Pen out of St. Ambrose's hand, when he wrote those Books of the
Sacraments. But let us now see what other Fathers of the same Age teach
concerning this Point. S. Cyril, Orat. 4. C.
Our Savior, says he, sometime changed Water into Wine, and shall we not
think him worthy of our belief, that he changed Wine into his Blood? S. Gregory
Nyssen. We do rightly believe that the Bread sanctified by the Word of God,
Orat. magn. Catech. c. 37.
is changed into the Body of God the Word. By virtue of his Benediction he
changes the nature of the things which are seen (Bread and Wine) into that,
Viz. his own Body. S. Gaudentius. Tract. 2. de Exodus
The Maker and Lord of Natures, who produces Bread out of the Earth, does
again of Bread, because he can, and has promised to do it, make his own Body;
and He who made Water of Wine, makes of Wine his own Blood. These are Fathers
who lived in the Age immediately following the three first Centuries, to whom I
might add St. Chrysostom above cited, (who flourished in this Century, though
he dyed in the beginning of the next) and others; but these may suffice to let
the Reader see, (if this be the Age which the Doctor intends to instance in)
how unlikely it is he should make good what he asserts, that Transubstantiation
was not believed in it.

In the Third Century St. Cyprian says, The Bread which our Lord gave to his
Disciples, Sermon. de coena Dom.
being changed not in shape or figure, but in nature, was by the Omnipotency of
the Word made Flesh. And Ursinus confesses, There are many sayings in him
which seem to affirm Transubstantiation. Commonefact. p. 211. and 218.
And Tertullian in the same Age, li. 4. in Marcion.
says, that our Lord having taken Bread made it his own Body, by saying, This
is my Body: and St. Ignatius in the first, confesses the Eucharist to be the
Flesh of Christ which suffered for our sins. Ep. ad Smyrn.
And now let the Reader judge whether those learned Protestants above cited,
had reason to affirm of these Fathers (though they taxed them of error for it)
that for what appears by their words they believed and taught the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation. I know the Doctor will not want many a pretty artifice to
obscure, if possible, and elude the force of these Testimonies, but the
Confession of his Brethren will still be a Potent Prejudice against him. Nor
can he ever have the courage to deny, but that the words taken as they sound,
seem evidently at least to teach the Doctrine of Transubstantiation; and yet
(what is highly observable in this case) this being a matter of so great
consequence, that Dr. Morton confesses, Prot. Appeal. li. 2. p. 105.
if it be defensible, Protestants must stand chargeable of Heresy; but if it
may be confuted, the Romanists must necessarily be condemned of Idolatry: None
of those Fathers, who are cited by Protestants as Abettors of
Transubstantiation, were ever taxed of Error for what they asserted by any of
their Contemporaries, whom we know to have been very jealous not only of new
doctrines, but of any new forms of words; or by those who lived in the Ages
after them: nor yet did the Greeks move any dispute about this Point in the
Council of Florence; whereas Berengarius no sooner began to broach the
contrary, but immediately the whole Church, as the Writers of that time
witness, was startled at the Novelty, and condemned it as Heresy, as Mr. Fox
above cited witnesses.

. 4. But what if the Doctor shall deny all this, that is, both the Testimonies
of the Fathers, and the Confession of his Brethren to be sufficient to prove
Transubstantiation to have been a Doctrine received in the Universal Church
from Christ's time? To show the unreasonableness of such a denial, I would
propose this case to his Consideration, and the Readers. Viz. In supposition
that a Controversy arise in this present Age about the sense of a Law, which
was made 500. Years ago, and that a considerable number of those who started
the Controversy, should confess, that for the last two hundred years the
contrary to what they maintain, was generally received in the Kingdom as the
sense of the Law, and should further confess that the most eminent Lawyers of
the former Ages, from the first enacting of the Law, held the same with the
latter; Nor had there ever been any disagreement or opposition among them in
that Point; whether it be not a sufficient proof, that what they taught to be
the sense of the Law, was generally received to be the sense and meaning of it,
from the beginning? The Testimonies themselves of those Ancient Lawyers would
be conviction enough: how much more when strengthened by the Confession of the
Adverse Party it self? Now if this be so in the delivery of the sense of a
humane Law, where it happens very often that great Lawyers may be and often are
of different judgments; how much more, in the delivery of a divine Doctrine,
where the Pastors of the Church are bound to deliver what they received, and
the succeeding Age is still bound to receive what they delivered? Surely, if we
add to this the Confession of the very Adversaries themselves, the Proof (as
St. Irenaeus says) must be true and without contradiction. Adv. haer. lib. 4.
c. 14.


. 5. But if the Doctor will still persist in the denial of so Evident a Proof;
because the Proposition is comparative between the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, and that of Christ's Divinity, as to its general reception
in the Church, I must desire him soberly to consider, how much less St.
Athanasius thought sufficient to prove this latter to be a Catholic Tradition.
For having cited the Testimonies of four Fathers only for the Consubstantiality
of the Son with his Father, viz. Theognostus, Dionysius Alexandrinus, De
Decret. Nicen. Synodi.
Dionysius Romanus, and Origin, he concludes with an Ecce. Behold, we
demonstrate, says he, this Doctrine to have been delivered from Fathers to
Fathers, as it were by hand. And St. Austin using the like Argument in the
point of original sin, Contr. Julian. li. 1. c. 2. etc.
first makes this Preface, I will allege, says he, a few Testimonies of a few
of the Fathers, with which nevertheless our Adversaries will be constrained to
blush and yield, if either any fear of God, or shame of Men can overpower in
them so pervicacious an obstinacy. And then having produced the Testimonies of
five or six of the Latin Fathers, he tells Julian against whom he wrote, that
that part of the World ought to suffice him, (that is, to make him yield it to
be the Catholic Faith) in which our Lord was pleased to crown with a most
glorious Martyrdom the First (or Prince) of the Apostles. And then to show
that the Faith of the Greek Church was the same with that of the Latin in this
Point, he cites the Testimonies only of three Greek Fathers; and to the first
of them; viz. St. Greg. Nazianzen, he immediately adds, This is so great a Man,
that neither he would say this but from the Christian Faith most notorious to
all; neither would they have esteemed him so Venerable, if they had not
acknowledged that he spoke these things out of the rule of the most known
Truth. And now let the Reader judge whether when we produce a far greater number
of most manifest Testimonies of the Fathers of several Ages, teaching without
any Contradiction that the Bread is changed into the Body of Christ by
Consecration; and this confessed of some of the most Eminent of them in every
Age by Protestants themselves, we do not more than sufficiently prove that it
was a Doctrine received in the Universal Church from our Savior's time? And,
if he think yet he can produce greater Evidence for the Doctrine of Christ's
Divinity, being universally received in the Church from Christ's time, the
early contest of the Arrians about that Point, their Power, and Continuance for
so many Ages, compared with the open and undisturbed delivery of the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, may soon convince him of the vanity of such an undertaking.

. 6. The 3d. and last Ground he instances in, is Scripture; and this, he says,
he does and shall acknowledge for his only Rule of Faith in spite of all
pretenses to infallibility either in Church or Tradition. When he has
considered well, what Mr. E. W. has said to him upon this Subject in his two
Learned Treatises, (Protestancy without Principles, and Religion and Reason) I
hope this spite of his may be abated. But in the mean time what does he
allege out of this his only Rule of Faith (as he will have it) against
Transubstantiation? Not so much I can assure you as one single Text. But
because Bellarmin produces One, and but One for that Point, (viz. the words of
Christ, This is my Body.) whereas he cites many for proof of Christ's Divinity,
he will appeal to him, whether there are the same Grounds and Motives from
thence to believe Transubstantiation, as there are the Divinity of Christ. But
if Catholics do not acknowledge Scripture alone to be the Rule of Faith, what
am I concerned whether Bellarmin produce many Texts, or but One, or none at
all? Does not the Doctor himself say, that some of our Religion have said, that
Transubstantiation could not be proved from Scripture alone; and have not
others of it said as much of the Consubstantiality of the Son with the Father?
I am sure this was believed before the Scripture was written; and so Scripture
could not be the Rule of believing it. But then again, what if Bellarmin
produced but One Text of Scripture for Transubstantiation, therefore can there
no more be produced? Or, if no more could be produced, would there not be the
same Ground of believing from thence, supposing I am certain of the true sense
of th^s One, as if there were many? Are we not bound as much to believe God
when he says a thing once, if we be sure of the true sense of what he says, as
when he says the same twice or thrice? And were not all those places cited by
Bellarmin, for Christ's Divinity, as much impugned by the Arrians, as this, (of
Christ's words, This is my Body.) is by Calvin and his Accomplices? Why then must
I, because Bellarmin produces out of Scripture but one Text for
Transubstantiation, and many for Christ's Divinity, acknowledge there are not
the same Grounds or Motives to believe the one as the other?

. 7. I, but Bellarmin himself acknowledges, that there is some obscurity or
ambiguity in the very Text he cites; for after he had spent the greatest part
of the Chapter against the Lutherans, li. 3. de Euch. c. 19.
He concludes it thus, says the Doctor, p. 131. Although there be some
obscurity or ambiguity in the words of our Lord, yet that is taken away by
Councils and Fathers, which is a plain Indication he thought, the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation could not be proved from Scripture alone. But stay, am I
bound to believe Dr. St. upon his bare word? May I not look into Bellarmin to
see what he says, without incurring a sin of rash judgment against my
Neighbor? The Book (God be thanked) is not so hard to be found, as that of
Trigautius. I ventured to look the place upon the Remembrance of some former
dexterity I had noted in him in citing of Authors, and (although I could hardly
believe my Eyes, nor did not, till I looked into another Edition) I found
Bellarmin not to say what he affirms him to say, but in reality the contrary.
For after he had proved from the words of our Lord, the Real Presence of his
Body in the Sacrament against the Calvinists, li. 1. de Euch. c. 1. and in the
present Chapter had shown against the Lutherans, that Transubstantiation is
absolutely inferred from the very same words, being to carry on his Proofs from
Scripture to Councils and Fathers, he concludes the Chapter in these words, and
that by way of Transition:

Add, quod LICET in verbis Domini ESSET aliqua obscuritas, vel ambiguitas, ea
tamen sublata est per multa Concilia Catholicae Ecclesiae, and Patrum
Consensum. Add, says he, that ALTHOUGH THERE WERE (or should be, which is as
much as to say, suppose there were) some obscurity or ambiguity in the words of
our Lord, yet that is taken away by the many Councils of the Catholic Church,
and the Consent of Fathers. And now I appeal to the Reader, whether Dr. St.
have not given us here a very rare example of reporting faithfully, (as he
calls it in his Preface) the words and sense of an Author. Is it all one to
say, although there be, and although there should be? He that says, Although
there be some ambiguity in the words, supposes them to be ambiguous: He that
says Although there should be some Ambiguity in them, supposes them not to be
ambiguous. And this is the case between Bellarmin and the Doctor. Bellarmin
only puts the case they were ambiguous, and by so doing supposes them not to be
so: and the Doctor makes him acknowledge them de facto to be ambiguous: which
is just, as if when the Doctor himself says, (p. 111.) supposing there were the
same divine Revelation of Transubstantiation and of Christ's Divinity, etc. I
should infer, that he acknowledges the Revelation to be the same, de facto, in
both. It Is manifest then, that by this Translation he has corrupted both the
words and sense of Bellarmin. And this not by mistake, as appears but too too
plainly, for that himself makes the words of Bellarmin, as he translates them,
to be a plain Indication, that he thought Transubstantiation could not be
proved from Scripture alone; whereas had he reported them as they stand in
Bellarmin, (LICET ESSET) Although there were, (or should be) some ambiguity in
the words of our Lord, etc. They had been a plain Indication, that Bellarmin
for his part thought that he had sufficiently proved the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation out of Scripture. And now the Reader sees what the Doctor
meant in his Preface, by his design (as he calls it) to report faithfully: And
however he intended to make use of it for his advantage, yet it is a very plain
Indication of what shifts and artifices they are fain to avail themselves of,
who will maintain a bad cause. To conclude, I shall give him the Opinion of Dr.
Tailor in this Point more faithfully: who in his Liberty of Prophesying, Sect.
20. n. 16. says, that Catholics have a Divine Revelation, (viz. This is my
Body.) whose literal and Grammatical sense, if that were intended (is so clear
and evident for Transubstantiation, that it) would warrant them to do violence
to all the Sciences in the Circle.

CHAP. VI.
Dr. Taylor's Argument in behalf of Catholics, supposing them mistaken,
Un-answered by Dr. St. His Parallel of such a supposed mistake with that of
Idolaters, shown to be a real and very gross mistake in himself.

. 1. HAving shown in my Reply that the Dr's Argument by which he would prove
the Church of Rome guilty of Idolatry for adoring our Lord Christ in the
Eucharist, would be of equal sorce srom the Pen of an Arrian, against the
adoration of him, as God, wherever present; I added, (p. 20.) that supposing
Catholics should be mistaken in their belief, (And I hope the Doctor will not
infer from hence, that I acknowledge them to be mistaken, de facto,) yet so
eminent and learned a Man among the Protestants, as Dr. Tailor, denies it would
follow from thence, that they were Idolaters. And the words I cited were these,
out of his Liberty of Prophesying. Sect. 20. Numb. 16. Idolatry, says he, is a
forsaking the true God, and giving divine worship to a Creature, or to an Idol,
that is, to an Imaginary God, who has no Foundation in Essence or Existence:
And this is that kind of Superstition, which by Divines is called, the
superstition of an undue Object. Now it is evident, says he, that the Object
of Catholick's Adoration (that which is represented to them in their minds,
their thoughts, their purposes; and by which God principally, if not solely
takes Estimate of humane Actions) in the B. Sacrament, is the only true and
Eternal God, hypostatically joined with his Holy Humanity; which Humanity they
believe actually present under the Veil of the Sacramental Signs; and if they
thought him not present, they are so far from worshipping the Bread in that
case, that themselves profess it Idolatry to do so, which is a demonstration,
that their Soul has nothing in it, that is, Idolatrical. If this Confidence
and fanciful Opinion has engaged them upon so great a mistake, (as without
doubt, he says, it has) yet the Will has nothing in it, but what is a great
Enemy to Idolatry. Thus Dr. Tailor, and I said, I thought it would be a I ask
worthy Dr. St.'s pains to solve this Argument, if he would not absolve us from
being Idolaters. But it seems, he either thought it not worth his pains; or
rather, that it would be but labor lost to go about it, and therefore
endeavors to shift it off: First* By returning Us the Opinion of some of our
own Divines; And, 2dly, By seemingly opposing Dr. Tailor to himself, though
what he cite out of him be nothing to this purpose.

. 2. The Divines, whose Opinions he returns me, are Coster and Bishop Fisher.
If the Doctrine of Transubstantiation be not true, Enchir. Controv. c. 8. p.
308.
says Coster, the Idolatry of the Heathens in worshipping some Golden or Silver
Statue, or any Images of their Gods; or the Laplanders worshipping a Red Cloth,
or the Egyptians an Animal, is more excusable, than of Christians who worship
a bit of Bread. And if there be nothing but Bread in the Eucharist, says
Bishop Fisher, Contr. Oecolamp. li. 1. c. 2.
they are all Idolaters. These are the Testimonies he produces: And what
follows from hence? that because they seem to say in effect what he does,
therefore the Reason alleged by Dr. Tailor is solved? This is a new way of
solving arguments not unlike to his new way of answering the Testimonies of
Fathers (I showed above, p. 46.) which was to ask me, How I was sure, the
Fathers had not changed their Judgment in their latter Writings, when himself
brings nothing to prove they did. What I required of him in this point was, to
solve the Argument, or absolve us from Idolatry. The one he cannot, the other
he will not do. Only he tells us that two of our own Divines were of the
contrary Opinion; as if because Vasquez holds an Opinion contrary to Suarez,
that alone were a sufficient solution to all his Arguments.

As for the Testimonies themselves, they are but the Opinions of Divines, and
so I might take the liberty of the Schools to deny the consequence, as Mr.
Thorndike does, when he says, that such kind of expressions in Catholic
Divines, [viz. if there be nothing but Bread in the Eucharist, they are all
Idolaters,] Epil. 3. part. p. 352.
show what confidence they would have the World apprehend, that they hold their
Opinion with, but not that the Consequence is true, viz. that they are
therefore Idolaters, unless, says he, what I have said above be reprovable.
And what was that, but the same which Dr. Tailor asserted? viz. That a Man's
mistake in thinking the Elements to be away, (which indeed, says he, are
there,) cannot make him guilty of honoring those Creatures as God, which we
know, if he thought they were there, he must needs take for Creatures, and
therefore could not honor for God. And he repeats the same again in his Just
Weights and Measures, c. 19. where he says, that they who worship the Host, do
not believe that the Elements remain, nay, they say they must be flat
Idolaters, if they he there. Zeal to their Opinion makes them say more than
they should say. But if they were there, they would not take them for God; and
that is it, says he, (not saying that they should be Idolaters if the Elements
did remain) that mu^t make them Idolaters. Thus Mr. Thorndike, and justifiably
enough, had those Divines proceeded in the Doctor's supposition of formal
Idolatry; which upon the best judgment I can make of Costerus his words, I have
reason to think they did not, but only considered and compared the Material
Object (Bread) as less worthy of adoration, with the Golden or Silver Statues
of the Heathens, etc. And this I take to be manifest from Coster's discourse,
(if entirely set down) which is this, that if the true Body of Christ be not in
the Sacrament of the Eucharist* Christ has dealt with his Church in a manner
much unbecoming his Goodness, which was to leave her for 1500. Years together
in such an Error and Idolatry, and that occasioned by his own words, as was
never seen or heard of in the World. For, says he, the Error of those who
worship for God a Golden or a Silver Statue, etc. is more tolerable, (that is,
less absurd to any Man's reason) than of Christians who worship a bit of Bread.
And upon this account it is, he adds, that ignorance could not excuse such wise
and learned Men, as Austin, Chrysostom, Hierom, etc. for adoring the Host
(unless they were most certainly assured, that it was not bread, but the Body
of Christ) and that the Heathens were more excusable from Idolatry, who adored
their Statues, (because they must needs think them much more worth than a bit
of bread.) By which it appears, that the whole force of his argument lies upon
the Indignity of the thing, (which the Doctor omitted) viz. that Christ by his
words should give occasion to his Church to run into so absurd an Error,
(though but material only) for so long a time together. And consequently he
meddles not at all with the present Question, whether supposing Catholics
mistaken in their belief, they would be guilty (as my Adversary would make
them) of Formal Idolatry? From whence it follows that Dr. St. has neither
solved Dr. Taylor's Argument, by which he proves that Catholics, neither ought
nor can be justly accused of Idolatry, (that is, of formal Idolatry) supposing
them to be mistaken in their belief of Transubstantiation, because what is
represented to them in their minds, their thoughts and purposes, (and by which
God principally, if not solely takes estimate of humane Actions) in the B.
Sacrament, is not Bread which they believe not to be there at all, but the only
true and Eternal God: Nor yet in reality has returned us the Opinion of our
own Divines, who were not concerned in the Question at present in debate
between us. For they did not consider the act, as it was the worshipping God
supposed to be in the place of Bread; but materially only, as it was the
worshipping the Bread for God. No relief then is to be had from our Divines.
Let us see whether the Doctor speed any better in what he cites out of Dr.
Tailor himself; for by his manner of proceeding, he would make the Reader
believe, that he had answered his own Argument, when he speaks nothing at all
of it.

. 3. None, says he, is so fit to answer Dr. Tailor, as himself, after almost
Twenty Years time, (in which also he was advanced to Episcopal dignity) to
consider more thoroughly of those things, that is, supposing Catholics mistaken
in their belief, ye^ they are excused from Idolatry, as having in their minds
no other Object of Adoration in the B. Sacrament but the only true and Eternal
God. And what is it that Dr. St. has found in Dr. Tailor himself after Twenty
Years consideration to Answer his Argument? Marry this, that Thou shall not
worship any Graven Images will outweigh all the best and fairest Imaginations
of the Church of Rome. And again, that the Second Commandment is plain and
peremptory against all the making and worshipping any Image, or likeness of any
thing. And who would not think here, that the Doctor had forgot, that we were
not disputing now about the worship of Images, but of Christ in the Sacrament?
Had I cited Dr. Tailor when I was treating the matter of Image Worship, Lib. of
Proph. c. 20. Numb. 4.
to say, that the ordinary disputes between Catholics and Protestants (of
which certainly that of the Veneration of Images is one) have to no very great
purpose disturbed the Peace of Christendom; and that they are superstructures
ill built, Ib. Numb. 3.
and worse managed, but yet they keep the Foundation -- The foundation of
Faith, says he, stands secure enough for all their vain and unhandsome
superstructures; the places he cites might have served for a kind of
Recantation, (not to give it the name of Contradiction) because if it be
Idolatry it destroys the Foundation. But to tell us that Dr. Tailor answers his
own Argument, viz. (that Catholics in case they should be mistaken in the
belief of Transubstantiation, are not guilty of Idolatry, as having no other
Object of their Adoration in the Sacrament but the only true God) because the
second Commandment is peremptory against the worship of Images; is such a
trifling evasion, as nothing but despair of saying any thing to the purpose
could have cast so subtle a Discourser upon it.

But has the Doctor nothing here to say for himself, why he produced these
Testimonies of so disparate a temper to the present purpose? Yes. For by these
Assertions of Dr. Tailor, it is clear, (says he) he did not think that
Idolatry did lie only in giving divine worship to a Creature, p. 133.
or to an Idol, which is called the superstition of an undue Object; but also
will have the superstition of a prohibited manner, or way of Worship to be
Idolatry. For he not only makes the Second Command peremptory against the
Worship of the true God by an Image, but elsewhere plainly determins this to be
Idolatry; Doct. dubitant. li. 2. c. 2.
as when he says, (and I pray take notice what it is he says) that to worship
false Gods, or to give divine honor to an Image (which only they who take an
Image for God do) is all one kind of formal Idolatry. If therefore, says Dr.
St. (and we must grant him too, it is all one, to worship God himself by an
Image, and to worship an Image instead of God) they cannot be excused from
Idolatry who worship the true God by an Image, though the Object of their
Adoration be right, and they think the manner of it lawful; neither can they
who worship Christ upon the account of Transubstantiation in the Sacrament.
This is the Doctor's discourse; and as it must cost him no little pains to
squeez so subtle an Inference from Dr. Taylor's words: So I confess, it cost me
some to reduce it into such order, as might make it intelligible to the Reader.
But the mischief is, that whilst he labors thus to solve the argument, he
confirms it. For as for the first part of the distinction, Viz. the
Superstition of an undue Object, it is evident that Catholics are not guilty
of it in Dr. Taylor's judgment, because (as D^. St. himself confesses) he
acknowledges the Object of Catholics Adoration to be the only true God, who, I
hope, is no undue Object of our Worship. And for the Second, viz. the
superstition of a prohibited manner or way of Worship, he brings nothing out of
Dr. Tailor to prove the worship of Christ in the Sacrament to be so; but only
tells us, (though Dr. Taylor's words, as I noted above, import no such thing)
that he determines the worship of the true God by an Image, to be Idolatry;
Neither did Dr. St. himself hitherto pretend any Prohibition to worship Christ
in the Sacrament, but only that there was no express Command, p. 111. for the
doing it. So that upon the whole, Catholics, supposing they were mistaken in
their belief, would not be guilty of Idolatry upon either of these accounts;
that is; either for that they had an undue Object of worship in their thoughts,
or for that the worship of Christ in the Sacrament was forbidden. But now,

. 4. In the 4th. and last place, the Doctor asserts, p 134. that if a mistake
in this case will excuse ^^tholicks, it would excuse the gr^ssest Idolat^^^ in
the World. And to make this out, he ^^lls us of some (who as St. Austin
relates) said that Christ was the Sun, Profat. in Ps. 93.
and therefore worshipped the Sun, and would fain understand why they should
not be as free from Idolatry, as those who are supposed to be mistaken in the
belief of Transubstantiation? But the disparity between the one mistake and the
other is so clear, that I shall appeal to the Readers, whether I had not just
reason to call the not seeing it in the Doctor, a very gross mistake. For what
St. Austin relates of the Manichees, (as the Doctor himself reports it) is,
that they worshipped the Sun, whom they falsely thought to be Christ: That is,
what they had in their minds and purposes to adore, was the Sun. But Catholics
(supposing a mistake in their belief) do not believe the Bread to be Christ; or
worship the bread which they believe to be Christ. No: their mistake (if there
were any) would be, that they believed the bread not to be there at all; and
therefore what they would have in their minds and purposes to adore, would not,
nor could not be bread, but the only true and Eternal Son of God. The
difference then in the mistakes would be this, that the Manichees had for the
formal term of their Worship, an undue Object, viz. a Creature instead of the
Creator; but Catholics in case of a mistake, would have no other formal Object
of Adoration in their minds but the Creator himself. And the mistakes being so
different, it follows they must have as different an influence upon the Acts of
Worship, i.e. to make them guilty or not guilty o^ formal Idolatry. But then he
moulds the Question anew, and proposes it in these (...), Whether the
worshipping false Gods, supposing them to be true, p. 136.
be not as Venial a fault, as worshipping that for the true God, which is not
so? As for Instance, suppose the Egyptians worshipping the Sun for God, and
the Israelites the Golden Calf, believing it was the true God, etc. Upon what
account, says he, shall these be charged with Idolatry, if an Involuntary
mistake and firm belief that they worship the true God does excuse from it? And
then adds, that the most stupid and senseless of all Idolaters, who worshipped
the very Images for Gods, were in truth the most excusable upon this Ground. To
this I answer, that (setting aside the new division, he runs upon the old false
ground, that Catholics believe the Bread to be God, as the Worshippers of the
Sun believed the Sun to be God) the disparity as to the mistakes is still the
same; because the Egyptians believed and worshipped the Sun for God, and so
did the Israelites the Golden Calf; but Catholics (though supposed to be
mistaken in their belief) would not worship the Bread for Christ, because their
mistake would not be in taking the Bread for God; as the Egyptians did the
Sun: but in this, that they conceived the Bread not to be there at all, but in
place thereof, the only true and Eternal God: And so although the Object, (or
rather Subject) materially there present would in such a case be Bread, yet
their act of adoration would not be terminated formally upon that, but upon
God. For as Dr. Tailor says, if they thought Him not present, they are so far
from worshipping the B^ead in this case, that themselves profess it to be
Idolatry to do so; which is a demonstration that their Soul has nothing in it
which is Idolatrical. And if the Doctor see not the force of this
demonstration, (for demonstrations are very dazzling Objects to Eyes unused to
so great Light) I shall lay it yet plainer before him in this Syllogism.
Whatever is taken for an Object of Worship, the Understanding must affirm
(either truly or falsely) to be: and therefore neither the Egyptians had
worshipped the Sun for God, nor the Israelites the Calf, if their understanding
had not first affirmed them to be: But Catholics whether mistaken or not in
the belief of Transubstantiation* do not in their minds affirm he Bread to be,
but not to be; because (...) both suppositions they believe it to be converted
into the Body of Christ; Therefore the Object of their worship is not Bread,
but Christ the only true and Eternal Son of God. And thereupon the same Dr.
Tailor (in the place above cited, Numb. 17.) says, That before they venture to
pass an Act of Adoration, they believe the Bread to be annihilated, or turned
into his substance, who may lawfully be worshipped: And they, who have these
thoughts, are as much Enemies of Idolatry, as they that understand better (as
he thinks he does) to avoid that Inconvenience, which is supposed to be the
Crime, which they formally hate, and we (says he) materially avoid. When
therefore Dr. St. upon account that the mistake, and firm belief of the
Egyptians and others, [that what they worshipped was the true God] could not
excuse them from being guilty of formal Idolatry, (because what they had in
their minds and purposes to adore, was that very Creature which they falsely
took for God) when I say he undertakes to infer from hence, that a mistake in
Catholics as to the material object present in the Sacrament, (whereas what
they would have in their minds and purposes to adore, would be no other thing,
but the very true God with Exclusion of the Creature:) would involve them also
in the same crime: Or, on the contrary, because such a mistake were sufficient
to excuse Catholics from the guilt of Idolatry; therefore another quite
different, would excuse those who directed their Intention to the Worship of a
Creature, which they falsely deemed to be God: Both these consequences are so
apparently irrational, that nothing but Animosity to maintain perfas and nefas)
an angry charge of Idolatry could extort them from a Person, who would be held
a Master of that Reason, as none but Rats can Answer. Nevertheless, in virtue
of them, He concludes, that what he has said in behalf of the Heathen
Idolaters, is the utmost can be said for the Papists adoration of the Host,
supposing the Doctrine of Transubstantiation were as true, as he says, it is
false and absurd. And was this then the Effect of that great Work of the
Conversion of this Nation to Christianity above a Thousand Years ago, that St.
Austin, and the other Religious Monks, who were sent hither with him by St.
Gregory, only persuaded the People to leave their old Idolatry for a new One,
as stupid and senseless as the former? Surely no Christian Ear can hear this
without horror. And the Judgment Mr. Thorndike would have made of this
Conclusion, could have been no other, but that the Author of it (had not Dr.
Stillingfleet very luckily put his Name to the Book) must have been a Jew or a
Turk; when after a serious consideration of Catholics adoration of the Host,
he concludes in these words. In fine, Just Weights. c. 19.
Jews and Mahumetans are bound to take the Worship of the Host for Idolatry.
For they will needs take the Worship of the Holy Trinity for no less. But they
who know that the Godhead of Christ is the Reason, for which his Flesh and
Blood is worshipped in the Eucharist, cannot take that worship for Idolatry,
because his Flesh and Blood is not present in the Eucharist, as they who
worship it there, think it is. For they know, that the Flesh and Blood of
Christ is no Idol to Christians, wheresoever it is worshipped: Wherefore if Dr.
St. have no better arguments to prove his Charge of Idolatry with, in this
matter, than his own discerning Faculty of Truth or Falsehood in matters
proposed to our belief; or than what he has said in excuse of the most stupid
and senseless of Heathen Idolaters, (whose Patronage he seems to have undertaken
all along in this Discourse) I must conclude his Reasons to be as false and
absurd, as any Jew or Mahumetan imagins the Doctrine of Transubstantiation to
be.

The End of the Second Part.
THE THIRD PART OF THE INVOCATION OF SAINTS.
CHAP. I.
The Doctrine of the Church of Rome in this Point supposed by Dr. St. to be
Idolatry, but not proved. The disparity between the Worship given by Catholics
to the Saints, and that of Heathens to their Inferior Deities, laid open.

. 1. THe Third Point, which Dr. St. fixed upon, as a fit Subject to show his
wit in proving the Church of Rome to be guilty of Idolatry, is the Invocation
of Saints. And that the Reader may see what a prodigious stock of that Faculty
is necessary to make it out, I shall first set down the Doctrine of the Church,
as it stands recorded in the Council of Trent. What that Council teaches, is:
that, It is good and profitable for Christians humbly to invocate the Saints,
Conc. Trid. Se^s. 25.
and to have recourse to their Prayers, aid and assistance, where by to obtain
benefits of God by his Son our Lord Jesus Christ, who is our only Redeemer and
Savior. These are the very words of the Council; and any Man but of common
Reason, would think it were as easy to prove Snow to be black, as so Innocent a
practice to be Idolatry, even Heathen Idolatry. What we teach and do in this
matter, is to desire the Saints in Heaven to pray for us, as we desire the
prayers of one another upon Earth; and must we for this be compared to
Heathens? Do we not acknowledge that Jesus Christ, the Son of God, is our only
Redeemer and Savior? Do we not confess that what Benefits we obtain of God
either by our own or others Prayers, must come by the merits of Him our only
Redeemer? Do we not believe that God needs neither our own Prayers, nor the
Prayers of others, to confer his Benefits upon us; but that all the need is on
our part, and all that we can do either by our own Prayers, or humbly begging
the Prayers of others, is little enough to make us capable of his Favors? Do
we not profess to all the World that we look upon the Saints, not as Gods, but
as the Friends and Servants of God, that is, as just Men, whose Prayers
therefore are available with him? And that we worship them only with that
worship of Love and Communion, with which even in this life also Holy men of
God are worshipped, whose hearts we judge prepared to lose their Lives for the
truth of the Gospel? Where then lies the Heathenism? Where lies the Idolatry?
Had the Doctor held himself to the Doctrine of the Church of England, which
terms the Invocation of Saints, a fond thing vainly invented and grounded upon
no warrant of Scripture; there had been some color for a dispute against the
lawfulness of it. But to condemn us of Idolatry, downright Idolatry for
desiring the Servants of God in Heaven to pray for us, was to put the common
size of Intelligent Readers quite out of hopes of ever seeing it proved. He
says indeed in his Preface, that He thinks it no great skill to make things
appear either ridiculous or dark: and here He gives us a very pregnant Example,
of what himself can do in that kind.

. 2. The Argument he made choice of to do this Feat, that is, to prove the
Church of Rome guilty of Idolatry in the Invocation of Saints, was this. If the
supposition of a middle excellency between God and us, be sufficient ground for
formal Invocation, then the Heathens worship of their inferior Deities could
be no Idolatry, for they still pretended they did not give to them the worship
proper to the supreme God; which is as much as is pretended by the devoutest
Papists in Justification of the Invocation of Saints. To this I answered two
ways in my Reply: 1. By showing the disparity of Catholics worship from that
of the Heathens, in two things: 1. In the Objects; where I said, that by
Persons of a middle excellency, we understand Persons endowed with supernatural
gifts of grace in this life, and glory in Heaven, whose Prayers by consequence
are acceptable and available with God. But the supreme Deity of the Heathens is
known to be Jupiter, and their inferior Deuits, Venus, Mars, Bacchus, Vulcan,
and the like rabble of Devils, as the Scripture calls them; and therefore there
can be no consequence, that because the Heathens were Idolaters in the worship
of these though they pretended not to give them the worship proper to Jupiter
the supreme God; therefore Catholics must be guilty of Idolatry in desiring
the servants of the true God to pray for them to him. 2. In the manner of
worship, because I said, if any of the Heathens did attain (as the Platonists)
to the knowledge of the true God, yet as St. Paul says, they did not glorify
him as God, but changed his glory into an Image made like to corruptible Man,
ador^^g and offering sacrifice, due to God alone, to the Statues themselves, or
the inferior Deities they supposed to dwell or assist in them; which St.
Austin, upon the 96. Psalm, proves to be Devils, or evil Angels, because they
required sacrifice to be offered to them, and would be worshipped as Gods. What
he meant by formal Invocation, I said I did not well understand, but
Catholics, I told him, understand no more by it in this matter, but desiring
or praying the Saints to pray for them. And if this were Idolatry, we must not
desire the Prayers of a just Man, even in this life, because this formal
Invocation will be to make him an Inferior Deity. 2. I answered, that the same
Calumny was cast upon the Catholics in St. Austin's time, and is answered by
him, and his Answer will serve as well now as then, in his Twentieth Book
against Faustus, Chap. 21. who himself held such formal Invocation a part of
the Worship due to Saints, as is evident from the Prayer he made to St. Cyprian
after his Martyrdom, l. 7. de Bapt. c. Donat. c. 1. And Calvin himself
confesses it was the custom at that time to say, Holy Mary, or Holy Peter
pray for Us.

This indeed was my Answer, and to disprove it, he undertakes to show two
things: 1. That the disparity between Catholics worship of Saints, and the
Heathens worship of their inferior Deities, p. 139.
is not so great as to excuse them from Idolatry. 2. That the Answer given by
St. Austin does not vindicate them now, as well as then.

. 3. 1. Concerning the disparity; 1. As to the Object of Worship, he abhors
from his heart to parallel the H^ly Angels and Saints with the impure Deities
of the Heathens, as to their Excellencies. No. He has more honor for them
than not to think them more excellent, than Devils, or wicked Wretches: I
suppose in case they have the testimony of Scripture for their sanctity;
otherwise it may go hard with the best of them, should he proceed in the same
form with all the rest, as he does a little below with St. Ignatius. But
supposing them at present to be more excellent, than the impure Deities of the
Heathens, yet if the Idolatry of the Heathens, says he, lay not only in this,
that they worshipped Jupiter, and Venus, and Vulcan, who are supposed to have
been wicked Wretches; but in this, that they gave Divine Worship to any,
besides God, then this disparity cannot excuse Catholics from being Idolaters.
Behold here the ground upon which he intends to build his Charge of Idolatry,
Viz. That Catholics give divine honor to the Holy Angels and Saints. This is
what the Reader must suppose, otherwise his Arguments are at an End; and having
laid this false and scandalous supposition, instead of proving it, he
undertakes to show out of the Primitive Fathers, that it was the Property of
the Christian Religion to give divine worship to none, but God himself and his
Son Christ Jesus. To this purpose he cites Justin Martyr, and Theophilus Bishop
of Antioch, to whom he says he might add, if it were requisite in so Evident a
matter, the testimonies of Clemens Alexandrinus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Origin,
Athenagoras, Lactantius, Arnobius, (and who not, that ever pretended to the
Name of Christian?) who all agree that Religious (by which he means divine)
worship is proper to the true God, and that no created Being is capable of it;
and in this strain he runs on for no less than Ten Leaves together: and at
length without ever proving that Catholics do give divine worship to the Holy
Angels and Saints, he most triumphantly concluded them to be Idolaters. This is
the sum of his performance, and by it I understand that it had been no great
skill in the Pharisees, to have made any of those Persons who honored St.
Peter, or St. Paul, when they were upon Earth, or desired their Prayers, to be
Idolaters. They needed not any other proof, but only to suppose confidently,
that they gave to them the worship proper to God alone, and the work was done;
especially if they had but cited that Text of Scripture, Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and Him only shall thou serve. I confess when I said, that I
thought it would be as easy to prove Snow to be black, as the Doctrine of the
Catholic Church in this matter, to be Idolatry; I did not reflect, that Dr.
St. might suppose Catholics to give divine worship to the Saints, and so
conclude them to be Idolaters. But this, (as I now remember) is a Peculiar
Topic, of which all those who oppose the Faith of the Church, are forced to
make use; Viz. to suppose her Doctrine not to be what she affirms, but what
they would have her to affirm, and from thence to make her guilty of what
Crimes and Enormities they p^ease themselves.

. 4. Now although the Testimonies of the Fathers he alleges, are so
impertinent to the present Question, as I have showed, yet because some of
them, as they are imperfectly reported, or advantageously translated by him,
may give occasion to an unwary Reader to suspect, that they meant to deny that
any worship at all was to be given to any besides God: I shall take the pains to
unfold their meaning, and free him from any such Jealousy, by showing that when
they deny in general terms worship to be given to a Creature, they mean divine
worship, which is due to God alone; and not that worship which is given to Men,
upon account either of their Natural or Supernatural Endowments; or for the
Place or Office they hold in the Church or Commonwealth. For as there is a
worship due to Men for the former; so also doubtless for the latter. And we
have an Example of it in Dr. St. himself, in his Irenicum, p. 413. [Printed at
London, An. 1662.] Where, speaking of Mr. Baxter, he calls him, Our Reverend
and Learned Mr. Baxter: Learned, I suppose for his knowledge; but Reverend for
his Piety, and Place in the Presbytery, and so worthy of double, if not of
treble honor.

Thus much premised of the different degrees there are of worship, as also that
it is a thing notoriously known, that many of the Heathen Emperors exacted to
be worshipped as Gods, that is, with divine worship;

The Testimony out of Justin Martyr (p. 141.) answers it self, because where he
tells the Emperors, that Christ did persuade Men to worship God alone, etc. He
presently adds, Apol. 2.
that the same Christ commanded Christians to give unto Caesar the things which
are Caesar's, 1 Pet. 2.
of which Honor is One, in the Judgment of St. Peter. And the like had been
manifest of Theophilus Antiochenus, Theophil. ad Autol. li. 1.
if the Doctor had fairly set down his words, for he expressly affirms, that
although the King was not ordained to be adored, yet He was to be honored with
that lawful worship, which belongs to Him. And this is insinuated in the very
words cited by the Doctor himself. [viz. as the King suffers none under him to
be called by his Name, nor is it lawful to give it to any, but himself, so
neither is it to worship any but God alone] for although the King will suffer
none under him to be called by his Name yet he requires that respect be given
to those whom he constitutes Judges and Magistrates under Him, according to
their degree and quality. And God himself, although he forbid to give his own
Name or Honor to any but Himself, yet he commands us to give honor to whom
honor is due, Romans 13. 7. And that this was the meaning both of Theophilus and
Justin, we need no better Expositor than Tertullian, who was near upon
contemporary with them; Scorpiac. c. 14.
and tells us that the King is then to be honored, when he keeps himself
within his own Sphere, and abstains from divine honors; Quum a divinis
honoribus long est. So that I cannot but wonder, what the Doctor meant by
alleging these Testimonies of those two ancient Fathers, unless he intend to
deny any worship at all to be due to any besides God; or that he think it not
possible to worship a good Man for his virtue and sanctity, but we must give
him divine honor. If he produced them for no other End, but to show that we
ought not to give divine worship to any created Being whatsoever, it is evident
they are not at all to the purpose, it being far from the minds and hearts of
Catholics to give that honor to the Saints.

. 5. But then the old scruple returns again, Why he may not as well honor God
by giving worship to the Sun, as to Ignatius Loyola, p. 143.
or St. Francis, or any other late Canonized Saint! (He might have added, if he
had pleased, or to one not yet Canonized, his Reverend Mr. Baxter?) For he is
sure the Sun (and why not the most Reverend Sun?) is a certain Monument of
God's Goodness, Wisdom and Power, and he cannot be mistaken therein, but he
can never be certain of the Holiness of those Persons, he is to give divine
Worship to. Thus Dr. St. And certainly he must believe his Readers to be all
stark blind, who cannot distinguish the Reverence due to a Person for his
Holiness, from Divine Worship: or that a Saint is not a greater Monument of
GOD's Goodness, Wisdom and Power, than the Sun. But by his particularizing the
late Canonized Saints, it seems he is satisfied, that St. Peter, and St. Paul
were greater Monuments of the Divine Goodness, Wisdom, and Power, than the
Sun; that more were raised to love God by seeing the light of their example,
than by gazing upon that bright Planet: and consequently, that we may much
better honor God by giving worship to them, at least, than to the Sun; and
perhaps to St. Francis too, because he is so kind as to honor him here with
the title of Saint. But his quarrel, I perceive, is particularly to Ignatius
Loyola, (as he irreverently calls him) who for ought he can know, (he says) was
a great hypocrite, but he is sure the Sun is none. And whether will his spite
against the Saints, at length hurry him, if we may not honor a Man for the
great Virtue and Piety, which appears in him, because for ought we can know, he
is a hypocrite? What if the like scruple should possess his mind in order to
St. Hierome, St. Ambrose, St. Austin, and the rest of the Primitive Saints? It
were but to say of them, what he does of St. Ignatius, that for ought he can
know, they were great hypocrites: For, He knows the best of Men have their
corruptions, and to what degree it is impossible to understand, but he is
certain the spots in the Sun are no moral impurities, nor displeasing to God.
And may he not say the same of the Martyrs too, that for ought he knows, they
did not lay down their lives purely for the truth of the Gospel, but perhaps
because they were weary of them, or for vain glory, or out of obstinacy, not to
yield to their Adversaries? If, I say, such a scruple as this should come into
his mind, what possibility were there of his ever being freed from it, but by
Divine Revelation? Yet some Assistance I may perhaps give him, by letting him
see the unreasonableness of the scruple, by the absurdness of the Consequences,
which must follow upon it. For if it be not lawful to honor a Saint, supposed
to be in Heaven, because for ought he can know, he was a great hypocrite upon
Earth; it follows by the same Rule, that we may not honor any Person in this
Life; for the grace of God which shines in his life and conversation, for fear
we should honor an Hypocrite for a Saint. And I should advise him by no means
to preach this Doctrine to his Auditors, least they should entertain the same
scruple of Him, which he does of the Saints now reigning with God in Glory. O,
but they are the late Canonized Saints, that he is not in perfect Charity with
(for if he were, he would never refuse to honor them, upon a mere whimsy, that
for ought he can know, they were great Hypocrites:) and Philip Nerius, he
says, could not be mistaken in the shining of the Sun, although he might be in
the shining of Ignatius his face, which yet is thought so considerable a thing,
(it seems it was not the only thing) that it is read in the Lessons of the
Roman Breviary. But whoever considers the care and diligence, used at this Day
by the Church of Rome, in examining the Lives, and Actions, and Miracles of
those Persons whom She Canonizes, shall find it every way as great, if not
greater than in the Primitive times. I must confess the Dr.'s desperate scruple
of For ought he can know -- is able to defeat the greatest diligence
Imaginable: and so no doubt it had the dedication of that Church in the West,
some years ago, in Memory of our late Royal Sovereign K. Charles I. had it
depended upon his decisive Vote. As for the shining of S. Ignatius his face, he
is not the first whom God vouchsafed to honor with that outward sign of the
Grace which shined in his Soul; and although the Roman Breviary make mention of
it only upon the Testimony of Philip Nerius, yet that Philip Nerius is known to
have been a Man of that sanctity and integrity, that he would not have stained
his own Soul, to cast a false light upon another Man's face. I am sure, though
the spots in the Sun are no Moral Impurities, nor displeasing to God; yet such
groundless suspicions, and rash judgments against Persons of so eminent and
approved Virtue, must needs be highly displeasing to him. What he adds of
giving worship to Kings and their statues, as well as to Saints and their
Images, is altogether impertinent, for if he mean divine worship, we deny it
may lawfully be given to either of them; and if he speak of such worship as may
be given to Men, I would willingly understand, why the Saints may not be
honored as the adopted Children of God, as well as Kings for that they are his
Vicegerents? I would also willingly understand yet farther, whether he allow
any honor at all to be due to Princes upon that account; for I do not remember
hitherto any passage in him, (though he have had frequent occasion to speak of
them) from whence I could gather, that he holds it lawful to give any worship
either to their statues, or to themselves. And upon the same Principles that he
denies any to be due to the Saints, a Quaker would prove that it must be denied
to Princes.

. 6. What hitherto has been alleged by the Doctor, to prove us guilty of
Idolatry, it seems was not so full to the purpose, as himself could wish it,
and therefore he will now come home to the case. p. 145.
And this it is. The Heathens were not such Fools, as some would make them:
(nor yet altogether so wise as he would make them, if we may believe the
Fathers,) to excuse themselves: For, though (says he) they gave worship to
some, whom they considered as the greatest Benefactors to Mankind, yet still
they acknowledged one supreme God, not Jupiter of Creet, but the Father of gods
and men: Only they said, this supreme God being of so high a Nature, and there
being other Intermediate Beings between Him and men, whose Office they
conceived it was, to carry the Prayers of Men to God, and to bring down help
from Him to them, they thought it very fitting to address their solemn
supplications to them. Here now, says he, is the very same case in debate,
(altering only the Names of Things) which is between us and the Church of Rome,
and if ever they speak home to our case, they must do it upon this Point. And
so they do, but very little to their comfort. Here then we must fix our Foot,
and if we can show the case not to be the same, we shall by his own Confession
speak home to the Point; and we shall more-over have this comfort at least,
that we suffer this reproach (of being paralleled to Heathens) falsely, for God
's sake. In order to this I shall show, 1. What the supreme God of the Heathens
was. 2. What were those Intermediate Beings. 3dly. What was their Office; And,
4thly, What kind of service they required.

1. For the supreme God Jupiter, the Doctor says, it was not he of Creet, but
the Father of gods and men. And the Poets indeed call him so, (of whom Horace
confesses, that they took the privilege to dare to fain and say any thing.)
But how glorious soever the Title be, yet Origin tells us in express terms, li.
5. contr. Cells. p. 487.
that he was not the true God, but a Devil. We are ready to undergo, says he,
any torments rather than confess Jupiters to be God, for we do not believe
Jupiter and Sabbath to be the same, neither indeed to be any God at all, but a
Devil, who is delighted with the name of Jupiter, an Enemy to Men and God.
2dly, For the Intermediate Beings, it is asserted by the same Origin, that they
were Devils also, and according to the differently formed statues, li. 8. cont.
Cells. p. 525.
in which they assisted, one was esteemed to be Bacchus, another Hercules, etc.
The like is affirmed also by Theophilus Antiochenus above cited, and St. Austin
upon the 96. Psalm. But then because the supreme God was conceived to be of so
high a Nature, that he knew not what passed in this sublunary World: Therefore,
3dly, The Office of these Inferior Deities or Devils, was to carry up the
Prayers of Men to God (as the Doctor himself cites out of St. li. 8. de Civ.
Dei. c. 14. 18. 21.
Austin, but very insincerely, for St. Austin says, not to God, but ad Deos,
to the Gods, that is, to Devils,) out of a supposition, that they cannot know
the necessities and prayers of Men, but by Intervention of these Spirits; and
so to bring down to Men the blessings they prayed for: And, 4thly, To oblige
them to perform this Office of Nuncii or Messengers, (as St. Austin calls
them,) they exacted of Men to give them Divine Worship, De Civ. Dei. li. 8. c.
21.
by the Oblation of Victims and Sacrifices, as the Fathers every where testify.
This then is the Scheme of the Heathens Divinity and Devotion. The Doctor's
Father of Gods and Men, was according to the Fathers, an Arch-Devil; The
Inferior Deities, were Inferior Devils. Their Office was to inform the
Superior Gods, of what passed here below; and the reward they required for
this service, was no less than the Offering of Sacrifice to their Devil-ships.
And now, was this the very same case (altering only the Names of Things) which,
he says, is in debate between Him and the Church of Rome concerning the
Invocation of Saints? Surely, a more Injurious Calumny scarce ever dropped from
the Pen of the greatest Enemy of Christianity, except that of Julian the
Apostate, who charged the Christians of his time for their worshipping the
Martyrs, that for the one true God, they worshipped many Men who were not Gods.
A most Injurious Calumny, As St. Cyril Alex. reports of him. li. 6. contr.
Julian.
I say. For, r. The God, whom we adore, is not that wise Father of Gods and
Men, who was so high, as not to know what was done here below; but the true and
Immortal God, Maker of Heaven and Earth, who sees the secrets of our hearts,
and knows our necessities before we utter them. 2dly, The Persons to whom we
address our selves for their Prayers, are not Devils or wicked Wretches, but
the Friends and Servants of God, whom the Doctor himself (as little respect as
he has for them) acknowledges to exceed those other in excellency. 3dly, Their
Office is not to inform the Supreme God of what he knows not, but to be Joint
Petitioners with us, and for us, to his divine Majesty, as other Holymen are
upon Earth. 4thly, and Lastly, We do not procure, or buy this favor of them,
by offering Sacrifice to them; for as St. Austin says, What Bishop officiating
at the Altar, Cont. Faust. li. 20. c. 21.
does say at any time, We offer to Thee Peter, or Paul, or Cyprian? But, as the
same Holy Doctor there says, We celebrate their Memory with Religious
Solemnity, both to excite us to their imitation, and to become partakers of
their Merits and Prayers: but so that we erect Altars not to any of the Martyrs
but to the God of Martyrs, although in Memory of them.

And now having spoken thus home to the Case, I leave it to the Reader's
Judgment, whether the Practice of Catholics in honoring and Invocating the
Saints, be the same with that of the Heathens, in the worship of their
Inferior Deities? To make the Case run Parallel on all four, the Doctor must
prove, either that the God we worship is not the very true God, but an
Arch-Devil; or that the Holy Angels and Saints are not his friends and
servants, but inferior Devils; Or that we believe him to be so ignorant, that
he stands in need of them to inform him; or that we offer sacrifice and erect
Altars to them. And when he can do all, or any of these, he will speak
something to the Point. But I believe these are none of those things, which he
threatens largely to prove, if further occasion be given. And I have good
reason to believe so, by his present undertaking, which is not to prove any of
these things (in which the Parallel must consist, if there be any,) but to cast
a mist before his Readers eyes, and make him lose both his labor, and the
Question, as I shall show in the following Chapter.

CHAP. II.
What kind of Honor Catholics give to the Saints. The Testimonies of Origin,
and St. Ambrose explained. Of the Practice of making Addresses to particular
Saints.

. 1. THe Question at present between Dr. St. and the Church of Rome, is not
whether divine worship be to be given to the Saints, (for this is abhorred of
all faithful Christians) but whether an Inferior Worship, of like kind with
that which is given to Holy Men upon Earth for their Holiness and near Relation
to God, may not be lawfully given to them, now they are in Heaven? This is the
true state of the Question between us, which the Doctor, afraid to grapple
with, turns aside, and will (he says) insist upon these two things. 1. That
the Fathers did condemn all such kind of worship, p. 146.
supposing their Principle true, that is, as far as I can understand it,
supposing what they said was true. 2. That they did not only condemn it, in
those spirits, which the Heathens worshipped, but in good Angels themselves.
And before I engage with Him upon the Testimonies of the Fathers, I must
disperse the Mist he raises by his Egregious equivocating in the words, All
such kind of worship. What kind of worship is it the Fathers deny may be given
to the most excellent created Beings? He tells us, (p. 145.) any Religious
Worship. And what does he mean by Religious Worship? To dispute, (says Mr.
Thorndike) whether we are bound to honor the Saints or not, Epil. part. 3. p.
353.
were to dispute whether we are to be Christians, and to believe this or not.
Whether this be Religious or Civil, nothing but equivocation of words makes
disputable, and the cause of that equivocation the want of words; vulgar use
not having provided words properly to signify conceptions, which came not from
Common sense. -- Plainly their excellence, and the Relation we have to them,
being Intelligible only by Christianity, must borrow a Name from that, which
vulgar language attributes to God, or to Men our Superiors. And then a little
after he says. That the Relation which God has settled between the Church
Militant and Triumphant, may be reasonably called Religious, provided that the
distance be not confounded between the Religious honor of God, and that Honor
of the Creature, which the Religious honor of God enjoins, being neither Civil
nor Humane, but such as a Creature is capable of for Religion's sake, and that
Relation which it settleth. By this it appears, that if the Doctor mean by
Religious Worship, that Honor which is due to God alone, it is true what the
Fathers say, that It is not to be given to the most excellent created Beings,
but nothing at all to the Point in debate between us. If he mean, that Honor
of which a Creature is capable of for Religion's sake, and that Relation which
it settleth, I shall show it to be false that the Fathers deny any such honor
to be given to the Holy Angels and Saints. And if he contend that this kind of
worship ought not to be called Religious, de Civit. Dei. li. 10. c. 1.
St. Austin will tell him, that it is but a mere wrangling about words, because
the word Religion, as he shows, may be used in other senses, besides that of
the worship due to God; Contr. Faust. li. 20. c. 21.
and Himself speaking of the honor given by Christians to the Martyrs, says,
We celebrate their Memories with Religious Solemnity. And, who so (says Mr.
Thorndike in the place above cited) could wish, that the Memories of the
Martyrs, and other Saints who lived so, as to assure the Church they would have
been Martyrs, had they been called to it, (Alas, He never thought that, for
ought Dr. St. can know, they were great Hypocrites) had not been honored, as
is plain they were honored by Christians, must find in his heart by
consequence, to wish that Christianity had not prevailed. Whether this Censure
of Mr. Thorndike's be applicable to my Adversary, or no, depends upon his
allowing, or not allowing such honor to the Saints, as is plain was given them
by Christians; but for the distinction he makes between the Religious worship
due to God, and that of which a Creature is capable of for Religion's sake, it
will clearly dispell the M^st he has raised from the Testimonies of the
Fathers; and let the Reader see, how he has perverted their meaning, and yet
said nothing to the purpose.

. 2. The first he cites is Origin, affirming, that the Scripture does indeed
style God, the God of Gods, and Lord of Lords, Contr. Cells. li. 8. in princ.
but withal says, that to us there is but one God the Father, of whom are all
things, and One Lord Jesus Christ by whom are all things, and we by Him -- And
his mind ascends up to the supreme God who worships him inseparably and
indivisibly by his Son, who alone conducts us to the Father. Therefore seeing
there are many Gods, and many Lords, we endeavor by all means not only to
carry our minds above those things on Earth, which are worshipped by the
Heathen for Gods, but above those whom the Scripture calls Gods, by which
Origin means the Angels. To this I answer, that it is plain from the very words
themselves, that the worship which Origin here contends, ought not to be given
to Angels, is divine worship proper to God alone; for he speaks only of that
worship, which is given to the Father inseparably and indivisibly by his Son.
And whenever such worship is to be given, we must not only carry our minds
above those things which were worshipped by the Heathens for Gods, but above
the good Angels also, because they are not inseparably and indivisibly One with
the Father, as the Son is, who alone can conduct us by his Grace and Merits to
the Father. And this is yet more plain from the Reply, which Origin gave to
that Evasion of Celsus, viz. that None were to be honored for Gods, but those
to whom the supreme God does communicate it; for, denying any such honor to
have been granted by God to the Heroes or Demons of the Heathens, he proves
from Miracles, and Prophecies, and Precepts, that this honor was given to
Christ, Ut omnes honorent Filium, sicut Patrem honorant, that all should honor
the Son, as they honor the Father, that is, that they should honor him as
God, which the Doctor translates that they who honor the Father, should honor
the Son also; tacitly insinuating that no honor at all might be lawfully
given, but to the Son. And again, when Celsus objects, that by the same Rule
that Christians gave honor to Christ, he thought they might give it to
Inferior Deities: The account which Origin gives of the worship which
Christians attribute to the Son, [viz. because it is said, I and my Father are
One.] makes it yet more evident, that he speaks of divine worship, which cannot
be given to any created Beings; and not of such an Inferior Worship, of which
Creatures are capable upon account of their Holiness and Relation to God. For
of these he says (and who will not wonder to see it cited, though but
imperfectly, by the Doctor himself) that if Celsus had spoken of the true
Ministers of God after his only begotten Son, p. 148.
such as Gabriel, Michael, and all the Angels and Archangels, and had contended
that they were to be worshipped: (which last words, though very material, are
left out by Dr. St.) he acknowledges that by explaining the notion of worship
or respect, and the Actions of those that give it, perhaps he should have said
something of that Subject, as far as the dignity of so great a thing, and the
reach of his understanding would have permitted. But this not being objected by
Celsus, but only that they were by the same Rule by which they worshipped
Christ for God, to worship in like manner the Inferior Deities of the
Heathens, he thought it not necessary to enlarge upon that Subject at present,
but only to show the different account upon which they worshipped Christ, as
one with his Father. By which it is manifest he held a certain worship or
respect due to the Angels, inferior to that, which is due to God alone. li. 5.
contr. Cells.
And all that the Doctor has to say for himself, is that Origin says
elsewhere, Although the Angels be called Gods in Scripture, yet we are not to
worship them with divine worship: which is a plain concession, that when Origin
denies worship to any created Beings, he speaks of divine worship, and so
nothing against that Inferior worship or respect which is given by Catholics
to the Holy Angels and Saints.

. 3. But now the Doctor would seem to say something to the purpose, li. 8.
contr. Cells.
when he tells us, that Origin utterly denies, that our Prayers are to be
offered to any but Christ alone, and that any word which is proper to Religious
worship, is to be attributed to the Angels themselves. But he does but seem to
come home to the Point; for as Mr. Thorndike well observes, Epil. part. 3. p.
353
The terms of Prayer, Invocation, calling upon, and whatever else we can use,
are or may be in despite of our hearts, equivocal; that is, we may be
constrained, unless we use that diligence, which common discretion counts
superfluous, to use the same words in signifying requests made to God and to
Men. And a little after. Prayer, Invocation, calling upon, is not so proper to
God, but that whether you will or not, every Petition to a Prince or Court of
Justice, is necessarily a Prayer; and he that makes it, Invocates or Calls upon
that Prince or Court for favor, or for Justice. The Notion then of Prayer may
be distinguished, as well as that of Worship: and Protestants themselves when
they pray others to pray for them, use it in a quite different sense, than when
they pray to God: for as applied to God, it imports a total dependence upon
him, as the Author of all good; but as applied to Just and Holy-men, it implies
no more, than a Communion of Love and Society in the Members of the Church
Militant, with those of the Triumphant, for the assistance of their Prayers, to
him, who only can give what we ask. And in this sense the words Prayer,
Invocation, etc. are used by Catholics, when they are applied to the Holy
Angels and Saints. And that Origin, when he denies that our Prayers are to be
offered to any but Christ alone, speaks of Prayer in the first sense, and not
in the latter, is evident from what he had said before in the beginning of the
first Book, where he acknowledges that the Angels do offer up the Prayers of
Men to God, (and surely it can never be Idolatry in us to desire them to do
what they do;) and much more from his own practice, in his first Homily upon
Ezechiel, where he Invocates an Angel in these words, Come Holy Angel, and
receive Him who is converted from his former Error. And therefore, when he
says, We are not to pray to them who pray for us; He adds, (as the Doctor cites
him p. 149.) That we ought not to divide our supplications between God and
them; By which he explains himself to mean, that we ought not to pray to them
in the same manner, as we do to God; for that indeed were to divide our
supplications; But to desire them to offer up our Prayers, or to pray for us,
is not to divide our supplications between God and them, but to unite their
Prayers to ours, as we do the Prayers of ^ust Men upon Earth, whom we desire to
pray for us. It is evident then, and mostly out of the very places cited by the
Doctor himself that the Invocation or Honor, which Origin denies to be given
to Angels, is that which is due to God.

. 4. But now the Doctor, weary (it seems) of being serious so long to no
purpose, thought fit to entertain his Reader with an other Essay (for one
Interlude of this kind we have had already in the 1st. Chap.) of the peculiar
Faculty he has in exposing the Saints to derision. Celsus (says he, p. 150)
yet further urges, that according to the doctrine of the Egyptians, every part
of a Man has a particular Demon or Ethereal God, and every one of these being
invocated, heals the diseases of the parts proper to themselves; why then may
they not justly be invocated? says Celsus. And if one of the Church of Rome,
says Dr. Still. had been to answer him, he must have told him, that the thing
was rational which he said, only they were out in their Names; for instead of
Chnumen, Chnaachumen, Cnat, Sicat, Biu, Eru, etc. They should have chosen
Raphael for traveling and against Diseases, Apollonia against the Tooth^ach;
Sebastian and Roch against the Plague, St. Nicholas against Tempests, Michael
and St. George against Enemies, and others in like cases. Thus the Doctor makes
sport for himself, and others of his humor, by deriding a practice used by
some Catholic People, of addressing themselves to some particular Saints,
rather than others, against particular dangers o^ diseases; as if there were no
difference between the Egyptians demons, or Ethercal Gods, and the Saints,
but in the Names: or between the Egyptians addresses to those Devils, and
those of Catholics to the Holy Saints and Angels, but in the language; and
that there needed no more, but to correct the Names, as you would do faults
escaped in Printing, viz. for Chnumen to read Raphael; for Chnaachumen,
Apollonia; for Cnat, Sebastian; for Sicat, Roch; for Biu, Michael; and I
suppose for, etc. (it is so like the Dragon's Tail) St. George, who otherwise
must be left out. But the sport is not more pleasing to those who mock at all
Religion, than I shall make it appear ridiculous to all sober Readers, by
showing Two things: 1. The difference between the Doctrine and Practice of the
Egyptians, and that of Catholics. 2. The reasonableness of the practice of
making addresses to one particular Saint, rather than another.

First then, That Catholics look upon the Saints with a different regard from
what the Egyptians did their Demons, is evident, in that the Egyptians
believed them to be Gods, which is far from the hear^ of any Catholic to
believe of the Angels and Saints: And it is no less evident that the addresses
they make to them are different from those the Egyptians made to those Gods,
because as Origin says, the Invocation which Celsus contended for, was Votiva
illis sacrificia reddere, to offer sacrifice to them, (which is due to God
alone) and that upon account that they had power to heal the Dis^ases of the
Parts proper to themselves: But the Invocation which Catholics make to the
Holy Angels and Saints, is but to desire them, as we do Holy Men upon Earth, to
pray for us. And therefore when the Doctor says, that If one of the Church of
Rome had been to Answer Celsus, he must have told him, that the thing was
Rational which he said. I must tell him, that what he says is Irrational and
false, because both the Conceit they have of the Angels and Saints, and the
addresses they make to them, as I have showed, are point blank opposite to
those of the Egyptians. But now on the other side, supposing the Egyptians
had the same conceit of their Demons, which Catholics have of the Holy Angels
and Saints, and that they did no more but as Catholics do, desire them to pray
for them to the supreme God; would it follow that Catholics may not desire the
Prayers of the Saints and Angels? No more, than because the Egyptians erected
Temples, and offered Sacrifice to their great God Osiris; therefore Catholics
may not do the same to the very true God himself: or, because they made their
solemn supplications to a false God; therefore Protestants may not offer up
their Prayers to the true One.

2. The reasonableness of making addresses to one particular Saint rather than
another in some particular occasions: And this will appear from the
Consideration upon which it is usually done, which is not a division of Offices
among the Saints, every one of whom may equally intercede without entrenching
upon the Propriety of another, and their Intercession may be implored by us, in
all kinds of necessities whatsoever; but it is grounded upon a Reflection, which
the suppliant makes either upon some signal Grace, which shined in that Saint
above others, as Patience, Humility, Chastity, etc. (for which reason the
Church says of every one of them, Non est inventus similis illi, that there
was no other found like to him) or upon the particular manner of his suffering
Martyrdom, or some particular Miracle, or such like remarkable passage in his
Life and actions; which may serve to excite the Hope of the suppliant to obtain
redress by means of his Intercession, in a case which he conceives to bear a
suitableness or conformity to something acted or suffered by him. Now the
efficacy of Prayer being grounded on Hope, and it being natural to us to hope
for redress where others have found it, or where it may more reasonably be
expected, by reason of some particular qualification we apprehend in the Person
to whom we address, it is manifest, that as the abovesaid Reflection serves to
erect our Hope, so also it conduces to the end of Prayer, that is, the
obtaining of what we pray for. Hence it is, that although all the divine
Attributes are really one and the same indivisible Perfection in God, yet for
pardon we fly to his Mercy; for knowledge to his Wisdom, for Protection to his
Power, etc. And St. Paul assigns the remission of our sins to the Passion of
Christ, but our Justification (by which we rise to newness of life) to his
Resurrection. He was delivered to death for our sins, Romans 4. 25.
and rose again for our Justification. The reason whereof he gives in the
Epistle to the Hebrews. c. 2. v. 18. Where he says, that it behoved Christ to
be made like unto his Brethren in all things, that he might be a merciful and
faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for
the sins of the People; For, says he, in that he suffered himself being
tempted, he is able to succor them that are tempted; that is, by what he
suffered himself, he is made prompt and ready to succor those who are in
affliction and Temptation. For it was true even of his most sacred Humanity,
what the Poet out of the very nature, of Humanity made another say, Hand ignara
^^li, miseris succurrere disco, that by his own sufferings he had learnt how to
compassionate the sufferings of others. And this was laid down by St. Paul, as
a powerful Argument to persuade the Hebrews to put their Hope in Him for their
reconciliation with God, because he was so particularly qualified and fitted
for that Work by what he had suffered. Why then may not a like Consideration of
the fitness or qualification of one Saint above others, as so conceived by us,
(either for his eminent Perfection in such a particular virtue, or some other
Remarkable passage in his Life) be taken as a Motive to invite us to address
for the obtaining what we stand in need of, to his Intercession before others?
The Scripture we know to persuade us to Patience in Adversity, James 5. 10.
bids us reflect upon the sufferance of Job; And why may not his eminence in
that virtue, as it serves for an example of our Imitation, be also taken as a
particular motive of our having recourse to his Intercession? And when Jacob
blessed the two Sons of Joseph, Ephraim and Manasses, among so many Angels
whose assistance he might have implored, he beggs for that Angel in particular
to be their Guardian, who had delivered him out of all his troubles. The Angel,
says he; who delivered me from all evils, Genesis 48. 16.
bless these Children. And why? but because he thought that he who had been so
careful to deliver him, would be as careful to deliver them. And upon this
account were I in danger of being ship wrackt, I should sooner fly to the
Intercession of St. Paul, who had saved by his Prayers all his
Fellow-passengers in the Ship from being drowned, than to another who had never
been in the like danger. Behold here then the Crime of Catholics in calling
particularly upon the Angel Raphael when they travel, because he protected
young Tobias in his Journey; upon St. Roch against the Plague, because his
Charity was signal in assisting those who were insected with it: upon St.
Nicholas against Tempests, because he saved some by his Prayers, who in a storm
at Sea invoked him, while yet alive: upon St. Apollonia for the Toothache,
because all her Teeth were stricken out for her free Confession of Christ; and
upon St. Michael and St. George against Enemies, because the latter was by
Profession a Soldier, and a most valiant Martyr. And the former is recorded in
Scripture to be the Protector of the People of God. This is the Crime for which
the Doctor charges Catholics with Idolatry. Dan. 10. 21. and 12. 1.
But if it be a Crime in them, it is much like that of a Beggar, who hopes to
find relief at that door, where he hears others have been relieved before. The
Doctor perhaps to carry on his sport, will instance in some addresses that are
made to particular Saints upon such accounts, which seem to him ridiculous, or
it may be contrary to what happened to the Saint. But while I defend the
reasonableness of the practice in it self, I am not bound to defend, that all
who use it, take the hints of their application to one Saint before another
from solid and reasonable Motives. This I know, that what seems ridiculous to
One who scoffs at devotion, may serve to raise affections in another who is
truly devout: And the Chananaean Woman, when our Savior said to her, It is not
good to take the Children's bread and cast it to Dogs, Matthew. 15. 26.
drew an Argument of Hope, from whence another who had not her Faith would have
taken a Motive of despair. In fine, to conclude this Point, let us suppose that
Martha and Mary Magdalen, who are now glorious Saints in Heaven, were again
living upon Earth, I would gladly know whether a Person guilty of Incontinency,
might not without being guilty also of Egyptian Idolatry, conceive a greater
Hope of obtaining God's favor by the Prayers of so Exemplar a Convert, than by
those of her Sister, though more Innocent? Surely the Parallel Example of her
Conversion, and the particular Zeal she must have for the Conversion of others,
would soon determine the devotion of the Penitent to have recourse to her
Intercession? The Case is the same now she is in Heaven, for she has not lost
her Charity by being there. And the case is the same in addresses made to other
Saints, upon like accounts, as I showed above. When therefore the Doctor has a
mind hereafter to change the names of the Egyptian Gods, who according to
their doctrine presided over the several parts of Man; let him, if he please,
transcribe out of the Almanac the Anatomy of Man's Body, as the parts thereof
are governed by the Twelve Signs, Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, etc. The
Characters at least may stand indifferently, as Hieroglyphical Notes either of
the Signs of the Zodiac, or Egyptian Deities. But nothing can be more
ridiculous, than to assert, that there is no disparity between the Egyptians
worship of those Deities, and the honor which Catholics give to the Saints,
but in the Names. Thus much for Origin.

. 5. His second Testimony is out of the Commentaries, under the Name of St.
Ambrose, In Ep. ad Romans c. 1.
where that Author speaking against those who neglecting the true God, said it
was sufficient for them to worship only the things which are seen, says, that
they made use of a miserable excuse, which was, that access might be made to
God by these, as we go to the King by his Courtiers, etc.

To this I answer, that it is evident by the Answer of that Author, as set down
by the Doctor, that he speaks of those who gave the honor due to God, to a
Creature, and forsakeing God, adored their Fellow Servants. Whom therefore he
compares to those who give the honor due to the King, to any of his Courtiers;
which as he does not, who only makes use of a Courtier to recommend him to the
King: so neither do Catholics give the honor due to God, to the Saints, who
only require the favor of their Prayers to God. But here the Doctor makes a
terrible blunder by his dextrous translating those words of the Author,
[Suffragatore non opus est, sed mente devota:] To signify, that because nothing
is hid from God, therefore we need no one to recommend us to his favor; a
devout mind is enough: which if it were the Author's meaning (as it is the
Doctor's) would make him to exclude not only the necessity we have of the
Prayers of our Fellow Members, as well of the Church Militant as Triumphant,
but also of the Intercession of Christ himself: for, if a devout mind be
enough, and that we need no one to recommend us to God's favor, what need we
the Prayers of others, or the Intercession of Christ? But it is manifest, that
the Author takes not the word in this sense; but as those are called
suffragatores, whose vote or advice the King takes (for example) in the
Election of his Officers, because as the Author there adds, being but a Man,
he knows not of himself whom to employ in public affairs, without being
informed by others. This is the Reason given by the Author, and this is what
the Heathens affirmed of their Inferior Deities, De Civ. Dei. li. 8. c. 21.
as St. Austin reports, Viz. That the Ethereal Gods who have care of humane
affairs, would not know what Men do, unless the Aerial Demons declared it to
them. By which it appears, that when the Author says, Suffragatore non est
opus, that because nothing is hid from God, there is no need of a suffragator,
he means, that GOD needs not any one to inform or advise him what to do, as
Kings do, and as the Ethereal Gods of the Heathen did; but not, according to
Dr. St.'s Version, that we need no one to recommend us to his favor, that is,
that we need not the Prayers and Intercessions of just Persons, which the
Scripture says, are available with Him.

. 6. The like Piece of Legerdemain he uses in his next Testimony (p. 153.) out
of St. Austin, for where he says, that if the Ethereal Gods can see our minds,
De Civ. Dei. li. 8. c. 21.
[non ad hoc daemonibus indigent nunciis] they need not for this the demons
for Messengers or Informers. The Doctor translates it impersonalty, that if our
minds can be known without their help, there is no need of their Mediation,
intimating thereby, that if our necessities and prayers can be known to God
without his being informed by the Holy Angels and Saints, we need not their
Prayers and Intercession to recommend us to his favor. These are the shifts
the Doctor is put upon, to wrest the Fathers to say what they never meant. But
now he thinks he has knocked us on the Head with a downright blow, when he
tells us out of the same St. Austin, li. 9. c. 15.
that those who are Christians do believe, that we need not many, but One
Mediator, and Him the very Person himself, by whose participation we are made
happy. But here also his Pen (that fatal Instrument by which he does us dead)
moved not so even, as not to slant a little from the true translation and
meaning of St. Austin's words. For whereas St. Austin disputing there against
the Platonists, who made the Inferior Deities to be Mediators, said, Non
multis sed uno Mediatore opus erat, that to bring us to happiness, there needed
not many, but One Mediator; the Doctor first makes a Preface of his own, as if
it were St. Austin's, that those who are Christians do believe; And then turns
[opus erat, there was no need] (as Plato pretended) into we need not many, but
One Mediator; as if St. Austin were disputing against Catholics for desiring
the Intercession of the Saints. To the Testimony it self, as it stands
translated by the Doctor, I answer, that it is plain from the very words of St.
Austin, that he speaks of such a Mediator, by whose Participation we are made
happy, that is, of a Mediator of Redemption, and not a Mediator of
Intercession, that is, such an one as may recommend us in his Prayers, to
obtain God's favor through his Son Jesus Christ our only Savior and Redeemer;
for these may be many, as Mr. Thorndike well observes, Epil. 3. Part. p. 355.
when he says, that if whosoever be accepted to pray for another is
necessarily by so doing his Mediator, Intercessor or Advocate to him, with whom
he is admitted to deal on his behalf by his Prayers, then -- Certainly neither
could Job intercede for his friends, nor Samuel for the Israelites, nor Abraham
for Abimelech or Pharaoh, nor any of God's Prophets, for any that had or were
to have recourse to them for that purpose, but they must be by so doing
Mediators, Intercessors and Advocates for them with God. And in this sense,
(supposing that the Saints pray for us, which Dr. St. says, he will not deny
the Fathers did believe. p. 173.) He admits that the Saints may be called our
Mediators, and Intercessors to God, and that to dispute whether they may be
counted so or no, is a mere contention about words. Now that the word Mediator
is not so appropriated to Christ, but that it may be and is applied to some
other, Bible in 4o. London, 1610.
even in Holy Scripture, the Annotations set forth upon the Bible by Public
Authority tell us, when explicating that place of St. Paul, Gal. 3. 19. [The
Law was ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator] They affirm that the
Mediator there meant was Moses. But however the word Mediator may be used, the
Doctor says, it would be ridiculous here to distinguish Mediators of Redemption
and Intercession, because all that the Heathens attributed to their good
spirits, (for so he will have them to be in despite of St. Austin, who calls
them Devils) was only Intercession.

This he avoucheth here in the face of the World, p. 156. but (as I suppose) in
confidence, that neither his Reader, nor his Adversary will be so rude, as to
remember him of what he told us out of Celsus, p. 150. that the Egyptian
Deities at least, I mean Chnumen, Chnaachumen, Cnat, Sicat, Biu, Eru, etc.
Every one of them healed the diseases of the parts proper to themselves, and
therefore might justly be invocated; nor yet of what he told us so lately out
of St. Austin, p. 155. that the Heathens supposed that the Gods could not know
the Necessities and Prayers of Men, but by the Intervention of those Spirits,
and that the giving them divine worship proceeded upon that supposition; Viz.
that it was their Office to inform the Superior Gods of what they could not
know otherwise. For, if these things be true, it is manifestly false what the
Doctor affirms at present; Viz. that ALL that the Heathens attributed to their
Inferior Deities was only Intercession; and consequently, he not only
contradicts the Truth, but (what perhaps to him is worse,) Himself also. So
dear does it cost him, to make the Church of Rome appear guilty of Idolatry,
for desiring the prayers of the Holy Angels and Saints; not to inform God of
what he knows not, nor for them to give what they ask, (as the Heathens
believed of their Deities) but only to recommend us to his favor, as we beg
the prayers of one another. But his Zeal is not all spent. There follows a
second Part of it to the same doleful Tune; And we must dance step by step
after it, if we will not be counted Rats.

CHAP. III.
What kind of Worship of Angels was Condemned by St. Paul, Theodoret, etc. with
a farther display of the disparity between the Heathens Worship of their
Inferior Deities and that given by Catholics to Holy Angels and Saints.

. 1. THe Second Thing the Doctor proposed to show out of the Fathers, (p. 154.)
was, that they did not only condemn giving this worship to the Spirits, which
the Heathen worshipped, but to good Angels too. And here again he deludes his
Reader with that general term of this Worship; as if the honor which
Catholics give to the good Angels, by desiring their Prayers to the only true
God, were the same with that worship which the Heathen gave to those spirits
whom they worshipped with sacrifice as Gods. But we must give him leave to cry
whoop, all hid, in Generals, and find him out if we can.

The first place he seeks to hide himself in, (and he was so afraid to be
discovered, that he would not set down the words) is that Text of St. Paul,
Col. 2. 18. Let no Man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility, and
worshipping of Angels, etc. and not holding the Head (Christ.) Here he says,
that St. Paul does in the general condemn the worship of Angels, that is, all
kind of worship of any kind of Angels, whether good or bad. But if so, why did
St. Paul say, in a voluntary humility, and not holding the Head Christ? These
Clauses sufficiently intimate a particularity in the Worship, which St. Paul
condemned, and this was, says St. Chrysostom, S. Chrysostom. in Col. 2. 18.
that some among the Colossians said that we ought to be recociled, and have
access to the Father, not by Christ, but by the Angels. And this, says he, is
that which is said (i. e. condemned) by the Apostle, that they so admitted and
worshipped the Angels for Mediators, as to exclude Christ; And the reason why
they did so, is given by Theophylact, Theophyl. in Col. 2. 18.
because they esteemed it a thing unworthy the Majesty of the only begotten
Son, on the one side, to make the Reconciliation, and far transcending Man's
Poverty or lowness on the other. This supposed, the Doctor's petty Objections
of St. Paul's not distinguishing good Angels from evil ones, and our setting up
other Mediators besides Christ, vanish into Air, because good Angels
themselves are not to be worshipped, but in subordination to Christ the Head,
nor their Prayers to be desired as efficacious for us, but through his merits.
And when we have recourse to them upon this account, it is no more to set up
other Mediators besides Christ, than when we desire the Prayers of Holy Men
upon Earth.

. 2. But Theodoret upon this Place of the Apostle, says, that those who
defended the Law, persuaded Men to worship Angels, because the Law was
delivered by Angels; which practice, he says, continued a long time in Phrygia
and Pisidia; and therefore the Synod of Laodicea does forbid praying to Angels;
And to this day the Oratories of St. Michael are among them. This they
persuaded Men to, as a piece of humility, affirming that God the Creator of all
things could not be seen nor comprehended, nor approached by us; and therefore
we ought to obtain his favor by the Angels. This is what Theodoret says, and
the Import of it amounting only to this, that St. Paul and the Council of
Laodicea (in his Judgment) forbad the worshipping or praying to Angels, upon
account that the Law was delivered by them (and therefore, as Theophylact
says, they brought us salvation) or that God by reason that he is Invisible
and Incomprehensible, cannot be approached, but by the Angels: The Reader sees
how unjustly this Place is urged against Catholics, who have recourse to the
Holy Angels for their Prayers, not upon account that they brought us salvation
without Christ by delivering the Law, or that God is so high we cannot have
access to Him, but by them: but that they, as true Friends of GOD, would
intercede for us through the Merits of Christ our only Savior and Redeemer: as
the Council of Trent declares.

But if Theodoret will not do the Doctor's work, Baronius shall. No wonder,
says he, (p. 155.) Baronius is so much displeased with Theodoret for this
Interpretation, for he very fairly tells us, what he condemns, Baron. An. 60.
20. 21.
(and St. Paul too) was the practice of the Church of Rome, and those Oratories
were set up by Catholics, and not by Heretics. And I shall wonder more, if he
find any one who will believe him; that so great a Champion of the Church of
Rome, as Baronius, should be so stupid, as to maintain in the face of the World
the lawfulness of praying to Angels, as it is practiced in that Church, and yet
confess that as so practiced, it is condemned by Theodoret and St. Paul too.
Either Baronius was a very great Dolt, or the Doctor does not deal very fairly
by him. And this is but too too evident: 1. Because the words as put by him for
the words of Baronius, Viz. [what Theodoret condemns (and St. Paul too) was the
practice of the Roman Church] are not Baronius his words, but the Doctor's, for
Baronius says there expressly, that Theodoret as to the Doctrine of the
Veneration of Angels, recta sensit, that is, held the same which the Roman
Church holds at this day. 2dly, Because the Point in which Baronius differs
from Theodoret, is not that those were not condemned by him and St. Paul too,
who worshipped Angels upon the erroneous account aforesaid, viz. That Access
could only be made to God by the Angels: (whether the Authors of that Doctrine
were Jews, or Heretics, or Philosophers;) but that Baronius judged Theodoret
mistaken in asserting the Authors of that Doctrine not to have been the Heathen
Philosophers, but certain Heretics; and much more in supposing the Oratories
of St. Michael in Phrygia and Pisidia, to have been erected by those Heretics;
Incaute nimis, says Baronius, Too unwarily attributing to them the erecting of
those Oratories which had been of old instituted by Catholics. Baron. An. 60.
n. 20.
This is what Baronius says, grounding himself upon some ancient Records; And
here lies the depth of the Charge, that because Theodoret condemns the worship
and Invocation of Angels, as he thought it was practiced by those Heretics in
those Oratories of St. Michael; and Baronius thinks him mistaken in the matter
of Fact, and that those Oratories were indeed erected by Catholics, therefore
Baronius (says the Doctor) very fairly tells us, that what Theodoret condemns
was the practice of the Roman Church. Which is just, as if the Doctor being to
comment that passage of Scripture, Jos. 22.
where the Children of Israel designed War upon the Reubenites, etc. for
erecting an Altar beside the Altar of the Lord, should tell us, that they too
unwarily ascribed to a schismatical worship, what was intended for a testimony
of the true and lawful worship of God. And another Author passing his judgment
upon this Comment of the Doctor's should affirm, that Dr. St. very fairly tells
Us, that what the Israelites condemned in the Reubenites, was the worship of
the true God. Would not this be a fair tale. if well told by a credible Person
of Dr. St.? If he would not own it for such himself; Why does he impose so foul
a one upon Baronius? For as the Israelites were mistaken in the End, for which
that Altar was Erected, so was Theodoret, says Baronius, in the use of those
Oratories of St. Michael; and therefore it follows no more in his Judgment,
that what Theodoret condemned was the true and lawful Invocation of Angels, as
practiced in the Church of Rome, than that what the Israelites condemned was
the worship of the true God, as exercised among them.

. 3. But the Doctor says yet further, that Baronius very fairly tells Us, that
not only what Th^odoret condemned, but what St. Paul too condemned, was the
practice of the Church of Rome. But this is yet fouler than the former; for
himself (p. 156.) tells us, that what Baronius contended, was condemned by St.
Paul, was the Idolatry of the Heathens. And although Dr. St. will needs make
the Catholic Invocation of Angels, and the Heathens worship of their Demons
to be the same, yet a greater Authority than His is requisite to make us
believe that Baronius thought so too. These are pitiful sleights of sophistry,
to delude an unwary Reader: Advers. Haeres. li. 2. c. 57.
And so are, his citing of Irenaeus, as denying any Invocation of Angels to be
in use among Christians; and of the Council of Laodicea, as charging all who
worship Angels with Idolatry in so doing: Can. 35.
For Irenaeus speaks only of such superstitious Invocating of Angels, as was
used by the Marcites and Carpocratians in their Magical Operations, and working
of false Miracles. And whatever Practice that were of nominating Angels, which
the Council of Laodicea is so severe against, (whether of the aforesaid
Heretics or Heathens) it is manifest that it cannot with any show of
Probability be understood of that worship which the Catholic Church gives to
Holy Angels. 1. Because the Council speaks of such as nominated Angels, and
made private Assemblies to them, forsaking (or excluding) our Lord Jesus
Christ, which words were conveniently omitted by the Doctor. And, 2dly, Because
the Council both in the Canon immediately foregoing: (34.) As also Can. 51.
allows the honoring and celebrating the Feast-days of the Martyrs; which is
a plain Indication that it intended not to condemn in this Canon the worship
due to Angels; of whom Theodoret says, That they are more to be honored than
Men; Li. 3. de Angelis.
yet not as secondary Gods, but as our Fellow Servants and Ministers of God. By
this the Reader may see, whether we had more reason to fear the force of this
Canon; or he the discovery of what he so artificially concealed.

. 4. To his Testimony out of Origin, p. 156. I have answered already, that he
speaks of such Prayers, as are offered only to God; for he both acknowledges a
distinction between the worship due to God and the Angels, and himself also
directs his Prayer to an Angel, as I have showed above, p. 359. What he cites
out of St. Austin, (de Civit. Dei. li. 10. c. 1.) is not in the least against
the Honor or Invocation of Angels, as taught and practiced in the Catholic
Church. For the Question there in debate between Him and the Platonists, as it
stands proposed in the very Argument of the Chapter, is, Whether the Angels
will that sacrifice be offered to God alone, or also to them? That they may be
honored with that kind of worship, with which Holy Men or Blessed Souls are
honored by us, he sufficiently intimates in his 20th. Book against Faustus, c.
21. Where he equally denies the worship due to God, ought to be given to any of
them. And elsewhere, Tom. 4. sup. Genesis 9. 61.
as if he intended to prevent the Dr.'s Objection, as to the worship of Angels;
he says, Neither let it move you, that the Angel (Apoc. 19. 10.) forbids
St. John to worship Him, and admonishes Him rather to worship God; For the
Angel, says he, appeared such, (that is, in so glorious a manner) that he
might (by mistake) be worshipped for God, and therefore the Worshipper was to
be corrected. And this he says in reference to what he had said before, Viz.
That it is observable in the Precept [Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and
Him only shall thou serve] that it is not said, Thou shall worship the Lord thy
God only, as it is said, Thou shall serve Him only, which in Greek is (...): by
which it is plain, that in St. Austin's Judgment, although Latria be due to God
alone, yet worship may be given to others. When therefore he says in the place
now under debate, that the Blessed spirits are not willing we should sacra
facere, that is, dedicate, (the Doctor translates it equivocally to perform any
sacred Offices) and sacrifice to them, or consecrate our selves, or any thing
of ours to them by the Rites of Religion, it is evident he speaks of the
worship which is due to God alone, that is, of such Dedications and
Consecrations, as were performed by the Heathens to their Demons as Gods. And
although in his 61. Q. upon Exodus, he makes this difference (as the Doctor
objecteth against us) between Latria and Dulia, that Dulia is due to God, as he
is Lord; but Latria is not due, but to God as he is God. Yet in the very place
cited here by the Doctor, he affirms, Li. 10. de Civ. Dei. c. 1.
that that service which is given by servants to their Masters, is wont to be
called by another Name in Greek, that is, dulia. But this the Reader was not to
know, for fear he might infer, that if some degree of the service called in
Greek dulia, might be given by Servants to their Masters, then surely a higher
degree of it may be given to the Holy Angels.

. 4. But now after all these endeavors used by the Doctor, to hide himself in
the General terms, of such worship, Religious worship, Prayer, Invocation, etc.
and some obscure passages of the Fathers; He tells us, that he knows very well
(and I pray God, his own knowledge may not rise against him in the Day of
Judgment) by what Arts all these Testimonies are endeavored to be evaded, (or
rather, by what Light he will be discovered to have said nothing to the
purpose,) Viz. That these sayings of the Fathers were intended against the
Heathens Idolatry who worshipped those Spirits as Gods, and offered Sacrifices
to them: But the Church of Rome denie^ the Angels and Saints to be Gods, and
asserts that the worship by Sacrifice is proper only to God. This Answer is
indeed given by St. Austin very often, and others of the Fathers: And there
needed no other, to the Testimonies he produces, if all who read his Book, knew
as much as himself. But such devices as these, (for so he calls them, though
proved to be the sense of the Fathers out of the very places cited by him) he
says, can never satisfy an impartial mind. And (to return him his own words in
a like occasion) I must tell him, that if ever he speak home to our case, he
must do it upon this Point, And so he does, but very little to his comfort; as
I shall make appear, by showing the nullity of the Reasons, with which he
endeavors to make the aforesaid Answer seem insufficient.

1. The First is, because The Fathers, he says, (p. 158.) do expressly deny,
that Invocation or Prayer is to be made to the Angels, and Saints. But this is
but to say the same thing over again, or to equivocate (as Mr. Thorndike says)
in the terms of Prayer and Invocation, which are not so proper to God, but that
in despite of our hearts, they may be used in signifying requests made also to
Men.

2. His second Reason is, because It would be no more unlawful to sacrifice to
Saints or Angels, than to Invocate them. And this Reason clearly destroys it
self, because it supposes we hold it unlawful to sacrifice to the Saints, as
the Heathens did to their Inferior Deities. But to let that pass with the
rest: If he take the word Invocation here to signify the Prayer we make to
God, as the Author and Giver of all Good, I grant it, no less unlawful to
sacrifice to Saints and Angels, than to Invocate them. For what Catholic ever
taught or thought that it was lawful to Invocate any Angel or Saint upon that
account? But if the word Invocation on the one side (as in despite of all
opposition it may be, and by the Custom of the Church it is used) be taken to
signify the requests we make to Angels and Saints to pray for us; and on the
other side the offering of sacrifice be not only by the custom of the Church,
but of all Mankind (as St. Austin teaches) appropriated to signify the
absolute worship due only to God; De Civ. Dei. li. 10. c. 4.
Who sees not the unlawfulness of offering it to any Saint or Angel, may
consist with the lawfulness of desiring them to pray for us? The case is plain
in just Men upon Earth. For St. Paul and Barnabas accepted willingly the
Prayers which others made to them for their assistance, but utterly refused to
admit the sacrifice which the Lycaonians (Acts 14.) would have offered to them:
and it is as plain of the Saints in Heaven, because we pray no otherwise to
them, than we do to Holy Men upon Earth, though more devoutly upon the account
of their unchangeable state of Bliss. How then could the Doctor parallel these
two together, and not only parallel them, but make it less unlawful to pray to
the Saints, than to offer sacrifice to them? I Will tell you. Catholics, when
they write against In^idels or Heretics, make use of the Answers which the
Fathers have formerly given to their Objections. But Dr. St. being to oppose
the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, in the Point of Invocation of Saints, is
for^'t to maintain an Argument of the Heathens against St. Austin: Nay, says
he, (p. 158.) The Heathens in St. Austin argued very well, that sacrifices
being mere external things, li. 10. de Civ. Dei. c. 19.
might more properly belong to the Inferior Deities: but the more Invisible
the Deity was, the more Invisible the sacrifices were to be, and the greater
and better the Deity, the sacrifice was to be still proportionable. Thus the
Doctor, to show that in all reason the duty of Prayer ought to be reserved as
more proper to God, than any External sacrifice; or, as he va^ies the Phr^^se,
than a mere outward sacrifice: and consequently that Prayer was less
communicable to a Saint, than Sacrifice. But do you not think the Doctor used
the utmost of his confidence here, to own and maintain for good (nay very good)
an Argument of the Heathens confuted by St. Austin in that very place? The
Heathen, says Dr. St. argued very well. I deny it, says St. Austin, because
in so arguing they manifest that they do not know (nesciunt) that visible
sacrifices are the signs of the Invisible Sacrifices of the mind; like as the
words we speak are the signs of things. For as when we pray or praise, we
direct the words to him, to whom we offer in our hearts the things themselves,
which we signify by them: so when we sacrifice, we know that the visible
Sacrifice is to be offered to no other, but to Him whose Invisible Sacrifice,
we our selves ought to be in our hearts. And upon this account (he adds a
little below) it is and no other, that the Devils require sacrifice to be
offered to them, because they know it to be due to God alone -- endeavoring by
that means to hinder access to the true God; that Man may not be his sacrifice,
whilst sacrifice is offered to any but to him. Thus St. Austin in Answer to the
Heathens Objection and the Doctor's. By which it appears, 1st, That in the
Judgment of St. Austin, external sacrifice being the highest expression of the
highest part of Prayer, which is the devoting and sacrificing our selves in our
hearts to God, it ought of all others to be reserved as most proper and
acceptable to him: And that Religion which admits no external visible
sacrifice, must needs be deficient in the most signal part of the Public
Worship of God. 2dly, That in the Judgment of the same St. Austin the Doctor
(if he speak as he thinks) knows no more than the Heathens did what the true
notion of external sacrifice is, when he takes it as distinguished from Prayer.
And it would seem, as he says, p, 159. very strange indeed that sacrifice, so
taken, should be that Latria which is proper to God. But it seems as strange to
me that He should take it so, when himself confesses, that those who did
appropriate sacrifice to God, (by which it seems himself is none of them) did
comprehend Prayer as the most spiritual and acceptable part of it, and that
(...) that sacrifices of old were Solemn (...) of supplication; unless he meant
to make his Reader believe that Catholics, w^^en they speak of sacrifice, as
proper to Go^, mean only the external action, as distinguished from Prayer:
which as (...) is far from the^ (...) minds to think so the Doctor in
applauding the Doctrine of the Heathens, and siding with them against St.
Austin, manifestly shows that he judged the Argument of the Heathens more
rational than St. Austin's Answer.

3. His third Reason of dissatisfaction is, (p. 159.) because upon the same
account that the Heathen did give divine honor to their Inferior Deities,
those of the Roman Church, he says, do so to Angels and Saints. But this has
been sufficiently refuted already in the First Chapter,. 6. And at present
there needs no more, but to put down the Negatives to the Doctor's
Affi^matives, viz. that Catholics do not use Solemn Ceremonies of making any
capable of Divine Worship; nor set up the Images of the Saints or Angels for
that End, nor consecrate Temples, and erect Altars to them, or keep Festivals
and burn Incense before them as Gods, or offer sacrifice to them as the
Heathens did even to their Inferior Deities. These are all such known Truths,
both from the Doctrine and Practice of Catholics, that nothing but a
Prodigious deal of Zeal to fix the black note of Idolatry upon that Church,
from which the English Nation received the Faith of Christ, could occasion the
frequent repetition of so notorious a slander. Nor does the Doctor so much as
offer to prove the contrary of any of these Negatives against the Church of
Rome, but only the last, of not offering sacrifice to the Saints and Angels.
And here he thinks he has found something to catch at, because Bellarmin
says, Li. 1. de Sanct. beat. c. 7.
That the sacrifices of the Eucharist, and of Lauds and Prayers are publicly
offered to God for their honor. But is this what the Fathers say of the
Heathens worship of their Inferior Deities, that they offered sacrifices to
God for their honor? No, they say expressly, that the Heathens offered
sacrifices to them, and maintained that they ought to do so; whereas yet
Catholics profess it ought not to be done even to the Holy Angels and Saints,
but only to God, though as Bellarmin says, it may be offered to God in
honorem, in, or (as the Doctor translates it) for their honor. And this is but
what St. Austin professed, De Civ. Dei. li. 8. c. 27.
when he said, that what is offered at the Memories of the Martyrs, is offered
to God, who made them both Men and Martyrs, and joined them in Heavenly Honor
with his Holy Angels, that by this solemnity, we may give thanks, says he, to
the true God for their Victories, and be excited to imitate what they did and
suffered. But the Doctor says, p. 116. that to sacrifice to one for the honor
of another, is a thing beyond his reach, if that sacrifice does not belong to
him for whose honor it is offered. I have heard that some Beggars have the
skill to shrink up their Arms into their Sleeves, as if they could not reach
above a span from their shoulders; And now I perceive there is an Art of
shrinking up Understandings, as well as Arms. For who can believe it beyond
Dr. St.'s reach to understand how sacrifice may be offered to God in honor, or
for the honor of the B. Virgin, but that it must be offered to the B. Virgin
her self, and that so, as not to honor God by it, as he most uncharitably and
unchristianly would make his Reader believe we do? A sudden twitch by the hand
will serve to pluck out the Beggar's arm to its full length; and because I am
perswa^ed a home-example may do as much for a shrunk^ up Understanding; I must
desire the Doctor to reflect, whether it would not be for his honor, that his
whole Party should keep a Solemn Day of Thanksgiving for the Great Wit and
burning Zeal with which the Lord has endowed Him, to the utter confusion of
the Popish Cause? If he think this would be much for his honor; although the
Thanks were given to God, and not to him; I hope it is not beyond his reach now
to Understand that sacrifice also may be offered to God in thanksgiving for the
great Virtues and Prerogatives he bestowed upon the B. Virgin, although the
sacrifice be offered to God and not to her. In^ (...), Honor is nothing but a
Testimony o^ Protestation of some excellency; and whether Thanks be given to
God, by words, or by sacrifice, for the Gifts and Graces he has bestowed on
such a Person, it is an evident Protestation of such excellency in that Person,
and consequently for his honor, though both words and sacrifice be directed to
God, and not to him.

His 4th. and last Reason, [that although Catholics do not call the Saints and
Angels Gods, yet they give them the Worship of Invocation, and the honor of
sacrifices, which are only due to God] This, I say, is but a Repetition of the
Burden of the old Song of Julian the Apostate, and Faustus the Manichaean: and
has been at large refuted in the precedent discourse. I shall only add two
Testimonies for a farther confutation of it, as sung over anew by the Doctor.
The first is of S. Austin. Li. 8. de Civ. Dei. c. 27.
We do not, says he, erect Temples, or ordain Priests, nor make Dedications,
nor offer sacrifices to the Martyrs, because not They, but their God is our
God. We honor indeed their Memories, as of Holy Men of God, who fought for the
Truth, even to the loss of their Lives -- But we do not worship them with
divine honors, as the Heathens did their Gods, nor do we offer sacrifice to
them. The second is of Bishop Mountague, in his Treatise of Invocation of
Saints, p. 60. Where he tells all, who are or will be concerned for Truth,
that the Doctors of the Church of Rome do teach, that the Saints are no
Immediate Intercessors for Us with God; but whatsoever they obtain for Us at
GOD's hands, that they do obtain by and through Christ. And it is (says he)
for ought I know the voice of every Romanist, Non ipsi sancti, sed eorum Deus,
Dominus nobis est. (that is, Not the Saints themselves, but their GOD is our
Lord.) So, it must not be imputed which is not deserved. Were they worse than
they are, it is a sin, they say, to belly the Devil; a shame to charge Men with
what they are not guilty of, to make the breach bigger, already too wide. Thus
St. Austin, and Bishop Mountague; and were they alive, they might justly ^ear,
Preface, page 22. 12.
that for these singular fancies, or superstitious Caprichio's, as the Doctor
calls them, they should ^all under his lash of being accounted Men of mere
Charity than Judgment.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Term, Formal Invocation, and the different Forms used in the
Invocation of Saints: Some Instances out of the Fathers, to show the like to
have been used in their Times.

. 1. THe Doctor having made use, in his Answer to the two Questions, of the
equivocal term of Formal Invocation, to amuze his Reader, I replied, I
understood not well what He meant by Formal Invocation, but withal I told him,
that what Catholics understand by it in the present matter, is desiring or
praying those just Persons, who are in Glory in Heaven to pray for them: To
show the palpable weakness (as he calls it) of this Answer, he says he will
prove, that those of the Church of Rome, do allow and practice another kind of
Formal Invocation from what I assert; and I think he never betrayed more
pa^pably the weakness of his own cause, than in this undertaking. Let the
Reader judge.

. 2. First then, he says, that Never any Person before me imagined that to be
the sense of Formal Invocation, which I do, when I say, that what we understand
by it, is desiring or praying the Saints to pray for us. And (...) Himself in
the very next words declar^s, that he imagins the very same sense of it that I
do, when he says, that the term of Formal Invocation was purposely chosen by
Him to distinguish it from Rhetorical Apostrophes, Poetical Flourishes, and
general wishes that the Saints would pray for us, and from Assemblies at the
Monuments of the Martyrs; of all which, he grants, there are some instances in
good Authors, Viz. the Chief Fathers both of the Greek and Latin Church. For
what is this, but to tell us, that he means by Formal Invocation, as I do, a
real address of our minds to the Saints themselves to help us with their
Prayers: It Is true indeed what He would have his Reader to understand by it,
is, what he says is constantly practiced in the Roman Church to offer up our
Prayers to Saints and Angels, to help us in our necessities, as well as to pray
to God for us. But what does he say then to the Form of Prayer used by us in
the Letanies, Holy Mary, or Holy Peter pray for us: Is it only a Rhetorical
Apostrophe, Poetical Flourish* or general wish, that the Saints would pray for
us: Or, is it more? If it be no more, Why does he impugn what he grants was
used by those good Authors. If it be more, it is then a part at least of Formal
Invocation, as defined by Himself. And if when we pray them to help our
necessities, the meaning be, that they should do it by their Prayers, the whole
sense of Formal Invocation in this present matter, is to desire them to pray
for us: so that though never any Person before me imagined this to be the sense
of it, yet now I have the Doctor himself concurring with me in it. But to pass
on to the Proofs of his Assertion.

. 3. All the difficulty, he says, (p. 163.) lies in this, whether Catholics
pray to the Saints to help their necessities, as well as pray for them: that
is, whether besides the usual form of saying, Holy Mary pray for us; we do not
sometimes vary the Phrase, and say, Help me, or comfort and strengthen me, O B.
Virgin: for, as for the meaning of the words, I never yet met with any
Catholic so Ignorant, as not to understand the sense to be, to desire them to
help us with their Prayers. Behold then here the terrible Mystery not to be
made known to Proselites, says the Doctor, until they be first made safe and
fast enough! Viz. that sometimes they may use the like form of words to God,
and the Saints, as a Child does to his Father, when instead of saying, Pray
Father, Pray to God to bless me, he says sometimes Bless me Father. But
Catholics he says, (p. 163.) do this with all the same external signs of
devotion, which they use to God Himself. And can he excuse a Child from
Idolatry, when he kneels down with the same external sign of devotion, which we
use to God, and says Bless me Father, because he says it in a different sense
to his Father, than he does to God; and will he not upon the same account be as
charitable to us, when with the like external sign of devotion, we say, Bless
me, or help me, Mother of God? Mr. Thorndike in all his discourses shows his
unwillingness to free the Practice of the Church of Rome in this matter from
Idolatry, yet convinced by the Evidence of Truth, Epil. 3d. Part. p. 358.
he confesses, that the Church of England having acknowledged the Church of
Rome, a true Church, though corrupt, ever since the Reformation, he is obliged
so to interpret the Prayers thereof, as to acknowledge the corruption so great,
that the Prayers which it allows may be Idolatries, if they be made in that
sense, which they may properly signify; but not that they are necessarily
Idolatries. For, if they were necessarily Idolatries, then were the Church of
Rome necessarily no Church, the being of Christianity pr^supposing the worship
of one true God. And although to confute the Heretics, the style of Modern
devotion, he says, leaves nothing to God, which is not attributed to, and
desired of his Saints, yet it cannot be denied, they may be the words of them,
who believe that God alone can give that which they desire. And if this cannot
be denied, where is the Doctor's either Charity or Sincerity to interpret these
or the like words, Help me Mother of God, in the same sense they carry, when we
say Help me GOD?

. 4. But what do I do expecting Charity from Him, who makes it superstitious
Fanaticisme, In his Preface.
or at best but Fanciful singularity in others? The excess not of his Judgment,
but Zeal, (if we must call it so) has quite eaten up his Charity. And every
thing he meets with, that is not downright Ora pro nobis, must now be
Idolatrous or Blasphemous. Nay, it is enough he has heard of our Ladies
Psalter, a Blasphemous Book, he says, never yet censured, wherein the Psalms
in their highest strains of Prayer to God are applied to the Virgin Mary. But
what, or whose Book soever that be, (which I first had news of from Himself)
his only hearing of it, argues that it is no public Devotion of the Church,
and so not to be charged upon Her: And did it contain Blasphemy (as he says it
does,) and were publicly known, no doubt it had been censured before this. But
then again, as we are not to take all for Gospel, so neither are we to take all
for Blasphemy, which the Doctor calls so. Every one, says Aristotle, judges
as he is affected, and nothing more subject to different construction, than
words. They are like those Pictures which represent a Man to one that stands on
the right hand, and a Beast to another who stands on the left; or like the
Pillar of Cloud, which gave Light to the Israelites, but was darkness to the
Egyptians. For Example, those words of Christ to his Apostles. You are the
Light of the World, if you set a Jew on the one side, and Dr. St. on the other:
The Jew who owns Christ for no other than a Seducer, will call them
Blasphemous; but the Doctor, I hope, will not do so, although Christ say of
Himself, that He is the Light of the World. And the only Reason he can give,
is, because though the words be the same, yet the sense in which they are
applied to Christ and his Apostles, is very different. And possibly those
highest strains of Prayer to God, which he says are applied in that Psalter to
the B. Virgin, may, if examined, be found not chargeable with Blasphemy, on the
like account. For, if it be not the dead words, but the Intention of the
Speaker that animates them, which makes them to be Prayer (otherwise a Parrot
which should be taught to say, Help me God, would pray as well as a Christian)
it follows that as the Intention of the Speaker is different, so will the
Prayer be also; that is, the same words spoken to God will have respect to Him,
as who alone can give what we desire; but applied to the B. Virgin, will
signify only that we desire her Prayers to obtain for us of God, what we
believe that he alone can give; and consequently no strain of Prayer, (properly
so called) which is made to GOD, will be applied to the B. Virgin.

. 5. But now the Doctor will be so just, as not to insist upon the Ancient
Breviaries, or Obsolete Forms, or Private Devotions, (among which surely the
Psalter he speaks of may be ranked) There is Blasphemy and Idolatry enough, he
thinks, in the present Roman Breviary, to serve his turn. The first Instance he
gives, is that of the Antiphon, Hail B. Virgin, Thou alone have destroyed all
the Heresies in the World; and least this should be interpreted of doing it by
her Son, (as the Church does, when she presently adds, Dum virgo Deum and
Hominem genuisti, that is, Miss. Vot. de B. Mar. a Purif.
by bringing Him into the World, who was both God and Man) a Formal Invocation
of Her, he says, follows, Give me strength against thy Enemies: to which he
adds those Ejaculations in the Hymn, Ave Maris stella. Wherein she is entreated
to loose the bonds of the guilty, to give light to the blind, and drive away
our evils (but he leaves out, and to beg for us all good things,) and to show
her self to be a Mother, (or as it is, says he, in the Masse-Book at Paris,
1634. Jure Matris Impera Redemptori, As thou art a Mother, Command the
Redeemer.) But then again, least the Hymn should be thought only Poetical, he
says, that in the Feast of S. Maria ad Nives, a formal Prayer, is made to Her
to help the miserable, to strengthen the weak, to comfort those that mourn
(where again he leaves out, Pray for the People, Intercede for the Clergy,
etc.) And the like forms, he says, are used to St. Michael, and the Angel
Guardians, and to the Apostles. And now, says he, is all this only praying to
the Saints to pray for us? Yes surely, if it be the sense which makes the words
to be Prayer, as I showed above; and not the bare Characters or Letters. And
that the Church's sense is no other, but to desire them to obtain for us of God
the blessings expressed in those forms, viz. help, comfort, light, etc. is
manifest both from her frequent intermixing that usual form of Pray for us,
which the Doctor conveniently leaves out; and from her public Doctrine, as set
down in the Council of Trent, and inculcated to all the Faithful in their
Cat^chisms.

But what can be said to those words in the Mass Book at Paris, 1634. Jure
Matris Impera Redemptori; As thou art a Mother, Command thy Son? I Answer, 1.
That those words, [shew thy self to be a Mother] to which the Doctor makes
these other of the Mass Book at Paris correspond, are not found in any
Mass Book at all, that I can hear of; nor do the words cited by the Doctor,
agree in their number and measure with the rest of the Verses of that Hymn, and
consequently I have some Reason to believe him mistaken (at least) in citing
that Mass Book. But 2dly, Supposing the words, as cited by the Doctor, to be
found in that Mass Book, I confess they express a vehemence of Spirit, not
unsuitable to the brisk and sudden efforts propet to that Nation; but yet they
are such as may admit of a fair construction, if they meet with a Reader who is
not obstinately bent to be way-ward. There are even in Scripture some
expressions, which seem to carry with them as great an excess as this. Jos. 10.
12. 14.
For example, when it is said that Josue spoke to our Lord, and the Sun stood
still, God obeying the voice of a Man: And when our Savior says of Himself,
that in Heaven he will make his Servants to sit down to Meat, Luke 12. 37.
and will serve them. Now, as the former of these expression does not signify,
a real Obedience in God to the voice of Man, but his readiness to do the will
of those that fear him; nor the latter, that Christ will really serve the Elect
at Table, but only signifies the great care He will take, that nothing shall be
wanting to the complement of their joy and satisfaction. ^o also the words
objected by the Doctor, [A^ thou art a Mother, Command the Red^em^^*] (...) not
signify, that she should really command Him, as she did when he was subject to
her upon Earth; but that she would use that Grace and Favor on Our behalf,
which She has with Him, as a Mother, above all other Saints. And this being
understood to be the sense of the words, all that the Doctor can say, is that
the Author was too Hyperbolical in the manner of his Expression; and in this I
dare affirm he will find very few Catholics dissenting from him. Nay more, I
have reason to believe, that the Parisian Missal of 1634. if there were any
such words in it, has been since corrected; Otherwise my Adversary would
doubtless have cited the Mass Book of 1670. and not of 1634. And then the words
he objects, ought to have been cast among the Obsolete Forms, which he said
before, he should not insist upon.

. 6. But now again, if we use the same form of words to the B. Virgin, and
other Saints, as we do to God, as when we desire her to strengthen the weak, to
give light to the blind, etc. From whence, says the Doctor, must the People
take the sense of these Prayers, if not from the signification of the words? I
Answer, not merely from Lilly's Grammar Rules, but from the Doctrine of the
Church delivered in her Councils and Catechisms, and from the common use of
such words and expressions among Christians. If a Child being taught by his
Parents, that God alone can give what we ask, when he says to his Father,
Bless me, understands the meaning of the words to be, that his Father should
pray to God to bless him: then surely much more must Catholic People, when
they pray to the B. Virgin to drive away all evils, understand the sense to be,
that she would pray to God to deliver them from all evil; there being besides
the common Doctrine of Christianity, (by which they are taught that God alone
is the Giver of all good things,) so many Sermons, Catechisms, and
Explications, both by word and writing daily made in the Catholic Church, by
Priests to the People, and Parents to their Children in this particular Point.
Well, but if this were all, says the Doctor, why in all this time that those
Prayers have been complained of, (viz. by those who have revolted from the
Church) has not their sense been better expressed? Why have they not been
expunged all this while, after that their Breviaries have been so often
reviewed? This I fear, if done, would not be enough to keep them from telling
us, Once upon a time there was a blasphemous Book; or in the Mass Book, Printed
at Paris in such a Year, there was -- But why to comply with the humor of a
few Opiniators, whom no Reason can satisfy, must Mankind be debarred the
natural manner of expressing their affections? And why have not those
scrupulous Person^ all this while devised a Dictionary, or Phrase-Book to
furnish us with words, and forms of speaking, which may equal our Conceptions,
and express every little variation of our thoughts, and all the different
tempers and emotions of the Spirit? Do we not do the same action sometimes more
quick and smartly, than at others? Why then must we be tied to use always the
same form of words? Why may we not sometimes utter the same affection in a more
fervent manner of expression, than at others? He that sees himself in an
imminent danger, makes no long Preambles, but cries out, Help me: And St.
Gregory Nazianzen records it as an act of great devotion in St. Justina, Orat.
in S. Cyprian. ut suppetias ferat.
that to free her self from the snares of Satan, she called upon the Virgin
Mary to help and succor her. But the Doctor has now found a Staff to beat
Bellarmin with, for offering to instance in Scripture that the Apostles are
said to save Men, Viz. by their Prayers, etc. Therefore in the like sense we
may desire them to save us: And he lays on so hard, Romans 11. 14. 1 Cor. 9. 22.
that he has beat all the brains out of the Cardinal's head at a blow. For
will any Man, says he, in his Wits, say the Case is the same in Ordinary
Speech, and in Prayer. Is it all one, says he, for a Man to say, that his
Staff helped him in his going, and to fall down upon his Knees, and pray to his
Staff to help him? And now I pray, who so proper a Man to confute Bellarmin, as
Dr. St.? Bellarmin speaks of such Instruments as have both Understanding and
Will to help us to Heaven by their Prayers; and he presently lets drive at Him
with his Staff for speaking Nonsense. Let the Reader judge whether the
Instrument be more Irrational, or the Use he makes of it: I have long since
observed, that whenever he makes other Men out of their Wits, The Reader has
reason to suspect all is not right at home. But St. Paul doubtless was a
Rational Instrument, and What would He have said, says the Doctor, to one who
should say to him, I pray you pardon my sins, and assist me with the grace of
God? I believe he would neither have condemned him of gross Idolatry, nor
prodigious Folly, as the Doctor does, but considering the bitterness of his
Soul, by the eagerness of his Expression, would have given him the assistance
of his Prayers, to obtain what he aimed to procure by his means of God.

. 7. Having thus cleared the fense of those Forms of Prayer, we sometimes use
to the B. Virgin, and other Saints, to be no other than praying to them to pray
to God for us, as I asserted in my Reply, and answered the little exceptions
the Doctor made against it; I shall conclude this Point with some Instances of
like expressions, either used or approved by the Fathers of the Primitive
times. And first for the usual form of, Holy Mary, or Holy Peter pray for us,
the Instances are so numerous, that to transcribe them would make a Volume.
Many of the Fathers are taxed for this practice by the Magdeburgenses, and
other Protestant Writers; and for this sort of Invocation, Epil. part. 3. page
358.
Mr. Thorndike says, it is confessed that the Lights both of the Greek and
Latin Church, Basil, Nazianzen, Nyssen, Ambrose, Hierome, Austin, Chrysostom,
Cyrils both, Theodoret, Fulgentius, St. Gregory the Great, Leo, more, or rather
all after that time, have spoken to the Saints, and desired their Assistance.
Nay, the Doctor himself (though diminute in his Confession) acknowledges there
are some Instances of them in good Authors, although he will needs have them to
be but Rhetorical Apostrophes, and Poetical Flourishes, or Wishes, that the
Saints would pray for us, as we Englishmen, when we are at play, (says Mr.
Perkins, and I wonder so pat an Example could escape the Doctor) call upon the
Bowls to rubb, Problem. p. 91.
or to run as we would have them. At this sport he fancies St. Hierome to have
been, when he cried to Paul, after her death, Help me, O Paul, in my old Age
with thy Prayers; And so no doubt was the Emperor Theodosius too, when as
Ruffinus reports, Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 33. He went to visit the Sepulchers of
the Martyrs, accompanied with all the Clergy and People, (it was, it seems, a
General Day of Bowling,) and prostrate before their Ashes, (You may imagine to
take surer aim) implored aid by their Intercession; or, (as St. Chrysostom. has
it) in the same, or a like occasion, Ho. 26. in 2 Cor. besought the Saints to
be his Patrons and Advocates with GOD. And the Doctor Himself brings in Saint
Austin, as playing at the same Game, when he says (p. 173.) that he wishes
rather than praise, that St. Cyprian would help him with his prayers;
Confessing also, as I said before, that there are some Instances of this
pleasant kind of Invocation to be found in good Authors. The difficulty then
lies in those prayers which we make to Saints to help our Necessities; But of
these also there want not Instances in the Writings of good Authors of the
Primitive times, parallel to those which the Doctor objects out of the present
Roman Breviary, and Office of our Lady. Do we say there, Hail B. Virgin, Thou
alone have destroyed all Heresies in the World; Vouchsafe Holy Virgin to let me
praise Thee? St. Cyril says, By Thee, Holy Mother and Virgin, Hom. contr.
Nestor.
every Creature that worshipped Idols, has been converted to the knowledge of
the Truth, Praise and Glory be to Thee, O Sacred Trinity. Praise also be to
Thee, O Holy Mother of God -- Who can sufficiently set forth thy Praises? Do we
entreat the B. Virgin to help the miserable, to strengthen the weak, etc.? St.
Gregory Nazianzen abovecited, commends St. Justina for beseeching the B. Virgin
to help and succor her. Do we desire her to protect us from our Enemies, and
show her self to be a Mother? Orat. in Theodor. Mart.
St. Gregory Nissen, calls upon St. Theodorus to fight for his Country, as a
Soldier, and to use that liberty of speech for his Fellow Servants, which
besits a Martyr. Do we supplicate the Angels to come to our help, and defend
Us? St. Ambrose says, Li. de vidius.
that they are to be supplicated for us, who are given us for our Protectors.
Lastly, Do we desire the Apostles Jubere, the word signifies to wish or desire,
as well as to command; but the Doctor will have it here to command the guilty
to be loosed; (And He might as well have translated, Jubeo te valere, I command
you to farewell) It is not so much, as what that devout Woman in St. Austin,
Sermon 33 de diversis.
said to St. Stephen, De civ. Dei. li. 22. c. 8.
when upon the death of her Child before Baptism, she brought the dead Body to
the shrine of the B. Martyr, and there exacted ofhim, says St. Austin, to
restore her Son to Life with these words, Read filium meum, etc. Give me my
Son, that I may behold him in the presence of him, who crowned thee. A thing
both commended by St. Austin, as a Testimony of her great Faith; and confirmed
for such by God, in restoring her Son to Life, at the Intercession of the
Saint. Thus much may suffice to show, that whilst the Doctor casts so much
Dirt upon the Doctrine and Practice of the present Roman Church, He makes it
fly in the Faces of those great Fathers and Lights of the Primitive Times. And
much less might have sufficed for an Objection, (which taken in all its parts,
is as like the seeking for a knot in a Bul-rush, as ever yet I met with any)
but that, as the Apostle says, We are Debtors both to the Wise, and to the
Unwise. Let us see whether the next be any better.

CHAP. V.
The disparity assigned by Dr. St. between desiring the Saints in Heaven, and
Holy Men upon Earth, to pray for Us, shown to be Insignificant.

. 1. TO manifest farther the weakness of the Doctor's Argument, I added in my
Reply, that if Catholics must be guilty of Idolatry, for desiring just Persons
in Heaven to pray for them, upon the same account we must not desire the
Prayers of a just Man, even in this Life, because this formal Invocation will
be to make him an Inferior Deity. And the Doctor rejoins, p. 168. that
supposing this were all, yet this would not excuse them. But from what? He was
loath to name it, the consequence is so absurd, yet he would have his Reader
believe, that it would not excuse them from Idolatry. And the Reason he gives
is, For their practice is very different in their Invocation of Saints, from
desiring our Brethren on Earth to pray for us. And he cannot but wonder how any
Men of common sense can suffer themselves to be imposed upon so easily in this
matter. But if he suppose, that what we do^ Invocating the Saints, is no more
than to desire them to pray for us, as we do other Holy Men upon Earth, How
comes the one to be Idolatry and not the other? The difference, as far as I can
gather from his words, consists in this, that amidst the Solemn Devotions of
the Church, after we have prayed to the Persons of the Holy Trinity, to have
mercy on us, remaining upon our Knees, we address to the Saints, and require
the assistance of their prayers, saying, Holy Peter and Paul pray for us; and
this without being sure that they hear us. This, together with a hint of our
setting up their Images in some higher place in the Church, and burning Incense
before them, is the whole sum of his Argument. These circumstances, he says,
make the desiring the Saints in Heaven to pray for us, to be of a very
different nature from desiring the same from our Brethren on Earth. And I
wonder how any Men of common sense can suffer themselves to be so far imposed
upon, as to believe that any thing of this, or all of it together can amount to
Idolatry? Li. 20. contr. Faust. c. 21.
Why we do not the same in all respects to Holy Men upon Earth, St. Austin
gives the Reason, when he says, that we worship the Saints in Heaven so much
more devou^ly, than when they were upon Earth, because more securely, after
they have overcome all the dangers and uncertainties of this World, as also we
praise them more confidently now reigning Conquerours in^a more happy Life,
than whilst they were fighting in this. So that what we do more to them in
Heaven, than whilst they were upon Earth, in praying to and praising of them,
is an expression of a greater devotion to them now, (than then) upon the
account of their secure enjoyment of a state of Bliss, which they can never
lose. But for that Worship, which is called Latria, for as much as it is a
certain service proper to the Divinity, we neither worship them, (says St.
Austin, and all Catholics with him) nor teach them to be worshipped, but God
alone. But to return to the Doctor.

. 2. The first thing he cavils at, is our turning to the Apostles with the same
postures and expression of devotion, to desire them to pray for us, after we
have invoked the Persons of the Holy Trinity: And where lies the Idolatry here,
if we desire them only, as he supposes, to pray for us? Is the desiring a just
Man to pray for us, to give him the honor due to God? Why then were Job's
Friends sent to him for his Intercession? Or is it the doing it upon our Knees?
Why then do Parents permit their Children to ask them blessing in that posture?
Or, is it the using that posture in the Church? Are all the People then
Idolaters, for desiring upon their Knees the Priest (nay one another) to pray
unto God for them? These are such pitiful trifles, that they were not worth the
reciting, much less refuting, if (as St. Hierom says of the like) to recite
them were not to refute them. Well, but St. Peter, he says, who would not
permit Cornelius to fall down before him, and St. Paul who rent his Garments
and cried out to the Men of Lystra, Why do you these things? would no doubt
have been less pleased with this. And why so, Advers. vigilant. c. 2.
if Cornelius, as St. Hierome thinks, intended through Error, to worship him
with divine honor; and the Men of Lystra, (as St. Luke relates) to offer
sacrifice to St. Paul, as to a God? But then again, supposing the honor which
Cornelius there intended, to have been only an Inferior respect, as to a Holy
Man, and that St. Peter (as St. Chrysostom thinks) refused it out of
Humility, Hom. 21. in Act.
(or as the Doctor terms it Modesty) Does that hinder, but that upon another
occasion he might have admitted it, without danger to his Modesty, and much
more securely now, that He is in Heaven? For my part, I believe that the
Prophet Elizeus lost nothing of his Modesty, 4. King. 4. 27.
or Humility, when the Sunamitess fell down and held Him by the Feet, and He
forbad his Servant to thrust Her away. To accept, or refuse due honor is a
matter belonging to Prudence; and as sometimes it may be refused with vain
glory, so at an other it may be admitted with Humility. What a Caprichio then
was it to say, that if we impute it only to St. Peter 's Modesty, we will not
allow him to carry it to Heaven with him? as if St. Peter could not, without
forfeit forsooth of his Modesty, have seen Christians do to him, what they
every Day do to one another in the Church.

. 3. The Second thing he hints at, is that we can never be sure that the Saints
do hear us, therefore it must be unlawful, or as he would make it, Idolatrous
to desire them to pray for us. To this I answer first, that this can be no
excuse for him not to desire the Angels to pray for him, for it is certain by
many Texts of Holy Scripture, that they know our necessities and prayers, as
Dan. 12. 1. At that time shall Michael stand up, that great Prince, which
stands for the Children of thy People. Zach. 1. 12. The Angel of the Lord
said, O Lord of Hosts, how long will thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, and on
the Cities of Juda, against which thou have had Indigration these threescore
and ten Years. Psalm. 137. 2. I will sing unto thee in the sight or presence of
the Angels. Luc. 15. 7. There shall be Joy in Heaven, and V. 10. There shall be
Joy before the Angels of God, upon one Sinner that does Penance. Apoc. 8. 4.
The smoke of the Incenses of the Prayers of the Saints ascended from the hand
of the Angel before God. All these places, and diverse others do manifestly
show, that our Prayers and Actions are not unknown to the Angels; And whereas
our Savior himself says, that the Just in the Resurrection shall be as the
Angels in Heaven. Matthew. 22. 30. (the equality as to knowledge, not depending
upon the Body) it follows by the Analogy of Faith, that our prayers and
concerns are known also to the Saints, now enjoying the same Blissful Vision
with the Angels; and they no doubt rejoice as much at the Conversion of a
Sinner, as the Angels do; and of them it is recorded also, Apoc. 5. 8. as well
as of the Angels, that they had golden Vials full of Odours, which are the
prayers of Saints, that is, of the Faithful upon Earth, who are here called
Saints, as they are often in other places of Holy Scripture also. To this I
might add the Incomparable perfection of the knowledge which the Blessed enjoy
in Heaven, with many other arguments both from Authority and Reason, brought by
Catholic Divines to prove this Tenet. But because the Doctor brings nothing to
prove the contrary, viz. that the Saints do not hear us, besides his own, Ipse
dixit; I shall not enlarge further upon this Point, but give him all the fair
play he can desire, which is to suppose with him at present, that the Saints do
not hear our prayers. But will it follow from thence, that it is unlawful, or
Idolatrical to desire their Intercession? I answer, (2dly,) with Bellarmine, De
Sanct. Beat. li. 1. c. 20.
and deny the Consequence. 1. Because, although Protestant Writers do cite some
of the Fathers, as expressing themselves doubtfully, whether the Saints hear
our prayers, or no; yet supposing this to be as those Protestants would have
it, this was no Argument to those very Fathers, not to call upon the Saints in
particular to pray for them, as is manifest from their own doctrine and
practice, by what has been said above, and from the Confession of Protestants
themselves. 2. Because it is certain by many and great Miracles wrought by God
upon Addresses made to the Saints, that those who call upon them are heard, and
obtain what they desire. And for the Protestant Reader's satisfaction in this
Point, I shall set down some of them, as they stand recorded in the Works of
St. Basil, Theodoret, and St. Austin, witnesses of too great Authority and
Integrity to be questioned, much less rejected, as Writers of Fables or
Romances.

1. St. Basil, in his H^mily upon the 40. Martyrs, after he had told his
Auditors. that there was Help prepared for Christians, Viz. The Church of the
Martyrs, and that those who had taken pains to find one to pray for them, had
here no less than Forty: and that it was the practice of Christians at that
time for those who were in Tribulation, or Joy, to fly, and have recourse to
the Forty Martyrs; those for deliverance from their Troubles, and these for the
Conservation of their Prosperity: he adds, Here a Pious Mother praying for her
Children, is accepted or heard; as also asking a saf^ return for her Husband,
when in a Journey; or health for him in sickness. Let us therefore pour forth
our Prayers with these Holy Martyrs. The Doctor will be apt to catch at these
last words, as if St. Basil meant, that Christians were only to join their
prayers with the Prayers of the Martyrs, and not to desire them to pray for
them; But this exception is excluded, by what he said before, that those who
are in Affliction, fly, and have recourse to the Martyrs themselves: which
practice of the People, says Dr. Forbes, Consid. Modest. c. 3. p. 311.
the first Bishop of Edinburgh, had not St. Basil approved, he would never have
proposed as an Example to be imitated: and with him agrees Vossius there cited
by him.

2dly, Theodoret is yet more express in this matter, Li. 8. de Graec. Affect.
The Temples of the Martyrs, says he, are conspicuous, and Illustrious both for
their Greatness and Beauty. Nor do we frequent them only once, or twice, or
five times in a year; but we celebrate frequent Assemblies in them; and often
sing praises every Day to the Lord of those Martyrs. Those who are in good
health, beg of the Martyrs the conservation of it; and such as are afflicted
with any disease, beg health. Those who are barren, pray that they may have
Children; and those who have Children, that they may be preserved to them. In
like manner, those who travel, desire the Martyrs to be the companions, or
rather Guides of their Journey; and those who return safe, return also to give
thanks for the benefit they have received; Not that they imagine they go to
Gods; but they beseech and pray the Martyrs of God, as Heavenly Men, to be
Intercessours to Him for them. Now that such as piously and faithfully pray to
them, obtain their desires: The Donaries, when they pay their Vows, do witness,
as evident Testimonies of their recovered health. For some hang up the
resemblances of Eyes; others of Hands, others of Feet; made of Gold or Silver:
which their Lord, how small and vile soever the gifts be, disdains not most
gratefully to accept, measuring the gift by the ability of the Giver. These
therefore being exposed to the eyes of all Men, and brought by those who have
obtained health, are most certain signs of the Cure of the Diseases. These I
say show the virtues of the Martyrs who lie buried there; and the virtue of the
Martyrs declares the God whom they worshipped, to be the true God.

3dly, St. Austin is so copious in this subject, that he writes a Treatise
rather than a Chapter, of the Miracles which were done in his time, at the
Shrines of several Martyrs, De Civ. Dei. li. 22. c. 8.
particularly of St. Stephen, which those who desire to be informed of the
Truth, may read at their leisure. I have instanced already in that of the
devout Mother, Chap. 4.
who exacted of St. Stephen to restore her Son to life, and had her Petition
granted, God, says St. Austin, doing it per Martyrem, by his Martyr. I shall
only add at present what he relates of a poor, but pious Man, called
Florentius, who having lost his Cloak, and not having wherewith to buy another,
went to the twenty Martyrs, (whose memory, says he, with us is very famous,
and prayed with a loud voice, to be clothed: Certain young Men, whom St.
Austin calls Irrisores, (i. e. scoffers) hearing him pray, derided him, (as no
doubt Dr. St. would have done, had he been there) as if he had begged so much
money of the Martyrs, as would buy him a Cloak. But he departing from thence
toward the Seaside, found a great Fish upon the shore, in whose Belly, when
opened, there was found a Gold Ring; which the Cook, a good Christian, to whom
he had sold the Fish, and knew what had passed, gave him, with these words:
Behold how the Twenty Martyrs have clothed Thee. Thus St. Austin, little
thinking, then, or now, (if he know nothing of what passes here below) what
sport this story will make for the Doctor and his Partisans; though he good M^n
judged it worthy to be recounted, that God might be glorified in his Saints.
And upon the same account I shall not omit, though it may add matter of new
Merriment to the scoffing humor of the Age, to set down what I find related by
John Patriarch of JERUSALEM, to have passed in this kind with Saint John
Damascen, about the Year 728. He is known to have been a stout Asserter of the
Veneration of Holy Images, and when the Emperor Leo Isauricus raised a
Persecution for that cause, he wrote diverse learned Epistles to confirm the
Faithful in the Tradition of the Church. He was then at Damascus, where the
Prince of the Saracens kept his Court, and highly in the favor of that Prince
for his Wisdom and Learning; And the Emperor Leo not knowing otherwise how to
execute his Fury against him, causes a Letter to be forged, as from Damascen to
Him, and to be transcribed by One who could exactly imitate his hand; the
Contents whereof were to invite him to pass that way with his Army; with
promise to deliver the City into his hands. This Letter the Emperor, (as out of
friendship to an Ally, and detestation of the Treachery,) sent to the Prince of
the Saracens, who no sooner saw and read it, but in a brutish* Passion,
commanded the right hand of Damascen, which he supposed had writ it, to be cut
off. Dictum Factum. A word and a blow. His hand was struck off, and hung up in
the Marketplace, till Evening; when upon Petition that he might have leave to
bury it, it was commanded to be delivered to him. He takes the hand, and
instead of laying it in the Ground, joins it to his Arm, and prostrating
himself before an Image of our B. Lady, which he kept in his Oratory, humbly
besought her Intercession for the restoring of his hand, that he might employ
it in setting forth her Son's praises, and Hers: This done, sleep seized on
him, and he beheld the Image of the B. Virgin looking upon him with a pleasant
aspect, and telling Him, that his Hand was restored; which when he awaked he
found to be true, and a small Circle or mark only remaining in the place where
it had been cut off, to testify the truth of the Miracle: This is recorded by
John Patriarch of Jerusalem, in the Life of St. John Damascen, and to this I
might add many more of the like kind: But these may suffice to satisfy an
Impartial mind, that whether the Saints themselves hear us or no, yet those who
implore their Intercession are most certainly heard, De Cura pro mort. Cap. 15.
and as St. Austin says, helped by them: And it can never be unlawful, much
less Idolatrous to use that means for the obtaining our just desires, which God
himself has attested by so many Miracles to be acceptable to him. All that the
Doctor brings to uphold his slippery consequence, is that it would be a
senseless thing to desire some excellent Person in the Indies, when we are at
our solemn devotion to pray for us. And so, no doubt he would have derided
those three Tribunes, Vita S. Nicol. apud Lipoman.
who (being unjustly condemned by the Emperor Constantine, commended themselves
to the Prayers of St. Nicholas at that time far from the Court,) for double
Innocents. But God who is every where present, and to whom the Wisdom of the
World is Foolishness, both could and did reward the simplicity of their
Devotion, by causing the Holy Man to appear to the Emperor in his sleep, and
divert him from executing the Sentence. In fine, if the Doctor will needs have
it to be a senseless thing to call upon the Saints in Heaven for the Assistance
of their Prayers, he must either condemn the Lights both of the Greek and Latin
Church (as Mr. Thorndike calls them) to have been senseless Men, (and they may
thank God they escape so) or he must grant this practice of theirs, to be a
convincing Argument, that they believed the Saints did hear them.

. 4. The last thing he quarrels at, is the setting up the Images of Saints in
some higher place of the Church, and burning Incense before them. And what he
says to show this to be very Evil, is that which proves it to be very Good,
viz. That the Persons, for whose sake this is done, are (as we suppose them)
truly such, as for their assured sanctity, would deserve to have it done to
themselves, though perhaps Humility, or other Moral Considerations might weigh
both with them, and the Church not to permit it to be done. Yet we know, that
Elias sat upon the top of a Hill, and called Fire from Heaven upon those two
Captains, who came to seize him; but condescended to go with the third, who
fell on his Knees before Him. And I would gladly be informed what Evil at all
it would be to set a Saint (were he present) in some higher Place in the
Church, (as we do a Bishop) for the People to see Him, and desire his Prayers.
Perhaps it is the smoke of the Incense, which troubles his Eyes, that he cannot
distinguish between the use of it, as applied to God, and as applied to his
Servants, or other things relating to him. But this being of its own nature an
indifferent Ceremony (as bowing and kneeling also are) and not appropriated (at
least in the new Law) to the worship of God, it is in the freedom of the
Church to determine how and when it shall be used. And as when we kneel to God,
that posture is a sign of the sovereign honor we give to him, as the Lord of
all things; but when we do it to a Holy Man, or our Parents, it is but a sign
of an Inferior respect due to them. So likewise the Ceremony of Incense, when
directed to God, signifies the worship we owe to him; but to Holy Persons or
things, an Inferior respect or veneration to them for his sake. Li. 2. de
Missa. c. 15.
The use of it is very ancient as Bellarmin shows, and the significations many,
and very fitly adapted to the Public Service of God, as well for the Reverence
of the Place; as to mind us of the Inaccessible Glory of God, who appeared in a
Cloud; and the sweet Odor our Prayers are to him, if sent up from a heart
inflamed with the love of God. This then being the Intention of Catholic
People in the use of these and the like Ceremonies, viz. to give only a
Honourary respect or Veneration to the Saints, and to desire them only to pray
for us, it is evident that neither in the place, nor the time, nor the manner,
any incroachment at all is made upon the worship and service due to God alone;
and all the Dr. has done in this Paragraff,. 14. p. 168.
was, to endeavor to tie a knot in a Bull-rush, when he could find none, and
the matter was so brittle, that it would not hold the tying.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Practice of Christian People in St. Austin's time, in the Invocation of
Saints.

. 1. THe second Answer I gave to the Dr.'s Injurious Parallel of the Heathens
Worship of their Inferior Deities, and the worship given by Catholics to the
Saints, was, that the same Calumny (as St. Austin calls it) was cast upon the
Catholics in his time, Li. 20. contra Faust. c. 21.
and is answered by him, and his Answer will serve now as well as then. That
Himself held such Formal Invocation a part of the Worship due to Saints, as is
evident from the Prayer he made to St. Cyprian after his Martyrdom; Li. 7. de
Bapt. contr. Donat. c. 1.
Let B. Cyprian therefore help us with his Prayers, etc. And for a farther
Confirmation of it, I added, that Calvin himself acknowledges it was the
custom at that time to say, Instit. li. 3. c. 20. nu. 22.
Holy Mary, or Holy Peter pray for us.

The Dr. comes now, as he says (p. 170.) to consider the Answer of St. Austin,
whether it will serve to vindicate us now as well as then: And I must desire
the Reader to take the pains to peruse attentively the words of St. Austin, as
they stand cited in the Reply, and the Doctor's Considerations upon them (for
himself thought not fit to call them an Answer;) that by his Performance in
this Point, he may see to what miserable shifts, and disengenuous Arts they are
put, who will shut their Eyes, and fight against the light of a Noonday Truth.

. 2. His first Consideration is, that Sr. Austin utterly denies that any
Religious worship was performed to the Martyrs. And how could he affirm this,
if he had not shut his Eyes, when St. Austin says expressly in the place cited,
that it was the custom of the Christian People in his time, to celebrate with
Religious Solemnity the Memories of the Martyrs? That the Reader might not see
this Contradiction, he corrupts the words of St. Austin by translating them
after his mode, Viz. It was the Custom of the Christians in his time to have
their Religious Assemblies at the Sepulchers or Memories of the Martyrs: As if
their Meetings were only to honor God in Himself, and not his Martyrs for his
sake. But this is both expressly opposite to the words themselves; and is
refuted by St. Austin himself, when having admitted in Answer to Faustus his
Objection, that Christians did celebrate the Memories of the Martyrs with
Religious Solemnity, he declares himself not to speak of that Religious Worship
which is due only to God, but such a kind of worship, with which even Holy Men
in this life are worshipped. We worship therefore, says he, the Martyrs with
that worship of Love and Society, etc. But we worship them so much more
devoutly, than we do Holy Men upon Earth, because more securely, after they
have overcome all the Dangers and Incertainties of this Life. He that has but
half an Eye open must see, that St. Austin speaks here of the Worship which the
Christians of his time gave to the Martyrs themselves. And that the Dr. does
but Equivocate in the term [Religious worship] which may reasonably be applied
to the honor due to the Saints, as I showed above in the 2d. Chap. And whereas
he says, that I conveniently left out, what St. Austin adds, that not only
Sacrifice was refused by Saints and Angels, but any other Religious honor,
which is due to God himself, as the Angel forbad St. John to fall down and
Worship Him; had He not conveniently put those words [any other Religious
honour] into the Text (for they are not in St. Austin) he had had nothing to
blind his Reader with; and yet as himself cites the words, it is evident that
St. Austin speaks of such Religious honor, as is due to God himself. Whoever
looks into the Text (which I omitted only for brevities sake) will judge he had
done much more conveniently for his cause, had he left it out.

. 3. His second Consideration, is, (p. 171) that Invocation is expressly
excluded by St. Austin, as no part of the Worship due to Saints. And how again
without shutting his Eyes, could he affirm this, when St. Austin expressly says,
that Christians did celebrate the Memories of the Martyrs with Religious
Solemnity, not only to excite to the Imitation of their Virtues, but also to be
partakers of their Merits, and to obtain help by their Prayers? This he
conveniently avoids the repeating of, and slies for refuge to another place of
St. Austin, where he says, We raise no Altars on which to sacrifice to
Martyrs, De Civitat. Dei. li. 22. c. 10.
but to One God, the God of Martyrs, as well as ours; at which as Men of God
who have overcome the World by Confession of Him, they are named in their place
and order, but are not invocated by the Priest who sacrifices. And here he
thinks he has done our work for us. For, This (says the afore-cited Bish.
Forbes) is a Testimony in which all Dissenters wonderfully exult, Consid. Mod.
c. 4. p. 317.
and even Triumph; But those of the Church of Rome, says he, do answer, and
indeed truly, that St. Austin speaks here of Invocation in the Liturgy, and at
the Altar, where forasmuch as Sacrifice is truly offered to God, (though he
think many of the Church of Rome mistaken in their Explication of it)
Invocation is to be directed to God alone. And that this was St. Austin 's
meaning in that place, would have appeared from the Reason he gives, in the
words immediately following the Doctor 's citation, had he not most
conveniently left them out, Viz. Because the Priest, says St. Austin,
sacrifices to God, and not to the Martyrs, although he sacrifice in Memory of
the Martyrs, for he is the Priest of God, and not of the Martyrs: Who sees not,
that St. Austin here speaks of Invocation made by the Priest at the Offering of
the Sacrifice?

. 4. But that He did allow at other times the direct Invocation of Saints, I
have already shown in the 4th. and 5th. Chapters, from the Examples of the
devout Mother exacting of St. Stephen the restoring her Son to Life; and of the
poor Man, who prayed to the Twenty Martyrs to be clothed. Both which St.
Austin highly commends, and relates them no doubt as patterns for our
Imitation. In his 17th. Sermon de verbis Apostoli, he expressly affirms, that it
is an Injury to pray for a Martyr, to whose Prayers we ought to be commended.
And in his Book of the Care for the Dead, c. 4. and 5. he says, that the
Christians of his time, did not only recommend the Souls of their deceased
Friends to God, but to the Martyrs also, as their Patrons to be helped by them:
And this he gives for the Reason, why they desired to have their Bodies buried
near the Shrines or Sepulchers of the Martyrs, Viz. That the Memory of the
Place where they were buried, might excite their Friends to recommend them by
their Prayers to those very Saints. These Testimonies are so clear, that they
cannot possibly be evaded by any shift, or pretense whatsoever of Rhetorical
Apostrophes, or Poetical Flourishes, or General Wishes that the Saints would
pray for us. And although Bishop Mountague with his piercing Wit, being pressed
with these Authorities, sought every chink to escape out at, yet Bish. Forbes
(c. 4. p. 320.) confesses it was in vain; and that he is very sorry, that the
said Bish. Mountague gave so just a cause to Joannes Barclaius to expostulate
with Him, Paraen. li. 2. c. 7.
for imposing upon the credulity of his Sovereign, and others in this matter.
And had he been now alive, he might with grief enough have pronounced the same
(as I doubt not but many other learned Protestanas do) of Dr. Stillingfleet. As
for what he quotes to have been observed by Lud. Vives (if his Observation were
true) that many Christians in his time did offend in re bona, in a thing good
in it self, (which the Doctor leaves out) because they did, says he, no
otherwise worship Saints, than they did God himself, (the contrary whereof is
asserted by St. Austin of the Christians of his time,) it imports at most but
an Error or Abuse in some particular Persons, such as St. Austin says (in the
place above cited against Faustus) that whoever falls into it, is to be
reproved by sound Doctrine, that he may be either corrected or avoided.

. 4. From St. Austin's Testimony of the custom of Christian People in his
time, I passed to his Practice, and for a Proof of it, I instanced in the
Prayer he made to St. Cyprian after his Martyrdom, Li. 7. de Bapt. contr.
Donat. c. 1.
in these words; Let blessed Cyprian therefore help Us with his Prayers, etc.
This the Doctor calls an Apostrophe, that is a Counterfeit Invocation, such as
Mr. Perkins said, we English men make to a Bowl, when we pray it, (globum
rogamus) to rubb or run; And the comparison being so Parallel between Mr.
Perkins's Globum rogamus, and St. Chrysostom's Sanctos rogamus, Hom. 26. in 2
Cor.
I cannot but wonder, that Englishmen who are generally esteemed the best
Invocators of Bowls in the World, should nevertheless be no better Invocators
of Saints. For, if the devotion be the same, it can be no more Idolatry to call
upon the Saints, than upon the Bowls. But to speak to the words of St. Austin,
[Let B. Cyprian therefore help us with his Prayers] whoever considers the
Motive alleged by Him, why he addressed himself to St. Cyprian, which was for
that in Heaven, He saw more clearly the truth of that Question, of which
himself had formerly doubted, and St. Austin was then treating of; and the
necessity he had of his Prayers, as being yet in this Mortal Flesh, and
laboring as in a dark Cloud; will easily see that it was not a counterfeit,
but a true and serious address to Him for the assistance of his Prayers: And
Chemnitius no doubt understood it so, Exam. part. 3. p. 211.
when speaking of this very passage of St. Austin's invocating St. Cyprian:
This, says he, Austin did, suffering himself to be carried away with the
Times, and Custom. Well, but for all this, the Doctor will have it to be a
wish, rather than a Prayer, and he doubts his saying the like to St. Austin,
Let Blessed Austin now help me with his Prayers, would not be taken by us for a
renouncing the Protestant Doctrine, and embracing that of the Church of Rome.
To this I Answer, although the word Adjuvet taken Grammatically, be of the
wishing or Optative Mood; yet taken with all the circumstances abovementioned,
and the custom of Christian People of that time approved by St. Austin, it
imports as much a formal request, as if a Child should say to his Father,
Benedicat, Let my Father bless me: For it is not so much the Mood, as the Mode
(that is, use and custom) which determins the sense of words: And if the
Doctor will hazard a trial of it, Let him but profess as St. Austin did, that
we ought to celebrate with Religious Solemnity the Memories of the Martyrs, to
be assisted by their Prayers; and that it is good and lawful to commend our
selves to their Prayers; and upon this account say, as St. Austin said, Let B.
Cyprian help me with his Prayers, I dare undertake his own Party shall take it
for renouncing the Protestant Doctrine, and embracing that of the Church of
Rome. But he is so far either from making this Profession with St. Austin, or
saying to him, Let B. Austin now help me with his Prayers, that he would have
the Reader to take it for one of the superstitions, which he would give us to
understand, crept in after the Anniversary Meetings at the Sepulchers of the
Martyrs, grew in request. For S. Austin himself, Contr. Faustum. li. 20. c. 21.
says he, affirms, that what they taught was one thing, and what they did
bear with was another, speaking of the customs used at those Solemnities. And
is it possible he could think so great a Forb as this could pass for current in
the World? Is it possible he could have courage enough to cite the place, where
those words are to be found, and not fear a Rat? Observe I pray: What St.
Austin condemns in that place is this, that some who brought Wine and Meat to
the Sepulchers of the Martyrs, took so plentifully of them, that they made
themselves drunk. His words are these, As for those who make themselves drunk
at the Sepulchers of the Martyrs, how can they be approved by us, whom sound
Doctrine condemns, even when they do it in their own private Houses. This was
the custom of which St. Austin says, that the Governors of the Church did
not teach it, but bore with, till it could be amended. And the Doctor had the
Conscience, by a subtle Insinuation, to make his Reader believe, that what St.
Austin condemned, was the desiring, or, as he calls it, wishing the Martyrs to
pray for them. I shall leave him to make satisfaction to God and the World, and
proceed to that which he calls the Question between us.

. 5. The Question between us, says he, is not how far such wishes, rather than
prayers, being uttered occasionally, as St. Austin does this to St. Cyprian,
but whether solemn Invocation of Saints in the duties of Religious Worship, as
it is now practiced in the Roman Church, were ever practiced in St. Austin's
time? This he utterly denies, and here, says he, (p. 174.) we stand and fix
our Foot against all opposition whatsoever. Thus expiring Candle gathers up its
spirits, and forces it self into a blaze before it dies. Alas! that so many
learned Men should all this while have been mistaken in the Question! that they
should have spent so much oil and sweat to no purpose! The great Question
hitherto controverted between Catholics and Protestants, was held to be,
Whether it be lawful to Invocate the Saints to pray for Us? and whether this
were agreeable to the practice of the Primitive times? But now, like a
mischievous Card that will spoil the hand, this is dropped under the Table, and
all the show above-board, is, whether it may be done in the duties (as he calls
them) of Religious Worship? He saw how often his Foot had slipped, whilst he
endeavored to stand upon the denial, of its being the custom of the Fathers
to desire the Saints to pray for them; and therefore he catches hold of this
Twigg to save himself, Consid. Mod. p. 308.
but in vain; for Bishop Forbes confesses that it was their custom to do so,
both in public and private prayers; although he be loath to give it any other
name but that of wishing. But Chemnitius, (That great Light of the German
Church, as our Doctor calls him in his Irenicum, p. 396. where he sets him in
the Van for asserting the mutability of Church Government, and of whom, he
says, Brightman had so high an Opinion, as to make Him to be one of the Angels
in the Churches of the Revelation) this great Man, without mincing the matter,
Exam. Conc. Trid. part. 3. p. 200.
acknowledges freely, that Invocation of Saints began to be brought into the
public Assemblies of the Church by Basil, Nissen, and Nazianzen, who lived in
the Century before St. Austin: and could little doubt of the Continuance of it
in St. Austin's time, when he witnesses that Christian People did then
celebrate the Memories of the Martyrs with Religious Solemnity, to obtain the
Assistance of their Prayers; But who can tell us what the Doctor means by the
duties of Religious Worship? If he mean hearing of Sermons, (which is so much
cried up by those of his Party, as if it were the Pro and Poop of Religion,
though the Author of the Causes of the Decay of Christian Piety, Chapter 18. call
it the most lazy of all Religious Offices;) he knows the Invocation of Saints
was both commended and practiced in their Sermons, by St. Basil. Hom. in 40.
Mart. S. Greg. Nazianz. Orat. 20. and 21. S. Greg. Nissen. Orat. des. Theodoro,
and others. If he mean the Letanies, although the use of them began to be more
solemn in the time of Gregory the Great, yet Strabo affirms that, De-reb. Eccl.
c. 28.
that form of Invocating the Saints was believed to be much more Ancient: Viz.
from the time that St. Hierom translated the Epitome of Eusebius his
Martyrologe into Latin: or, (as others explicate his meaning) before that time,
but not in so great a number. But then again, if he speak of that Part of the
Mass, which was anciently called the Mass of the Catechumeni, and serves as a
Preparatory devotion, both to Priest and People, the Priest indeed before he
ascends to the Altar, desires the B. Virgin, and the rest of the Saints, as
also the People, to pray to our Lord God for him, and in the Versicles between
the Epistle and Gospel, there are some Instances (though very rare) of Holy
Mary, or Holy Paul pray for us; but as these are not excluded by St. Austin,
who speaks only of the Priest's directing his Invocation to God alone in the
offering of the sacrifice; so neither can the Doctor give any satisfactory
Reason, why the Priest may not lawfully use it then, (especially being
appointed by the Church,) as in his private Oratory. But if he mean that Part
of the Mass, which begins from the Offertory, and was anciently called the Mass
of the Faithful, in which the Priest addresses himself expressly to Offer up the
sacrifice of the New Testament, which Christ has Instituted in his own Body
and Blood; Let him, if he can, (for, he says, he has looked into our Missals)
produce any one Instance of Formal Invocation to any Saint or Angel. There they
are named at this day (as they were in St. Austin's time) in their place and
Order, but are not Invocated by the Priest that Sacrifices: So that in this,
which is the most proper and peculiar duty of Religious Worship (as I have
shown in the 3d. Chap. it was accounted by St. Austin) there is a most perfect
Conformity between the Primitive and Modern Church: and the difference in other
less solemn parts of Devotion, not at all material, as has been showed.

. 6. In the last place (p. 174.) the Doctor says, He is sent from S. Austin to
Calvin, whose Authority, (though never owned as Infallible by Him) he need not,
as he says, fear in this point; and therefore the Errand, (if he will have it
so,) could not be ungrateful. I may well think his heart leaped for joy to hear
Calvin alleged for a witness, that it was the custom in St. Austin's time to
say, Holy Peter pray for Us: and thereupon, as if the day were his own, he
says, He cannot but wonder, that if I saw the words in Calvin, or Bellarmin,
that I would produce them. But hold: Have not I more Reason to wonder at his
wonder, if it be true what Himself makes Calvin to say, Viz. That the Council
of Carthage did forbid praying to Saints, lest the public prayers should be
corrupted by such kind of Addresses, Holy Peter pray for us? For why, I pray,
was such a Decree made, and why did the Fathers of that Council fear, lest the
public prayers should be corrupted with such kind of addresses; if there were
no such custom at that time? Either the Dr. corrupts the words of his dear
Master Calvin; or, it is manifest, they imply it was the custom at that time
to say, Holy Peter pray for Us. And to make this clearer, I shall set down, 1.
What Calvin really says. 2. What Bellarmin answers to him. And from both it
will appear, that Calvin supposes there was such a custom; and withal that
Calvin has corrupted the words and meaning of the Council, and D. St.
misrepresented those of Calvin.

1. What Calvin really says, is this, viz. That it was anciently forbidden in
the Council of Carthage that direct prayer or Invocation be made to the Saints
at the Altar. Instit. li. 3. c. 20. n. 22.
And it is probable, the reason was, for that those Holy Men, when they could
not totally Repress the force of an evil Custom, they thought good at least to
put this restraint upon it, lest the public prayers might be corrupted with
this Form; Holy Peter pray for Us. This is what Calvin says. And who sees
not, that the custom (no wonder if He call it an ill one.) whose force, he
supposes, the Council would, but could not totally Repress, was this form of
address, Holy Peter pray for Us? And He that sees this, must shut his Eyes, if
he sees not that in Calvin's Opinion, it was the Custom of that time (however
reprovable he would make it) to say, Holy Peter pray for Us. For how could he
make the restraining that Custom, to be the reason of the Law, if he did not
suppose there was such a custom, and that a forcible one too? But then again,
who sees not, that for fear the Reader should see this, the Dr. most
conveniently left out of his citation those words of Calvin, which were most
material to the present purpose [viz. that the Decree was made to forbid direct
praying to Saints at the Altar, and the Reason in his Opinion, why those
Fathers made that Decree, was to restrain the force of an evil custom, which
they could not totally Repress?] For had these words been put down, the thing
had been too clear to be denied, viz. that Calvin acknowledged there was such a
custom at that time: As in a like case, if the Elders should make a Sanction,
that hereafter it shall not be lawful for Dr. St. to mis^report the words and
sense of their Patriarch Calvin; and I should say, that in my Opinion, the
Reason would be to restrain the force of an evil custom, which they could not
totally repress in him, of doing it in most of the Authors he cites; I dare
confidently aver, he would not stick to charge me, that I said, he had such a
custom: which if he think good to do, the many instances I have brought of his
insincere dealing in this kind, will more than sufficiently acquit me.

2. What Bellarmin (de sanct, beat. li. 1. c. 16.) answers to this Objection of
Calvin, is, that Calvin corrupted the words and sense of the Council, when he
said, that what it forbad, was to make direct Prayer or Invocation to Saints at
the Altar, because the Council speaks not at all of praying to Saints, but only
ordains that the prayer of him that sacrifices be directed to the Father, and
not to the Son. He says indeed, that Calvin by his Logic deduces that, because
prayer is to be directed to the Father, therefore the Saints may not be
Invocated: and then farther, that the Council decreed, that that form of
Invocation, Holy Peter pray for us, should not be used. And this I can easily
believe was Calvin's ultimate design in corrupting the Canon of the Council. But
where does Bellarmin say, that there was no such custom in St. Austin's time;
or that Calvin said, there was no such custom at that time? Why then is it
made a wonder, that if I saw the words in Calvin or Bellarmin, I would produce
them? The Reason was, to make the Reader believe, that himself could not
possibly be guilty at that very time of a crime, which he imputed to his
Adversary. But whoever considers the nature of the cause, he has undertaken,
will see no cause to wonder at this procedure, because it is the natural effect
of such a cause, to put the maintainer upon the desperate shift of
mis-representing the words and sense of Authors, and no Man wonders at a
natural effect, especially if it be frequent, as this of the Doctor's is.

. 7. But now the blaze is spent, and there only remains a little smoke, viz.
that I may as well the next time bring St. Austin's Testimony for worshipping
of Martyrs, Images, and Angels, because he says, he knew many who adored
Sepulchers and Pictures, and had tried to go to God by praying to Angels. What
this [as well] relates to, I cannot tell; but I am sure he uses the same Art
here, in bringing these Testimonies against us, which he did before in
alleging the custom of those who made themselves drunk at the Sepulchers of
the Martyrs. For either S. Austin speaks here of the Errors of such as were
professed Heretics; or, if any who professed themselves Catholics fell into
them, they were the Errors of particular Persons, (though many,) and justly
reproved by him: Whereas the Custom of Invocating the Saints to pray for us,
was the Universal practice of Christians at that time, not reproved, but owned,
practiced, and abetted by the most Religious Bishops and Fathers of the
Primitive Church, and by St. Austin himself, as has been shown: and by more,
or all after their time; as Mr. Thorndike confesses. Wherefore if the Doctor be
still resolved to keep his standing against so great a strength of Authority,
and give no more satisfactory account hereafter, than he has already done, of
charging the Roman Church with Idolatry: It is manifest, that his Foot sticks
fast (as the Psalmist says) in the deep Mire, where no ground is: or, to speak
in Mr. Thorndike's language, in the depth of Schism: From whence, that he may
be drawn out before the Flood run over him, is the hearty wish of Him, who
honors his Person and Parts, whilst he detects his Sophistry, and refutes his
Calumnies.

FINIS.

