Mr. J. Glanvil's FULL VINDICATION Of the Late Reverend, Pious, and Learned Mr.
Richard Baxter.
THAT the great Enemy of Mankind may keep the greatest part of the World in
Ignorance, Bruitishness, and Sensuality, it has been his peculiar slight,
either to blind and corrupt the minds of those who, by Office, and Profession,
are to oppose those Works of Darkness, or else to fasten some unjust Accusation
upon those that in earnest set themselves to promote Piety, Virtue, and
Holiness; and so, by prepossessing Men's minds with a false Opinion of their
Persons, effectually bar the entrance against any of their never so
Salutiferous Instructions. If after all he can but prevail with good people
(who have still a vulnerable part) to believe or report any of these
Accusations, he then sings his ^^ Triumph, and thinks himself secure of his
Vassals, though they are attacqued with never such clear and convincing reason.
Poh! thinks he, since those that once cried him up are weary of him, and the
very Brethren cry shame upon him, I do not doubt but I have influence enough
over my Slaves, to persuade them to take the opinion of those that have tried
him, and never learn at their own expense, what the experience of others will
teach them at an easier Rate. I wish we had not so sad, and late an Instance of
the successful attempts of the great destroyer in this Nature. As there has
scarce been for many Ages a more Exemplary Pattern of Piety in the World, than
the late Justly Renowned Mr. Baxter, nor a more zealous Recommender of it to
others; so I think it is hard to instance in any, against whom the Powers of
Darkness have made a more manifest and vigorous opposition. But he charged
through it all with an Unshaken Resolution, and Invincible patience; and the
strong and continual impression he had of his speedy appearance before his
Righteous Judge, enabled him to slight the unjust Judgments of Men, to whom he
was neither to stand nor fall; nor could any of this tempt him to betray his
Masters cause by sloth, or prevarication.

Within a few Weeks last past, he has been conveyed safe out of this Noysie,
Clamourous, and censorious World, into the Peaceful Regions above, where
instead of the Reproaches and Accusations of the ignorant and envious, his
Pious Labors meet with the kind appre^^ation of his great Lord, and the
universal applause of the Heavenly Choir. It Is not then so much out of kindness
(though it be a Debt we all owe) to his memory, that we present you with this
Vindication of him, his innocence being cleared up by the proper Judge of it;
he neither fears the Censures, nor wants the praises of those below. But it is,
lest any, by a Preconceived Prejudice, should be diverted from reading those
Books of his, by which so much Heavenly light, and life may be conveyed into
their Souls. Now whereas there are two things especially, (though contradictory
each of the other) which were laid to this Reverend Gentleman's charge, by some
who were equally enraged against him; though upon different Accounts; it is these
two that I shall mainly endeavor to enervate, passing by others of smaller
Importance: While some accused him highly for Faction and Schism, others fell
foul upon him for Time-serving, and Treacherous Compliance; For Confutation of
the First Charge, I shall refer you to the Letter here subjoyned (refering the
answer to the other till another time.) I take this way of answering it,
because most of those that accuse him of it, took not their measures of him, by
any personal acquaintance with him, or indeed observation of their own; but
because they heard it laid to his Charge, by those they had a value for;
therefore the best way to confute them, is to show them, that the same thing is
denied, and Mr. B. justified from the charge, by Men, whom they equally value.
Mr. G -- has made himself deservedly Famous in the Common Wealth of Learning,
and his abhorrence of Faction and Fanaticism: he has testified, not only by
interspersed passages, but whole Sermons and Books against it. So that I cannot
see how any Man, that will acquit the one from the Charge, but he must acquit
the other also, unless he have a very mean opinion of Mr. G -- s, either Skill
or Sincerity.

A Letter of Mr. Joseph Glanvils (Chaplain in Ordinary to K. Charles II.) to
Mr. Richard Baxter.
Reverend and most Honored Sir,
I Have often taken my Pen in hand, with a design to signify to you, how much
I love and honor so much Learning, Piety, and exemplary Goodness, as you are
owner of; And how passionately desirous I have been and am, to be known to a
person with whom none has a like place in my highest esteem and value: But my
affections and respects still growing infinitely too big for mine expression, I
thought I should but disparage them by going about to represent them. And when
I (...) to consider, how I might most advantagiously set forth (...) sense of
your great deserts, always (...) confounded with subject. And the thr^^g of
m^^e affections, each of them impatient to be first upon (...) another's
gratification Great (...): And I find my self (...) with the (...) write
suteably to the (...) for you, that I can scarce forbear throwing a(...) near
concluding, that it is better to speak (...) in such a subject, than a little.
But when I consider you as a person that have high affections for those
excellent qualifications, which in the highest degree are your possession, and
suteably resent the worth of those that own them; I am encouraged to think that
you may conceive how I honor you (though my pen cannot tell it you) by
reflecting upon your own estimate of those, that are of the highest form of
learning, parts, and exemplary piety; or, more compendiously, such in your
judgment, as I take you for, Incomparable. And yet I have a jealousy that that
will not reach it; for though I think your judicious esteem of such, cannot be
surpassed; yet I am apt to think, that none ever got such an interest and hold
upon your passions, as has the object of my admiration, on mine. Nor yet can I
rebuke them as extravagant, though at the highest, since they take part with my
severest judgment, and were indeed inflamed by it. And I profess I never found
my self so dearly inclined to those of my nearest blood, or so affectionately
concerned for my most beloved friends and acquaintance, as for you whom I had
never the happiness to converse with but in your excellent writings, nor ever
often saw, but in the Pulpit. Yea, I speak unfeignedly, I have always
interessed my self more in your vindication when your unreasonable prejudiced
enemies have malign'd you, and delighted my self more in your just praises from
those that know you, than ever my self-love or ambition could prompt me to do
in any case of mine own. Sir, I hope you believe that I speak my most real
sentiments, and do not go about to complement you. For I must be very weak and
inconsiderate, did I think to recommend my self to so much serious wisdom, by
such childish fooleries. Therefore if my expressions favor any thing above
common respect, I beseech you to believe it is for that their cause is not
common; but as much above ordinary, as their object. I know your humility and
remarkable self-denial will not bear to read, what I cannot but speak, as often
as I have occasion to mention your great worth, and merits. However I cannot
choose but here acknowledge, how much I am a debtor to your incomparable
writings. In which, when you deal in practical subjects, I admire your
affectionate, piercing, heart-affecting quickness: And that experimental,
searching solid, convictive way of speaking, which are your peculiars; for
their is a smartness accompanying your pen that forces what you write into the
heart, by a sweet kind of irresistible violence; which is so proper to your
serious way, that I never met it equaled in any other writings. And therefore I
cannot read them without an elevation, and emotions which I seldom feel in
other perusals. And when you are engaged in doctrinal and controversal matters,
I no less apprehend in them your peculiar excellencies. I find a strength,
depth, concinnity, and coherence in your notions, which are not commonly
elsewhere met withal. And you have no less power by your triumphant reason upon
the judgments of capable, free inquirers; than you have upon their affections
and consciences in your devotional and practical discourses. And methinks there
is a force in your way of arguing, which overpowers opposition. Among your
excellent Treatises of this nature, your Rational confirmation of that grand
principle of our Religion, the Sacred Authority of Scripture; your solid
dependent notions in the business of justification, and your striking at the
Root of Antinomianism in them, which I look on as the canker of Christianity,
and have always abhorred as the shadow of death; and your excellent Catholic,
healing indeavoure; These, I say deserve from me particular acknow(...). I
profess the loose, impertinent, unsound, cobweb (...) of the most that I had
met with in the Master of (...) Divine Authority of Scripture, had almost
occasioned, (...)mbling at the threshold, in my inquiries into the (...) on an
implicit faith in things of this moment. But your performance in this kind
brought relief to my staggering judgment, and triumph't over my hesitancy. As
they did also to an excellent person, a friend of mine, who was shaken on the
same accounts that I was. And we are both no less obliged by what you have done
in the other things forementioned. Which I profess I judge so rational, that I
cannot but wonder, almost to stupor, to behold the fierce, though feeble onsets
of your cankered fiery opponents; whose writings against you (most of them)
seem to me to be indicted by nothing but spleen and choler. Nor have I been able
to ascribe the engaging of so many virulent pens against you, to, any other
cause than the endeavors of Satan, hinder the success which your powerful pen
has had against the Dark Kingdom. And the spirit that I have perceived to
animate some of their wild ravings has confirmed me in that belief, that it
was the great Abaddon that inspired their undertakings. I thought e're this to
have given you a more public specimen of mine affections, by endeavoring
somewhat in your vindication against the calumnies, and feeble arguings of some
of those fiery Assailants; But collaterial occasions, and other studies have
hitherto diverted me: Yet I shall not forget my obligations, as soon as I can be
master of convenient time and oppertunities for the performance. But I see my
paper warns me; And though I should please my self by a larger expression of my
respects, and sense of your high deservings from every one that has had the
happiness to be taught by you, either from the press or pulpit; yet I dare not
be so rude in this first Address, as to be troublesome and importunate. I know
your occasions are such, as that they cannot bear a long divertisement. I had
several times designed at London to have taken the boldness to have waited on
you, but the consideration, how you were constantly engaged in business,
prevented the execution of those intentions, And about three years since I came
from Oxford on purpose to Kederminster, to see you there, and hear you preach;
both which I was happy in. But you were then so busy in the company of several
Ministers, that were at your house, that I could not gain an oppertunity of
making way for a future acquaintance. If I were sure that you were less
encumbered now, and that you made any considerable stay in the Country, I would
make a journey on purpose to wait on you. I have with this, sent you a small
Discourse of mine own, of which I desire your acceptance. For the subject and
design I know it will not displease you. And for the management, I Am confident
you will not quarrel with it, because it is not so popular as it might have
been, when you shall know that 'twas intended for those of a Philosophic
Genius. I durst not (Sir) be any longer troublesome, and therefore shall
conclude with this profession, that the freedom of your spirit, the
impartiality of your inquiries, the Catholickness of your judgment and
affections, the peaceableness, and moderation of your principles, the
generosity and public spiritedness of your disposition, the exact, uniform
holiness of your life, and your indefatigable industry for the good of souls,
excellencies which I never knew so combined in one; have so endeared you to me,
that there is not that person breathing, that has such a share in the
affections, and highest value of.

Most excellent Sir, One of the meanest, though most sincere, of your
affectionate lovers, and admirers Joseph Glanvile.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THere is in the Press and (...) published, a Treatise of Mr. Baxter upon the
Ni^est Points of Divinity (...) his own hand sometime before his death. Printed
for John Salusbury, at the Rising Sun near the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, Where
is sold the Worlds of Spirits, fully evince^ by Unquestionable Historys of
Apparitions and Witches, (...) being the (...).


