INSTRUCTION CONCERNING PENANCE AND HOLY COMMUNION; The Second Part OF THE
Instruction of YOUTH, Containing the Means how we may return to God by Penance,
and remain in his Grace by the good and frequent use of the Sacraments.

By CHARLES GOBINET, Doctor of Divinity, of the House and Society of SORBON,
Principal of the College of PLESSIS-SORBON.

The Last Edition in French, now rendered into English.

LONDON, Printed by J. B. and are to be Sold by Matthew Turner, at the Lamb in
High Holborn, and John Tootell, at Mr. Palmers the Bookbinder in Silverstreet
in Bloomsbury: Together with the First Part of the Instruction of Youth in
Christian Piety, 1689.

A DEDICATORY PRAYER TO OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST.
MY Lord and my God, permit me also to consecrate this Second Instruction to
thee, and lay it at the foot of thy Cross, to which I invite thy Children, and
beg the favor of thy Benediction. That which thou have been pleased to bestow
upon the First I made, gives me hopes that thou have yet reserved a blessing
for this Second; and that in respect of the things therein contained, which are
the Sacraments, thy own work, thou will not fail to bless it. Its whole design
is to instruct thy Children, and to teach them to frequent and make good use of
the Sacraments: Sacraments, which with so much Charity thou have instituted,
that thereby thou might conferr thy Grace upon us. We see to our great
grief, that they have not that esteem, which is due to them; and that for want
of the knowledge of their worth and grandeur, and the advantage which from
thence arises to us, many either neglect to approach unto them, or at least do
not always take care to provide themselves with convenient dispositions when
they come. Thou presentest them with holy Penance, that thereby they may be
freed from the Slavery of their Sins; but it often happens, that like the
Israelites in the Egyptian Bondage, they choose rather to continue captives as
before, then to accept thy offer. Thou bestowest upon them Celestial food for
their nourishment, and to strengthen them, whom once thou have received into
thy Grace; but by reason they are ignorant of the excellence of the gift, they
either refuse or neglect to take it, and permit themselves Spiritually to be
starved in the Desert of this Mortal Life. This Bread of Angels agrees not with
their taste, so depraved it is, that they prefer the Onions of Egypt before
this Heavenly Manna. Divine Jesus, open their eyes, who live thus contented in
their misery. Make them feel the weight of their Chains; make them sensible of
the danger of that Servitude, wherein they are detained by Sin; make them
ashamed so to affront thee, and debase themselves, as to serve the Devil, that
Enemy of thy Glory, and their own Salvation. Grant them Grace to aspire to that
liberty, which thy Children, the Children of God, enjoy: that to this end they
may embrace Holy Penance, and thereby be entirely converted to thee; and that
their actions may testify the sincerity of their hearts. That they may increase
and be strengthened in thy Grace by means of this Celestial Bread; and that by
frequently feeding upon thy precious Body and Blood, they may happily pass
through the dangers of this Life to the Land of Promise, which is thy Heavenly
Kingdom, where thou live and Reignest Eternally.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
I Here present you, Dear Reader, with this Second Instruction, for the use of
young People, and also of all such as are pleased to make use of it, that they
may learn how they may rightly employ these two grand means, Penance and the
Holy Eucharist, instituted by Christ for our Salvation. I have discoursed
already of these two Sacraments in the Second Part of the First Instruction:
But I did it with that brevity, which is necessary to be observed in matters,
which one treats of only in passant, or by the by, as accessories to the main
point he designs to handle. Since that time I have often observed, that what I
had said of them was not enough to give young People a full view or a perfect
understanding of these two Sacraments, and to facilitate the use thereof.
Therefore it seemed to me very convenient, that they should have a Book,
wherein they might be solidly instructed in what concerns these two important
Subjects, and benefit themselves thereby upon either of these two occasions;
viz. 1. When they find themselves moved to return to God by a sincere
Repentance, and to consecrate themselves wholly to his Service by a true change
of their former course of life, and to this effect have need to make a general
Confession of their life past, as we have said in the Second Part, the Sixth
Chapter of the first Instruction, 2. When after this general Confession, they
are willing to continue in the frequent use of these two Sacraments; that they
may do it, as far as it may be needful to conserve them in the grace of God,
and to advance in Virtue. And this was the motive I had to undertake this
Instruction, wherein I supply what was defective in the former, aend perform
the two things, I have but even now spoken of. For in the four first parts of
the Instruction concerning Penance I show them the proper means, whereby they
may return to God: The first of which is an exhortation to change our life and
totally to addict our selves to Virtue. In the Second I show them the way to
compass this design, by treating at large of Contrition; of the enormity of
Sin, and the practice of this great Virtue. In the Third and Fourth I treat of
Sacramental Confession, and Satisfaction, and whatsoever else is necessary for
the worthy receiving of that Sacrament. Afterward in the Fifth Part I speak of
the means to conserve the Grace, which one has received by the Sacrament; and
to persever in a truly holy, and Christian life. And the Instruction which
follows concerning Communion may also serve for the same end. For it is most
certain, that this Divine Sacrament is one of the chiefest means, which God
has bestowed upon us to conserve us in his Grace. Hence it is easy to perceive
that this Instruction is not so much a Second Book, as a continuation or
conclusion of the first I made. I have taken an occasion to intermix some
necessary points, which one is obliged to know; as the explication of the
Principal Mysteries of our Faith, which I have placed in the first Part of the
Instruction concerning Communion; and that of the three Theological Virtues,
Faith, Hope, and Charity, which you will find in the Second Part of the same
Instruction: Virtues which are the groundwork of our Salvation, and upon
which, as St. Augustine de Verb. Apost. has it, the house of God, which is
raised up by his Grace, is built. I have also taken occasion to explain the
Commandments of God in the examen of Sins, which I have placed at the end of
the Instruction concerning Penance: And this I have done, that one might have
in this one Book the explication of the Principal points of Christian Doctrine
which every one is obliged to know, and that one may be informed of these
important truths, which often through his negligence he is ignorant of, either
because he conceives them not so necessary, or that he thinks he knows them
sufficiently well already; which happens but too often, not only to young
People, but to many others.

Thus you see, Dear Reader, what I have to tell you upon the Subject of this
Instruction: After which I have no more to do, but to exhort you to benefit
your self thereby. You will not fail herein, if you read it with this design,
and with a desire ot improve your self. And as I have composed it with no other
intention except that of assisting you in your approach to God, and conserving
you in his grace; I hope that if you also read it with this intent, God will
bless both yours and my design. This is what I demand with all my heart,
beseeching him with all possible humility that he will enlighten your Soul
rightly to understand the truths, which he has comprised in these great
Sacraments, and that you may draw in abundance from these two Fountains of our
Salvation the Celestial Waters of Divine Grace; which will preserve you in this
life from the mortal heats of Sin, and rendering you fertile in Virtue and good
works make you deserving of Everlasting Life, the fruit of pious endeavors,
and our last end. Amen.

The Approbation.
WE Underwritten, Doctors of Divinity, of the Faculty of Paris, certify that we
have read a Book Entitled, Instruction concerning Penance and the Holy
Communion, etc. Composed by Charles Gobinet, also Doctor, Principal of the
College of Plessis-Sorbon, wherein we have found nothing but what is
conformable to the Principles of Faith, and Christian Morality, which are there
treated in a manner very clear for the Instruction of Youth, moving for the
Conversion of Sinners, and extreme useful for the Edification of the Just, if
they will follow the light and means, which are therein suggested to them, that
they may advance in Piety by the frequent and worthy use of the Sacraments of
Penance, and the Eucharist.

Given at Paris, this Third of December, 1667. I. Charmeluc. B. Le Blond. J.
Jollain.


The Division of the Instruction concerning Penance. Page 1.
PART I. COntaining an Exhortation to a true Conversion and amendment of Life.
Page 2. PART II. Of Contrition, the first part of Penance. Page 21. PART III.
Of Confession. Page 97. PART IV. Of Satisfaction. Page 151. PART V. Of the
preservation of Grace after Confession against relapse into Sin. Page 187. An
Examen of Conscience. Upon the Commandments of God and the Church. and upon the
Seven Capital Sins. Page 229.
A Table of the CHAPTERS.
Of Instruction concerning Penance, and the means to return to God by a true
Conversion.
PART I.
COntaining an Exhortation to a true Conversion and amendment of life. Page 2.
Chap. 1. An Exhortation, which God made to men and particularly to Young People
to return to him by Penance. Page 3. Chap. 2. Reflections upon the said
Exhortation; and first upon the matter therein contained. Page 5. Chap. 3. The
Second Reflection, upon the Goodness of God, in Exhorting us himself to our
Conversion. Page 6. Chap. 4. The Third Reflection, upon the Injury which those
do, who refuse to be Converted, or deferr their Conversion. Page 8. Chap. 5.
The Fourth Reflection, upon God's Anger against those, who refuse to yield to
these Exhortations. Page 12. Chap. 6. Of the great Punishment which God lays
upon those, who refuse or deferr their Conversion. Page 15. Chap. 7. The
Conclusion of the Exhortation. Page 19.
PART II.
OF Contrition. Page 21. Chap. 1. What we are obliged to do in Virtue of the
precedent Exhortation. Ibid. Chap. 2. What Penance is. Page 23. Chap. 3. What
Contrition is. Page 26. Chap. 4. Of the qualities or Conditions which true
Contrition ought to have. Page 29. Chap. 5. Of Perfect and imperfect
Contrition. Page 34. Chap. 6. Of the means to obtain Contrition. Page 38. Chap.
7. Of the first means to obtain Contrition, which is threefold, Avoiding Sin,
Works of Penance, and Prayer. Page 40. Chap. 8. Of the Motives of Contrition,
and first of the grievousness of Sin. Page 43. Chap. 9. Of the same Subject, of
the grievousness of Sin. Page 46. Chap. 10. A further illustration of the
grievousness of Sin. Page 49. Chap. 11. Of the deplorable effects of Mortal
Sin, to discover better the grievousness thereof. Page 53. Art. 1. Of the death
of the Soul, or the sad effects which Sin produces in his Soul who commits it.
Page 54. Art. 2. Of the effects of Sin in Heaven and upon Earth. Page 60. Art.
3. Of the effects of Sin in Hell. Page 64. Art. 4. A continuation of the same
Subject. Page 67. The Conclusion of this Article of the pains of Hell. Page 75.
Art. 5. Of the effects which Sin produces in respect of God himself. Page 78.
Art. 6. Of the effects of Sin in the Person of Jesus Christ. Page 81. Chap. 12.
The practice of Contrition upon the precedent Motives. Page 87. Chap. 13. Of
Examples of Penance taken out of Holy Writ. Page 89.
PART III.
OF the Treatise of Penance, which is Confession. Page 97. Chap. 1. Of the
Institution and necessity of Confession. ibid. Chap. 2. What Sacramental
Confession is. Page 99. Chap. 3. Of the Conditions necessary for a good
Confession. Page 102. Chap. 4. Of the defects in Confession. Page 104. Chap. 5.
Of the Conditions necessary to make the Confession entire. Page 107. Chap. 6.
An observable Advice concerning the Number of Sins. Page 109. Chap. 7, An
observable Advice concerning the Circumstances of Sins. Page 112. Chap. 8. How
great an evil it is to conceal a Mortal Sin in Confession. Page 115. Chap. 9.
Of the Preparation for Confession, or the Examen of Conscience. Page 123. Chap.
10. Of the distinction which must be made betwixt Mortal and Venial Sin. Page
126. Chap. 11. Of the Confession of Venial Sins. Page 128. Chap. 12. Of
Interior and Exterior Sins, or of the Sins of Thought, and Action. Page 132.
Chap. 13. Of the Sins of Action and Omission. Page 134. Chap. 14. Of the Sins
of Ignorance, Passion, and Malice. Page 136. Art. 1. Of the Sins of Ignorance.
Page 137. Art. 2. Of the Sins of Frailty or of Passion. Page 139. Art. 3. Of
the Sins of Malice. Page 141. Art. 4. Of the Sins which spring from Vicious
Habits. Page 144. Chap. 15. Of the Sins, that are committed by Error or by
Doubt. Page 146. Chap. 16. Of the Sins which we commit in others. Page 148.
PART IV.
OF the Treatise of Penance, which is of Satisfaction. Page 151. Chap. 1. What
Satisfaction is. ibid. Chap. 2. That God pardoning the Sin obliges to a
Temporal punishment. Page 152. Chap. 3. Excellent Reasons out of the Council of
Trent to show why God, remitting the Sin by Penance, obliges the penitent
Sinner to a Temporal punishment. Page 156. Chap. 4. Wherein Satisfaction
consists, and whether it be essential to the Sacrament of Penance. Page 159.
Chap. 5. Of the Conditions which Satisfaction ought to have on behalf of the
Ghostly Father. Page 161. Chap. 6. Of the Conditions of Satisfaction in respect
of the Penitent. Page 167. Chap. 7. Of the Works which may be enjoined for
Penance. Page 172. Chap. 8. That the Penitent, who truly desires to work his
Salvation, ought not to content himself with the Penance enjoined him in the
Sacrament, but he ought to perform others, and how. Page 175. Chap. 9. Of
Sacramental Absolution; what it is, wherein it consists, and what are its
effects. Page 178. Chap. 10. Of the dispositions necessary to receive
Absolution, and of the cases wherein it ought to be denied or deferred. Page
179. Chap. 11. Of the Choice of a Confessor. Page 182.
PART V.
OF the Preservation of Grace after Confession, against relapse into Sin. Page
187. Chap. 1. Of the importance of this Subject. Ibid. Chap. 2. How the relapse
into Sin is a very great Evil. Page 190. Chap. 3. Of three great indignities,
which occur in the Sin of relapse, the Ingratitude, the Perfidiousness, and the
Contempt of God. Page 192. Chap. 4. That those, who relapse frequently into
their Sins, have reason to dread their Salvation. Page 196. Chap. 5. A further
Confirmation of this truth from other proofs, and first from the uncertainty of
their Confessions, who relapse frequently into their Sins. Page 201. Chap. 6.
An excellent Advertisement of St Gregory, concerning the false Repentance of
those, who relapse into their former Sins. Page 205. Chap. 7. That by relapsing
into Sin we lose great part of the fruit of our precedent good Confessions.
Page 207. Chap. 8. That by frequent relapse into Sin, one always falls into a
worse condition then before. Page 209. Chap. 9. That frequent relapse into Sin
leads to final Impenitence and to an Evil death, or to dye in mortal Sin. Page
212. Chap. 10. Of the remedies against relapse into Sin. Page 216. Chap. 11. Of
the means which Penitents ought to observe to avoid any relapse into Sin. Page
224.
A Table of Sins, or an Examen of Conscience upon the Commandments of Gods Law,
and of the Church, and upon the Seven Deadly Sins. Page 229.
The Examen upon the first Commandment. Page 230. The Sins against Faith. Ibid.
The Sins against Hope. Page 234. The Sins against Charity. Page 236. The Sins
against the Virtue of Religion. Page 238. The Sins against the care we ought to
have of our Salvation. Page 241. The Examen upon the Second Commandment. Page
244. The Examen upon the Third Commandment. Page 247. The Examen upon the
Fourth Commandment. Page 249. The Examen upon the Fifth Commandment. Page 254.
The Examen upon the Sixth Commandment. Page 255. The Examen upon the Seventh
Commandment. Page 259. The Examen upon the Eighth Commandment. Page 261. The
Examen upon the 9. and 10. Commandment. Page 264. The Examen upon the precepts
of the Church. Page 265. The Examen concerning the Seven Deadly Sins. Page 266.
Of the Sin of Pride. Ibid. Of Covetousness, Luxury and Sloth. Page 270. Of
Gluttony. Ibid. Of Envy. Page 271. Of the Sin of Anger. Page 272. The Examen of
the Sins which one commits by another. Page 274. The Examen of the Sins of
Students. Page 279.
A TABLE of the Parts and Chapters, contained in the Instruction concerning the
Holy Communion.
THe Preface. Page 281. Of the necessity of this Instruction, and the order
observed therein. ibid. The Division of the Treatise. Page 282.
The First Part. Page 283.
Of the Doctrine, that is to say, of the Truths it imports us to know
concerning the Sacrament of the Eucharist. ibid. Chap. 1. Of Faith. Page 284.
Quest. 1. What is it that we are obliged to know concerning Faith in general?
Page 285. Qu. 2. What is Faith? ibid. Qu. 3. Who is the Author of Faith? ibid.
Qu. 4. What is the Action, Object, and Motive of Faith? Page 286. Qu. 5. By
what ways it has pleased God to convey these Truths unto us? ibid. Qu. 6. What
is the Rule of Faith? Page 287. Qu. 7. What Qualities or Conditions ought our
Faith to have? Page 291. Chap. 2. Of the things we are obliged to believe. Page
294. Art. 1. What are we obliged to believe of God? Page 295. Art. 2. What are
we obliged to believe of Jesus Christ? Page 296. Qu. 1. What is Jesus Christ?
ibid. Qu. 2. Why was he made man? Page 297. Qu. 3. In what does the Incarnation
consist? ibid. Qu. 4. How was this Divine Union accomplished? Page 298. Qu. 5.
What is it that the Son of God has done for our Redemption? Page 299. Art. 3.
What are we obliged to believe concerning the Church? Page 300. Art. 4. What
are we obliged to believe concerning the Sacraments? Page 303. Chap. 3. Of the
Holy Eucharist. Page 306. Art. 1. Of the real prefence of the Son of God in the
Eucharist, and of what we are to believe concerning this Sacrament. Page 307.
Art. 2. Of the Wonders which occur in this Saerament. Page 309. Art. 3. Of the
Effects of the Holy Eucharist. Page 311. Art. 4. Of the Dispositions required
to Communicate well and as we ought. Page 314. Art. 5. Of an unworthy
Communion. Page 316. Of the Damages which follow from an unworthy Communion.
Page 320. Art. 6. Of the end we ought to propose to our selves in the Holy
Communion. Page 322.
PART II.
OF the Practice of Communion, or what we must do to Communicate well, and as
we ought. Page 325. Chap. 1. Of Faith in as much as it serves for Communion.
Page 326. Art. 1. How necessary it is, and in what manner. Ib. Art. 2. That to
Communicate well it is not sufficient to have Faith, but we must practice the
acts thereof, and how profitable they are in Communion. Page 327. Art. 3. The
Practice of the acts of Faith for Communion. Page 331. An Act of Faith upon the
real presence of Jesus Christ in the Blessed Sacrament. Page 332. Upon the
wonders which occur in the Blessed Sacrament. Page 333. Upon the effects which
the Holy Eucharist is capable to produce in the Soul. Page 335. Chap. 2. Of
Hope, the second disposition for Communion. Page 339. Art. 1. What is Hope?
ibid. Art. 2. Of the good which we expect by Hope. Page 341. Art. 3. That it is
necessary to distinguish well betwixt True and False, Good and Bad Hope. Page
344. Art. 4. Of the great Blessings which Hope derives upon us. Page 347. Art.
5. That the Blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist is of great use to fortify and
augment Hope, the Virtue, in us. Page 351. Art. 6. That the Practice of Hope is
a good and great disposition to the Holy Communion. Page 354. Art. 7. The
practice of the Acts of Hope for Communion. Page 355. The practice of Hope
before Communion. Ibid. After Communion. Page 358. Chap. 3. Of Charity the
Third disposition for the worthy receiving the Blessed Sacrament. Page 361.
Art. 1. How necessary Charity is, and how much is required to Communicate well,
and as we ought. ibid Art. 2. That we must have a special care to distinguish
false Charity from true. Page 364. Art. 3. What is Charity? Page 366. Art. 4.
Of the motives of the love of God. Page 369. Art. 4. Of other particular
motives of the love of God drawn from the Blessed Sacrament. Page 371. Art. 6.
The practice of the Acts of Charity before Communion. Page 374. After
Communion. Page 376. Acts of love toward Jesus Christ. Page 378. An Offering
to Jesus Christ. Page 379. A Prayer to Jesus Christ. Page 380. Art. 7. Advices
concerning the precedent practices of Faith, Hope and Charity. Page 381. Art.
8. Another advice of Prayer to the blessed Virgin before and after Communion.
Page 382. A Prayer to the Blessed Virgin before Communion. Page 383. After
Communion. Page 384. A Prayer to the Blessed Virgin after Communion. Page 385.
Art. 9. How it is fit we should spend the day of our Communion. Page 386. Art.
10. Of frequent Communion. Page 388. Art. 11. When and how often we ought to
Communicate? Page 393. An advice of great Importance, Page 395.
Proverb I.
SApientia foris praedicat, in plateis dat vocem suam: in capite turbarum
clamitat, in foribus portarum urbis profert verba sua dicens:

Vsquequo parvuli diligitis infantiam? Et stulti, ea quae sunt noxia, cupient,
and imprudentes odibunt scientiam?

Convertimini ad correptionem meam: en proferam vobis spiritum meum and
ostendam vobis verba mea.

Instruction concerning Penance; And the means to return to God by a true
Conversion.
I shall divide this Instruction into Five Parts.
THe First shall Contain an Exhortation to him, who is in Mortal Sin, to return
to God by Penance, and by serious amendment of his Life.

The Second shall treat of Contrition, which is the first part of Penance: of
the Motives which may raise it, and of the means to obtain it.

The Third shall be of Confession, and the Principal things that ought to be
observed therein.

The Fourth shall give Instructions concerning Satisfaction, and the Works of
Penance, which ought to be performed for Sins past.

In the Fifth, we shall speak against the relapse into Sin: Of its ill and
dangerous consequences: Of the means to avoid that dreadful Rock, where the
greatest part of the World are Shipwrackt, and unfortunately lost. We shall
adjoyn at the End a General Examen of all Sins.

THE INSTRUCTION OF YOUTH.
PART I.
Containing an Exhortation to a true Conversion and Amendment of Life.
ALL that we have spoken in the first part of the Instruction of Youth, is a
continual exhortation to young people to live virtuously during the time of
their youth; and correct their lives by Penance, if they shall be already
engaged in Sin, as it happens but too frequently. This is the cause, why it is
not at all necessary to stop here, to exhort them to think seriously of their
Conversion, and Salvation: and that it will be sufficient to send them back to
the reading of that first part.

This is the reason, dear Theotime, why, if you be touched with a desire to
consider seriously of the Salvation of your Soul, I beseech and conjure you to
read that part of your instruction, and to weigh attentively the reasons, and
motives, which I have brought to persuade, and convince you of the great
obligation you have to apply your self to virtue in your tender years: I am
confident that if you poise them well, and with that serious attention the
matter does deserve, you will be convinced, and conclude with your self thus;
It is true, I ought to think of my Salvation, from the very moment that I
desire to return to God, to change my life, and labor earnestly for my
conversion.

And to the end you may be more firmly fixed in this resolution, and may
perform it with more constancy, and without any wavering, I shall propose here
an exhortation, which God himself has made you, that so I may the better
remove from you all resistance, and delay in a business so important and
necessary for your good, to which you are exhorted by the voice of God himself.

CHAP. I. An Exhortation which God made to Men, and particularly to Young
People, to return to him by Penance.
IT is in the first Chapter of the book of Proverbs, which was dictated by the
Holy Ghost chiefly for the instruction of young persons, where the divine
wisdom speaks in this manner. Give ear, Theotime, to the voice of God, who
addresses himself to you, and comprehend well, what he shall say unto you.

O Children, how long will you love infancy, and fools covet those things that
are hurtful, and unwise hate knowledge? Turn at my correction, behold I will
utter my mind to you, and make you understand my words. Because I called, and
you refused; I have stretched out mine hand, and there was none that regarded.
But you have despised all my Counsels, and neglected my reprehensions. I will
also Laugh at your destruction, and mock, when that shall come to you, which
you feared; when sudden Calamity shall fall on you, and destruction, as a
Tempest, shall be at hand, when tribulation and distress shall come upon you.

Then shall they call upon me, and I will not hear, they shall seek me early,
and shall not find me: because they have hated knowledge, and not received the
fear of our Lord, nor consented to my counsel, but despised all my correction.
Therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own ways, and be filled with
their own devices. The aversion of little ones shall kill them, and the
Prosperity of fools shall destroy them. But he, who shall hear me, shall rest
without terror, and shall enjoy abundance, fear of evils being taken away.

Hitherto are the words of God, which call men to their Conversion, and which
press men to think on their Salvation. But I beseech you Theotime, be not
satisfied with once reading them, offer not such an affront to the Speech,
which God himself has made you, as to pass it over so slightly; but read it
often, till you have perfectly understood it, and deeply printed it in your
mind, and heart. Desist not from reading, until you are resolved to obey, and
perform what it requires; and to the end it may make a greater impression, and
produce more plentiful fruit in your mind, read also these following
reflections.

CHAP. II. Reflections upon the Precedent Exhortation, and First upon the
things, which it contains.
IF you consider well this divine exhortation, you shall find, that it contains
five parts.

In the first, Almighty God, that he might make you reflect upon your self,
gives you an amorous reproach of your blindness, which moves you to run after
your own destruction, and shows you, that you act not like a man, but like a
child, one unwise and in a frenzy.

2ly. He exhorts you with a fatherly, and admirable goodness to depart from
your blindness, and return to him by a true conversion.

3ly. Because you have heretofore sometimes resisted his divine admonitions,
and interior motions of his grace, he threatens you with his anger, and
severest indignation, if you continue to despise his bounty.

4ly. He foretells the sad misfortunes, which shall befall you in punishment of
your obdurateness: The only reading whereof is sufficient to make you tremble,
and quake, with horror, and apprehension. In fine, He opposes to these
misfortunes the favors, and blessings, which he heaps upon those, who hearken
to his voice, and follow his admonitions, and live according to his holy will.

Weigh well, dear Theotime, all these things one after another, they are of
great importance to you, if you regard them as in themselves; but more, if you
consider them as they are proposed by Allmighty God, and in his own proper
words.

CHAP. III. The Second Reflection upon the Goodness of God in Exhorting us
himself to our Conversion.
COnsider first, and weigh attentively, that God who invites you to return unto
him by repentance, and a holy life, is he himself, whom you have most
greivously offended, by neglecting his friendship, loosing his grace, and
incurring his indignation. To God you are become an Enemy by your Sin, and he
might justly destroy you for evermore. Yet nevertheless he is the first that
invites you to be reconciled unto him, and urges you to return into his favor.
He himself seeks after you, he prevents and exhorts you to reconcile your self
unto him; and this moves you not at all!

Seek amongst men an example like this, of one, who being offended, goes to
meet his Enemy and invites him to a reconciliation, and you shall not find any:
And this example of God himself, who does infinitely greater things for your
sake, does not move you, so as to make you return unto him. Is this possible?
can there be an obdurateness like this?

But consider in the second place, the quality and greatness of the Person, who
Exhorts you to return unto him, and enter again into his favor; which is no
less then that of God himself. God who is infinite in Greatness, Power, and
Majesty, before whom all the Grandeurs of the World are but dust and ashes: who
makes the powers of Heaven and Pillars of the Firmament to tremble. This God,
so great, so powerful, does humble himself so far, as to go and meet a
wretched creature, an ungrateful and rebellious man; who has forgotten the
favors of his Creator, despised his commands, and lost his friendship: this
God seeks for such a man even in the bottom of the abiss, the state of mortal
Sin, wherein he is, to exhort him to come forth, and offers him his hand to
withdraw him from that misfortune: yet this insensible creature hearkens not at
all, choosing rather to continue in his misery, then give ear to the voice of
God, that would deliver him. This is you your self, Theotime, who treat in this
manner almighty God, when you refuse to obey his voice, who calls you to your
Conversion. If a King should show such bounty toward a criminal, and that
miserable creature should refuse the favor of his Prince, would it not be, a
thing without example, and would not men say, that he had lost both his sense
and reason? what ought you not to say, and judge of your self, who perform the
same in respect of God?

Thirdly, if God did receive any benefit by your Conversion, this might
something (though but little) diminish the esteem, which we ought to have for
that excessive bounty, which he manifests by seeking us first. But the truth
is, he can receive no advantage, for all that he seeks is your good, and not
his own: He will not be more happy, when you shall be saved; nor less blessed;
if you shall be damned; for he is glorified as well by the actions of his
justice, as by those of his mercy, Quid prodest Deo si justus fueris aut quid
ei confers si immaculata fuerit via tua? what profit, says Job, does God
receive from thy justice, or what advantage does thy holy life yield unto him?
Job 22. All the advantage is to your self, and not to him; it is your
happiness, and not his. It is true, he takes a great pleasure in showing his
mercy, and exercising his bounty toward those, who make not themselves
unworthy of his favors: but then it is also most certain, that he is glorified
by the punishment of the wicked. This is that which he himself has declared by
his Prophet Moses, to his people of Israel. As our Lord, says he, has before
rejoiced upon you, doing good to you, and multiplying you, so he shall rejoice,
destroying and subverting you. Deuteronomy. 28.63.

Is it not then a strange blindness to resist the voice of God, who seeks after
us out of his pure bounty, and for our only good? What can we say of our
selves, Theotime, if we are so obdurate and insensible in the concern of our
Salvation? Doubtless there is great reason to cry out with St. Hierome, O
clementia Dei! O nostra duritia! dum post tanta scedera nos hortatur ad
poenitentiam, and nec sic quidem volumus ad meliora converti. O the meekness of
God! and the hardness of humane heart! since after so many offenses his mercy
exhorts us to repentance, and yet our heart is so obdurate, that it refuses to
submit to the word of God, and be converted.

CHAP. IV. The Third Reflection upon the Injury which those do who refuse to be
Converted, or defer their Conversion.
AS the Bounty of God toward Sinners seems not to be able to advance farther
then to court and seek after their friendship; so the wickedness of man cannot
reach to an higher pitch, or do a greater injury to God, then by despising and
neglecting the wonderful goodness he manifests in this occasion.

That we may rightly apprehend the greatness of this injury we shall make a
small reflection upon the actions of God toward man, and upon the actions of
man toward God.

The Divine Bounty performs that to man, which man denies to his
Fellow Servants. It may sometimes happen, that the offender begs pardon of the
offended, submissively request a reconciliation, and a restitution to his
favor; but upon what extrinsick Motives, proceeds this chance-acknowledgment
of a fault, will easily appear; as either he is an Inferior, and may justly
expect the ill consequences of prejudiced Power; or that an after thought fears
a revenge from the provoked; or that Interest consulted, he seeks how
advantageous his friendship may be for the future; or some like reason brings
him to this act of a specious humility: But that a person, by his Inferior, nay
and even his Creature, most heinously offended against the strictest ties of
humanity and gratitude, and from whom he can neither expect a favor, nor fear
an Injury; as for example a Master, Superior, King or Benefactor; That this
Person seek his friendship, by whom he had been grievously offended; This is
that, which one man never performs to another: Yet this is that which God
performs toward man, viz. a Master toward his Servant, a King toward his
Subject, a Judge toward his Criminal; and, that I may comprize all in one
word, God toward his Rebellious and Ungrateful Creature. And in this he
manifests unto the world a goodness and love which only appertains unto
himself. In hoc est charitas quoniam ipse prior dilexit nos. 1. Joh. 4. It was
in this point, says St. John, that God made appear his goodness in loving us
first, and even then, says St. Paul, when we were his Enemies he reconciled us
unto his friendship. Romans 5. Was there ever any Bounty like unto this? See here
how God behaves himself toward man in this occasion. Let us now see how man
comports himself toward God.

You understand, Theotime, very well, what his duty is; it is, without doubt,
to yield himself conquered by this admirable Love; and to cast himself into the
arms of this infinite goodness, which invites him so amorously to receive him
into his favor: But stand astonished at both his and your own actions after so
long entreaty.

This God, whom you have grievously offended, seeks after you first, and
exhorts you to return unto him, offering you pardon for your Sins. This God so
great and so powerful, who has no need of you in any thing, invites you, and
entreats you to return unto his favor. He who can raise as much Glory to
himself from your Damnation, in punishing you by his justice, as he shall
receive from your Salvation, by making you partake of his mercy. Yet
nevertheless out of the sole desire, which he has of your happiness, he
abaseth himself even to invite, and urge you to your Conversion, and you will
not hearken to him at all; you refuse, or defer to follow the invitation of his
love, and perform what he requires of you for your own good. Can there be an
affront like unto this?

Job in his miseries complained that even his Servants themselves did not
regard him, and that they insolently scoft at the requests which he made them.
Servum meum vocavi and non respondit mihi: ore proprio deprecavi illum. Job.
10. Judge then how God may blame you, and what complaints he will make of you,
when you continue in your wicked life, and defer to obey his admonitions: will
not he have reason to make the same complaint as he did in times past of the
Jews? I have stretched forth my hands, says he, toward that incredulous, and
always rebellious people, which resists my words. Isai. 65. Tota die expandi
manus meas ad populum incredulum. That which a Master will not do in respect of
his Servant, which is a man like himself, God performs in regard of you, and
you take no notice of it: but to speak plainer, God performs that for your
sake, which a Servant would scarce do for his Master; he seeks you, as if he
had need of you; he sollicites you, as if he had a want of you. O divine Love,
when I consider thee, I cannot but exclaim according to the expression of an
Author of these latter days.

O amor, O pietas nostris been provida rebus!
O bonitas servi facta ministra tui! Picus Mirand.
O Love, O piety of God, who have so great a care of our Salvation! O goodness
how great art thou, that make thy self a Servant of thy Servants!

But converting our consideration to our own obdurateness and ingratitude, and
to the contempt we have of thee, I deplore our misery with the words of the
same Author.

O amor, O pietas nostris male cognita seclis!
O bonitas nostris nunc prope victa malis.
O Divine Love, O goodness, how little art thou reflected upon in our age! O
bounty, it is true that thou art infinite, yet our Sins are become so great,
that we have much reason to fear lest they should furmount thy goodness, and
oblige thee to withdraw thy Mercy from us.

CHAP. V. The Fourth Reflection upon Gods anger, against those, who refuse to
yield to these Exhortations.
THe injury of this refusal being such as I have said, or rather above all that
we can think or imagine, it is certain that it highly moves Gods anger against
those, who render themselves guilty: Quanta est haec injuria and quam graviter
punienda: cum vilissimus vermis clamantem ad se audire dedignatur creatorem?
St. Bern. Sec. 23. de diversis. How great is this injury (says St. Bernard)
and what Chastizements ought it not to expect: when wretched man, who is less
than a little worm of the Earth, is so impudent, as to refuse to hearken to the
voice of his Creator, who speaks to him for his Salvation.

Without doubt this refusal does greatly provoke the anger of Almighty God, as
it is a contempt of his divine words and admonitions: of all injuries, contempt
is the most insupportable; and of all contempts there is none greater, then
that by which one refuses a reconciliation with their Sovereign; principally
when he offers himself, and expresses his desire: what will then the contempt
be, which one shows on this occasion toward Almighty God himself?

He that would Seriously consider of it, would soon perceive how injurious and
affrontive it is to Almighty God, and how much it provokes the indignation of
God against those who render themselves guilty: but that I may make you more
clearly discern it, I shall give you here the judgment of God himself upon this
subject, which he has declared in many places of the Scripture; read and
consider well that which follows.

In the 65. Chapter of Isaias God numbers up all the iniquities of his People,
and after he had reproached their enormous ingratitude, he says, he will
destroy them for all their crimes, and particularly, because they had contemned
those mild exhortations, which he had so often made them for their conversion
and Salvation. And you who have forsaken the Lord, who have forgotten my holy
Mount, I will number you in the Sword, and you shall all fall by Slaughter,
because I have called, and you have not answered, I spoke, and you have not
heard, and you did evil in mine eyes, and you have chosen the things that I
would not, Isa. 65.

In the following Chapter he repeats the same menaces, where he says, that as
the wicked take a delight in the things that displease him, so he will take a
pleasure in bringing upon them all the evils that they feared; and then adds
the reason, I have called and there was none that would answer, I have spoken
and they heard not. Isai. 66.

He speaks more effectually in the 7th Chapter of the Prophet Jeremy. And now
because you have done all these works, and I have spoken to you early rising,
and speaking you have not heard: and I have called, and you have not answered:
I will do to this house, wherein my name is invocated, and wherein you have
confidence, and to the place, which I have given to you, and your Fathers, as I
did to Silo: and I will cast you away from my face, as I have cast away all
your Brethren, the whole seed of Ephraim. Jer. 7.

And to show how great his Indignation was against that people for contemning
his sayings, and the exhortations which he had so often made them for their
Conversion, he forbids his Prophet to pray for them, and to oppose himself by
his prayers to the Design he had to punish them, and revenge himself of them.
Tu ergo noli Orare pro populo hoc: nec assumas pro eis laudem and Orationem,
neque obsistas mihi: quia non exaudiam te. Thou therefore pray not for this
People, neither take unto thee Praise and prayer for them, and resist me not,
because I will not hear thee.

Could God give a greater mark of his indignation against them who refuse to be
converted, then is expressed in those Words, since he refuses that others
should appease him by their prayers, by which they would endeavor to hinder
the execution of his justice?

But if his anger were so high, against the Jews for this reason, how can we
expect it should be less against Christians, and against us our selves,
Theotime, who contemn no less his divine grace, and who continue in our
disordered lives, and in our Sins after so many exhortations, and admonitions
to leave them? This is the reflection which St. Hierome made upon this place,
which we ought to consider and keep well in mind. Viz. that all that which God
there spoke to the People of the Jews, ought to be understood of us, if we
commit the same faults that the Jews did: Quidquid illi populo dicitur,
intelligamus and de nobis si similia fecerimus. St. Hier. in c. 7. Jerem.

CHAP. VI. Of the Great Punishment which God lays upon those, who refuse or
defer their Conversion.
ALL the Passages which I have brought, do sufficiently show, the heavy
Chastisement which God sends to those, that contemn him in that manner: The
Scripture contains a vast number of others. But we need not seek farther, then
in this Exhortation of God, which we have spoken of above. Learn from God
himself, what you ought to fear, and the misfortunes that will befall you, if
you resist any longer the desire he has of your Salvation.

The punishments are contained in these words. Ego vero in interitu tuo ridebo,
and subsannabo vos. I will laugh at your Destruction, and mock at you: words
full of terror, which ought to make all those tremble, who are in mortal Sin.
Dicat nunc qualiter feriat, quos ad se nullatenus revertentes tanta
longanimitate sustentat. St. Greg. lib 18. moralium c. 7. It is for those,
according to the advice of St. Gregory, to learn hence from the mouth of God
himself, in what manner he will punish those, whose conversion he has expected
a long time, without any effect on their part.

By these words God threatens to revenge himself of those at the hour of their
death, who continue in their sins; to punish their wicked life with an
unfortunate end, and treat them at that last hour, as they have dealt with him
during their life. Is not this most just and reasonable? They abandoned God
during their Life, and God abandons them at the hour of their death. They
refuse to hearken, when he speaks, and moves them to their Salvation; they
contemn his admonitions, and will give ear to nothing, but their own Passions,
and follow nothing but their pleasures: They perform all their actions, as if
they Mocked God; and God by a just but dreadful punishment will act in respect
of them as a provoked Enemy, who Scoff's at his Conquered Foes, and Insults
over their utmost miseries, with which he sees them overwhelmed.

He will behold them Surprised with some dreadful accident, or a mortal Agony
which in a small time will carry them away: He will see them Searching all
means to Escape, Overwhelmed with griefs; troubled with fear and trembling;
tormented with the Remorse of their guilty Consciences; calling to him for
their Succor and Deliverance; but he will not hearken at all: He will become
Deaf to their Prayers as they would not give ear to his admonitions: He will
not hearken to their desires for their deliverance, as they would not hearken
to his advices for their Salvation: He will not give them time for repentance,
being they refused it when it was in their power, and when they were exhorted
by God himself. Thus will they dye Miserably, seeing themselves constrained to
abandon a mortal Life, with all the Pleasures which they loved more then either
God, or their Salvation, to go and begin an Eternal Death; where for fleeting
Pleasures they shall find immortal torments, and an infinity of evils, which
shall never end.

It is thus, Theotime, that God shall treat those who contemn his Favors, and
refuse to hearken to his Voice, when he invites them to their Salvation; and
thus will he punish them always; and that you may better comprehend this
Chastizement of God, take notice of three great evils which compose it.

The First is an unprovided death, which he will send to those, that are
impenitent, when they shall least expect it. Cum irruerit repentina calamitas,
and interitus quasi tempestas, ingruerit.

The Second is an oppression of grief, and anguishes in that dreadful
surprise, pains of Body and Senses, anguishes of Soul and Conscience: this is
that, which is signified by those words of God, Cum irruerit super vos
tribulatio and angustia.

The Third, which is the most dreadful, is God's forsaking them in that last
and deplorable extremity; a forsaking so great, that he will never more hearken
to their prayers and cries, as he himself says in the following words, tunc
invocabunt me and non exaudiam, etc.

And all these miseries will befall them in punishment of their obstinacy in
their Sins, and refusal to be converted. Eo quod exosam habuerint disciplinam,
and sermonem Domini non receperint, etc.

I would to God, Theotime, this chastisement were as rare, as it is frightfull
and terrible. But it happens too often by a deplorable misfortune, and is but a
just effect of the divine justice, which frequently puts in Execution his
threats against those, who so often contemn his holy inspirations.

All the Christians, who are either dead, or daily dye in Mortal Sin, (of whom
the multitude is innumerable) are witnesses of this truth; All those to wit,
who are surprised by unexpected accidents, either of sickness, wherein they dye
without Confession; or Confess, but in haste, without necessary dispositions:
or having time to Confess, defer it to the last extremity of their sickness,
being more taken up with the grief and apprehension of death, then moved with
the thought of their Salvation and Conversion: Or else also those, who confess
themselves in due time, yet have no true sorrow for their sins; but are sorry
rather by reason of the Evils, that surround them, then upon any motive of the
Fear, or Love of God; these also, although they have all the exterior marks of
true Penitents, as having duly performed all the exterior acts of Penance;
(which makes us believe that they are truly Converted, and departed in the
grace of God) Yet, in effect, they shall be damned for ever.

In fine, Theotime, it cannot be denied, but that there are a great number of
Christians Damned: It is also most certain, that this does not happen, but
because they have not done true Penance for their Sins before their death: and
why have they not done it? Except it were that death suprized them in the state
of sin; and did not give them time, or means to do Penance, or at least perform
it, as they ought. But how happened it, that they were so surprised? unless it
were, that, by the just judgment of God, those menaces were executed against
them, wherewith he so often threatened to punish their hard and obdurate hearts:
by suprising them, when they thought the least of it, and abandoning them at
the hour of their death.

O Theotime, they must be extremely deaf, and in a deep Lethargy, who are not
awakened with these Thunderclaps: and they must be very infensible not to fear
the dreadful effects of these menaces of Almighty God; which happen daily to
many of the World. Be afraid then, and apprehend the severity of all
misfortunes, that may attend you. That which happens unto many, may perhaps
happen unto you; and if it should befall you, in what condition would you
remain for all Eternity?

CHAP. VII. The Conclusion of this Exhortation.
AS this great Exhortation comes from God himself; it is proper also, that he
himself should give us the Conclusion, and that we should learn from him, what
we ought to conclude, and perform, after we have heard his voice, that calls us
to our Salvation. We shall learn it from the Apostle St. Paul in his Epistle to
the Hebrews, 3. Chapter, where he exhorts the Christians, not to be rebellious
to the voice of God, and not to imitate the obdurateness and rebellion of the
Jews, which God punished so rigorously: Hearken then to his words, and his
conclusion: Wherefore (as the Holy Ghost says) to day if you shall hear my
Voice, harden not your hearts, as in the provocation, according to the day of
the temptation in the Wilderness, where your fathers tempted me. Heb. 3.

He pursues and urges strongly this advice, as well in this Chapter, as in the
following; where he shows, that the Jews were not rejected of God, but for
their incredulity, and resistance, that they made to his words. To whom did he
swear, that they should not enter into his rest, but unto them that obeyed not?
so that we see, that they could not enter in because of unbelief. Heb. 3.18.

He adds afterward, how the Christians ought to fear the like Chastisement:
Let us therefore fear, (says the Apostle) lest at any time by forsaking the
promise of entering into his rest, any of you should seem to be deprived -- Let
us therefore study to enter into that rest, lest any man fall after the same
example of incredulity. Heb. 4.

And about the End of this Epistle, in the 12 Chapter, he renews again this so
important an Advertisement, by these words, which ought to be engraven in all
the hearts of Christians. See that you despise not him that speaks to you;
for if they escaped not, who refused him, that spoke on Earth; much more shall
we not escape, if we turn away from him that speaks from Heaven. Heb. 12.

See, Theotime, the Advertisements, which the Apostle gives to all those, whom
God has favored so as to speak to them for their Salvation, and call them by
his voice to their Conversion. Consider them attentively, with the reasons he
alleges, and think well upon it, what you are to do. Assure your self, that
it is to you that God addresses himself, when you have understood the
abovementioned pressing Exhortation, which he has made for your Conversion.
Be afear'd to fall into the dreadful chastisements with which God has
punished the obstinacy of the Jews, and use all your endeavors to avoid them;
you cannot by any other means escape them, then by seriously complying with the
desire which God has of your Salvation, and making now a firm resolution to
return unto him by Penance, and a perfect change of your former life, for
effecting whereof I propose the following means.

PART II. Of Contrition.
CHAP. I. What we are obliged to do in Virtue of the precedent Exhortation.
WE read in the Acts of the Apostles, that the Jews and other Inhabitants of
Jerusalem, having understood the first Sermon, which St. Peter made them of
the Death and Resurrection of the Son of God, upon the day of Pentecost, were
so lively touched, that they immediately demanded what they should do to be
saved. Now when they heard (says the Scripture) this, they were moved in their
hearts, and said unto Peter and the other Apostles; Men and Brethren what shall
we do? The St. answered them in these terms, Do Penance, and be Baptized every
one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of Sins, and you
shall receive the Grace of the Holy Ghost. Acts. 2.

Dear Theotime, if the words, which you have read above, (which are Gods own
words, whereby he Exhorts you to treat of your Salvation) have made that
impression on your mind, which they ought to make; your heart will certainly be
washed with sorrow and compunction; unless you be totally obdurate, and more
obstinate then the Jews. Now I cannot believe this of you; wherefore, methinks,
I hear you demand of me, what must I do, that I may obey the Voice of God, and
become a good and real Convert, and a true Penitent?

To which I answer with the chief of the Apostles, do Penance for your Sins,
and receive the Sacrament, not of Baptism, since you have once received it, and
it cannot without Sacrilege be repeated; but of Penance, to obtain hereby the
remission of your Sins, and the Grace of the Holy Ghost, which will assist you
to lead a new Life. Let us betake our selves to Holy Penance, which is a Second
Baptism, a Baptism of tears and sorrow to cleanse therewith all our Sins.
Baptisemus lachrimis conscientiam, qui peccatis inquinavimus Vitam. St. Ambr.
Let us wash our Consciences with tears, who have defiled our Lives mith a great
number of offenses. Let us weep before God our Creator, and cast our selves
into the arms of our Celestial father, whilst yet he has them open to receive
us, and so lovingly calls us to him. Let us not delay, lest he may shut them in
punishment of our incredulity: Let us prevent his anger by having recourse unto
his Mercy: and let us perform that, which the Apostle St. Peter exhorts us to
do, in Conclusion of the abovementioned admonition. Let us therefore, says
that Divine Apostle, go boldly to the Throne of Grace, that we may receive
Mercy, and find Grace to help in the time of need. Heb. 4.

CHAP. II. What Penance is.
SInce we cannot return to God after Sin by any other way, but that of Penance;
it imports us very much to know, what it is; and to understand well this means,
which is of such importance, as that without it we can never be saved,
according to that weighty sentnece of our Savior. If you do not do Penance,
you will all perish. Nisi paenitentiam habueritis, omnes simul peribitis.

This Penance so necessary may be considered two ways. As it is a Virtue, and
as it is a Sacrament, for it includes both these excellent qualities.

First, it is one of the Christian Virtues, which has for its object, and end,
the destruction of Sin in him, that has committed it, and the satisfaction of
the divine justice by sorrow and good works.

Secondly, it is also one of the Seven Sacraments of the New Law, being raised
to that dignity by Jesus Christ, when he gave to his Apostles, and their
Successors power to remit Sins.

As a Virtue, Divines define it thus. A Virtue or gift of God which makes us
deplore and hate the sins, which we have committed, with a purpose to amend,
and not offend any more for the future.

Its principal acts are Confession, Contrition, and Satisfaction.

Confession, that is a declaration or acknowledgment, that they have sinned
before God, by which they owe themselves before him guilty, and worthy of
punishment: it being certain that the first degree necessary to obtain pardon
for a fault, is to acknowledge it, and declare our selves culpable. It was for
this reason that David said, that he had confessed his sins before God, and had
obtained pardon. Psalm. 31.

Contrition, that is to say, a regret or sorrow for having offended God;
because the declaration of the crime is not sufficient to obtain pardon; except
we also testify and declare a regret and displeasure from our heart; without
which it is impossible to obtain it.

Satisfaction, is a punishment which one lays on himself, to repair the injury
he has done to God by Sin, that he may more easily obtain pardon, and bear the
punishment which his justice should impose: It being certain, that it is in the
liberty of him, that pardons an injury, to pardon it on what condition he
pleases, and reserve what punishment he shall think convenient for it. Hence it
is that St. Ambrose in Psalm. 37. said, that he, who does Penance, ought to
offer himself to endure, and be chastised by God in this life that he may avoid
eternal punishment; and St. Augustine begged of God with so much earnestness,
that he would be pleased to chastise him in this world, so that he would pardon
him in the next. Hic ure, hic seca, modo in aeternum parcas.

As these three acts compose the Virtue of Penance, they also make the parts of
the Sacrament, which Jesus Christ has instituted upon this same Virtue. The
words of this institution are these, which he spoke to his Apostles on the day
of his Resurrection. Receive the Holy Ghost, whose sins you remit are remitted,
and whose sins you retain are retained. John. 20.

By these words he has given to the Apostles and their Successors the Power
to remit, and retain the Sins of the faithful; and by a necessary consequence
he obliged the faithful, that should fall into Sin, to put themselves in a
state fit to receive that remission, and to have the dispositions without which
a Sin cannot be pardoned, neither by God nor men, which are Confession,
Contrition, and Satisfaction: Confession, by which the delinquents declare
their Sins to him, who has Power to judge, to wit, the Priest; because a judge
cannot give Sentence of a Crime, if he know it not, or it be not brought before
him to judge; Contrition, because a Sin cannot be remitted to him, who does not
declare some sorrow before the Judge: and Satisfaction, because to receive a
remission, one must be disposed to receive it upon the Conditions, that shall
please him who gives it, and with that reasonable Chastizement that he shall
think proper to impose, as is already said. So these three acts, serving as
dispositions for the remission of Sin, serve also for the matter of the
judgment, which the Priest makes, of the same Sin, and of absolution, which he
pronounces in virtue of the power, which Jesus Christ has given him.

And these two things joined together, to wit the acts of the Penitent, and the
absolution of the Priest, compose the Sacrament, which we call Penance;
whereof these acts are the matter, and the Absolution is the form; which are
two parts necessary for a Sacrament.

Behold Theotime, what Penance is, and it is necessary, that you should
conserve in your mind this Idea, and the distinction, which we now made, as the
groundwork of all that, which we shall say on this Subject: Because to make a
true conversion, of which we speak here, Penance is requisite in both those two
manners, both as a Virtue, and as a Sacrament. The Sacrament is necessary,
because it is by its virtue, that one receives the remission of Sin: and the
acts of this same virtue are likewise necessary, both before and after the
Sacrament: Before the Sacrament, to dispose one to receive it; and after having
received it, to Satisfy God, and conserve ones self in Grace, as we have said
above.

CHAP. III. What Contrition is.
I Begin to explain the acts, or parts of Penance with Contrition; because it
is the most necessary of all; for without it, the others are of no value, and
it may supply the want of the other in case of necessity, on condition that it
include the will to confess, and satisfy when we are able. Wherefore read
attentively, what follows.

The Council of Trent gives us a perfect Idea of this great action, when it
defines it in these terms, to be A grief of mind and a detestation of Sin
committed, accompanied with a resolution not to commit it any more. Counc. Tree.
Sess. 14. c. 4.

It says, that it is a grief of mind, that is, a regret and interior
displeasure, which is conceived in the heart for having offended God. And a
detestation by which word is meant a Hatred and an Aversion, which one has to
Sin, in looking on it, as a wicked thing and mortal Enemy to our Salvation, and
the Glory of God. With a resolution not to Sin any more. This is a necessary
consequence of the grief and hatred of Sin. For he who has a regret for an
evil, and truly detests it, he also has a will to avoid it; if he has not
this will, it is certain, he has neither sorrow, nor aversion.

By this definition you see, that Contrition is composed of three interior
acts, a Sorrow, a Detestation, and a good Purpose. Detestation is the first
Act, which is the groundwork, on which are raised the other two. For he who
has conceived in his heart an hatred against Sin, has a Sorrow for having
committed it, and a purpose not to commit it any more. So that we must chiefly
apply our selves to this detestation or hatred; and this is what we must
carefully take notice off.

That we may arrive at this, we must perfectly understand the malice, that is
included in Sin.: for we only hate and detest those things, which we know to be
wicked.

Now there are in Sin two sorts of evils, the evil of the fault, and the evil
of the punishment. The first is the Injury, which by Sin is done to God. The
other is the damage, which the same Sin draws upon Us in punishment of that
injury, which we did to God. The one regards God, the other our Salvation: and
both of them render Sin infinitely detestable. The evil of the fault, because
it offends God, and the evil of the Pain, because it makes us loose God, and
become punishable by eternal Damnation.

In fine, Theotime, there is nothing more detestable, and which ought to breed
in us a greater horror, then the cause which produces these two evils, which
are the greatest and most terrible of all mischiefs. Sin offends God so highly,
and is such an injury done unto him, that all men and all Angels together are
not able to comprehend, how heinous it is, so grievous is it. Is there any evil
more heinous and detestable? The same Sin, by this injury, which it does to
God, separates us from him, makes us loose his Grace, excludes us for ever from
his Glory, and makes us subject to eternal Damnation: And can we speak, or
think, of an evil more dreadful, and which deserves more our hatred and
detestation.

Let us raise our thoughts higher, and consider Sin not only in general, and as
it is others; but as it is within our selves; and say to our own hearts; By the
Sins which I have committed, I have offended my Creator, my Redeemer, my
Benefactour, my All, God infinite in greatness, in Bounty, in Holiness; without
cause, without reason; by my malice alone, and blindness: Good God! how happens
it, that I have not a horror of my self and of the evils, which I have done.

By the same Sins I have lost the Grace of God, I am become his Enemy, I am
deprived of Heaven, I am fallen into the Slavery of the Devil, and made a
Victim of Hell. O Sin, how horrid art thou! O siin, why have I committed thee!
O Sin, I hate and detest thee with all my heart, and above any thing that is
detestable in the world. Iniquitatem odio habui: and abominatus sum. Psalm. 118.

CHAP. IV. Of the qualities, or conditions, which true Contrition ought to have.
WE speak not here of perfect Contrition, (whereof we shall treat in the
following Chapter) but more generally of the Conditions, which grief, necessary
for the obtaining the remission of Sin, ought to have, whether it be perfect or
imperfect; and I say this Contrition must have four Conditions, to wit, it must
be Interior, Supernatural, Universal, and Sovereign: Take notice of these
Conditions, for they are of great importance, and many are deceived in them.

First, Contrition, or sorrow for Sin ought to be Interior, that is to say,
from the Heart; and when it is only in words and outward appearance, it is not
Contrition, but an Illusion: The Heart must sincerely produce the Sentiment and
Sorrow, which the words express: For this reason the Council said above, that
it was a Sorrow of Mind, and a detestation of Sin: Now this detestation is an
Act of the Will. The Scripture says, that it is a Conversion, that is, a
return of the Heart to God: Convert your selves to God with all your hearts. We
must seek for God by Penance, and in seeking we shall find, if we seek for him
with all our hearts, and with the sorrow and tribulation of our Souls. Deuteronomy. 4.
God reprehended the Penance of the Jews, who made great Exterior
Demonstrations, even to tear their Clothes, as a mark of their sorrow, but they
were not touched in their Hearts. Convert your selves to me (says God to them)
with all your hearts, in Fasting, in Tears, and Lamentations, and tear your
Hearts, and not your Garments. Joel. 2.

In fine, Theotime, there is nothing more manifest both by Scripture and
Reason, then this truth, that Penance oght to be in the Heart, that is in the
Will: that as the Will was the cause of Sin, so also it may be the cause of
Sorrow, and produce Penance. The Heart must revoke the evil, which it has
wilfully committed, and detest Sin, which formerly it had affected.

Secondly, It is not sufficient to detest Sin in the Heart; it must also be
detested upon a good Motive, that is upon a Motive sufficient to obtain Pardon
for the Sin. This Motive, that it may produce that effect, must be
Supernatural, that is one of those which God has revealed, and which we know
by Faith: The reason is, because an Action purely Natural cannot procure
sanctification for the Soul, which is wrought by Grace, and is a thing above
Nature. Hence we assigned the Second Condition of Contrition to be
Supernatural, that is conceived upon a Supernatural Motive, and consequently by
a Motion inspired by God.

This Supernatural Motive has relation to two Heads: Viz. to that which
concerns our Supernatural good, which is Eternal Happiness; and to that which
regards the Glory of God. I say our Supernatural good, because the Natural
goods, as Life, Health, Honor, Riches, are not able to raise such a sorrow for
Sin, as might serve to obtain the Pardon from God. This we must take good
notice of: Such was the sorrow of Saul, who did not grieve for his Sin; but for
the loss of his Kingdom, which he saw God would deprive him of. Such was the
sorrow of Antiochus, who did not weep for his Crimes; but because of the great
Misfortunes he found himself overwhelmed with. Such many times is the grief of
Christians, who demand pardon for their Sins, when they are surrounded with
Afflictions, which they resent more livelily, then the evils, which they have
committed by their Sins, which move them little, or nothing. It is very true,
that Afflictions make us return to God, and he himself sends them us for that
effect: but there is a great deal of difference between the occasion, which
makes us do an action, and the motive for which it is performed. Afflictions
serve for an occasion to return to God, because they awake us from the sleep of
sin, make us reflect upon our selves, be sorry for the crimes, that caused
them, and have recourse to God for our deliverance: but they ought not to
serve, as a motive to detest our sins; because that would be only a pure
natural sorrow, which avails nothing to restore us unto the grace of God. We
must have a higher motive, and returning to God by afflictions, detest our
sins; by reason of the danger, to which they exposed our Eternal Salvation; or
the honor of God, which they have infinitely offended. Whosoever has not
these motives in view, or one of them, has not the Contrition which disposes
to grace.

In the third place, we have said, that Contrition must not be only
supernatural, but also Sovereign, that is, most powerful. The meaning hereof,
is, that it does not suffice to detest sin upon a supernatural motive, but that
this motive should overrule, and keep above the other, which come into our
mind: so that we should rather detest the sin by reason of the damage it brings
to our Salvation, or the injury done to God, then for any natural evils it may
produce; and be resolved to suffer them all, rather then commit one Mortal sin.
This is what Divines call detesting sin, supra omne detestabile, that is, above
all that which in the world may stir up our hatred and detestation.

And the reason is most clear, because sin is the Sovereign evil, and the
greatest of all evils. For if we consider the offense, there is none more
heinous, then that which it commits against God; and if we cast our eye upon
the punishment, there is none more Dreadful. This is the reason, why one
cannot detest it sufficiently, but by detesting it above all natural
misfortunes.

Herein yet we must mark well, that this greater detestation, does not consist
in being more sensible, more lively, or more vehement then the hate and
detestation of other evils; because that is not necessary, nor always in our
power: but this is to be understood of the esteem, or judgment, which we make
of Sin, accounting it really the greatest of all evils, as in effect it is; and
detesting it in this quality above all others, and purposing firmly not to
commit it any more, upon any account whatsoever.

But we are yet to observe, that to have that detestation of Sin above all
evils in our heart, it is not at all necessary, that every evil in particular
should be proposed, as Death, Torments, Infamy, and the like; but it suffices,
that they should be proposed in general. Likewise, it is not convenient they
should be proposed severally; lest their representation should make the mind to
waver in its Resolution, or make resolutions lightly, and with presumption of
its own forces; which would not be performed; when occasions were offered: as
it happened to St. Peter. It is sufficient to esteem Sin the greatest of all
evils, which can ever befall us; To hate and detest it as such, to make a new
resolution not to commit it any more, but rather to undergo whatever misfortune
may happen to us, trusting in the mercy of God, and hoping he will either free
us from those mischiefs, or that he will give us strength to support them by
his Grace, then offend him.

The 4th condition of Contrition is, that it must be Universal in respect of
all Mortal Sins: that is, by it we must detest all, without excepting any, and
have a resolution never more to commit any one mortal Sin. The Holy Ghost
pointed at this Condition, when he said, that we must do Penance for all the
Sins we have committed. If the Sinner shall do Penance for all his Sins, he
shall Live. Ezech. 18. We must convert our selves to God with all our hearts;
that is, the heart must totally be offered to God, and not divided, so as to
give one part to God, and the other to Sin. Their hearts (says he elsewhere)
are divided, therefore shall they dye. Hosea. 10. The reason is evident,
because Mortal Sins cannot be remitted but altogether, not one without the
rest. Man cannot reserve in his heart an affection to any one Mortal Sin, but
he will of necessity incur the hatred and displeasure of God. The Contrition,
which one may think he has of other Sins, if yet he affect any, cannot justify
him in the sight of God; for it is absolutely false and imaginary; because if
he really hates any, he hates all Sins, there not being any one which does not
cause his damnation, and infinitely offend God.

Hence it is, that those deceive themselves, who pretend to do Penance, and yet
refuse to pardon injuries, or to be reconciled to their Enemies; those also,
who will not restore the goods they have unjustly gotten, and those who are
careless in avoiding the immediate occasions of Sin, and such other like: In a
word, all those, whosoever they be, that have any wilful tie upon them to any
particular Sin, which yet they are not fully resolved to break asunder, are
imaginary, but not true Penitents.

CHAP. V. Of perfect and imperfect Contrition.
THis distinction is grounded upon that, which we said even now, of the two
sorts of evils, which are found in Sin, to wit, the one of the injury done to
God, and the other of the damage, which thereby we bring to our own Souls.

When we hate Sin by reason of the Supernatural goods which it deprives us of,
as of the Grace of God, and Life eternal, or because of the Punishment it draws
upon us from Almighty God, it is an act of Contrition, but an imperfect one, by
reason we consider nothing in it so much as our own Interest; and this act is
called Attrition.

But when above this motive we raise our thoughts higher, and hate Sin by
reason it is an affront to the supreme goodness of God, which deserves to be
beloved above all things, which we ought to affect more then our selves, and
which we are obliged to love, although there were neither Paradise, nor Hell; it
is an act of perfect Contrition, which proceeds from Charity, and the pure love
of God.

The first Contrition is good, and profitable; it is supernatural by reason of
its motive, and because it is an effect of the inspiration of the Holy Ghost;
but it does not restore man unto Grace, except it be assisted by the Sacrament;
because it is not of it self, without the assistance of the Sacrament, an act
of Charity, which can justify, but only an act of the Virtue of Hope, which is
not able to confer Grace.

The Second is excellent and perfect, and restores the Soul to the grace of
God, even before the receiving of the Sacrament; but not without respect to the
Sacrament; because it includes a will, or disposition of mind, to receive it,
when occasion serves.

In either of them both, there is a fear and love of God, but differently. For
in Attrition there is a servile fear, and an imperfect love, which makes us
only regard our own advantage. In Contrition there is a filial fear, and a
perfect love or Charity; which makes us consider the honor of God, more then
our own concern.

By the one and the other we hate sin: but by the first we hate principally the
punishment of sin, and we fear that more, then the fault, or offense of God. By
the Second we detest principally the offense of God, and we fear that more,
then the punishment.

But here we must take notice of a point of great concern: when we say, that in
Attrition we fear more the pain, then the offense; this more, or this excess,
is not to be understood of a Positive preference, or esteem, which one may
have, whilst he compares the punishment with the offense. For he, who comparing
these two together, should say, either expressly, or tacitly, that he fears
more to be damned, then to offend God, would commit a Mortal Sin; but this is
to be understood only of, as we may call it, a Negative, or abstractive
preference; which we understand, when one thinks of the punishment of sin
without reflecting on the offense of God, which because it occurrs not to his
mind, he does not think of; but stops as it were only at the punishment which
occurrs, as being more sensible, and without advancing farther, conceives a
horror of sin, and detests it upon that account, without rising higher, or
thinking of the offense.

But if it chance that any one think expressly both of the punishment of sin,
and the injury, which thereby is done to God, comparing the one with the other;
such a person would be obliged to detest them both, according to their merits,
that is, the offense more then the punishment. I say more, not as to the
greatness, or vehemence of the fear and detestation, but as to the preference
and esteem, which the will makes of the one above the other, that is, of the
offense above the punishment.

In the practice, Theotime, consider, that it is fitting, we always endeavor
to have them both; for to content our selves only with the imperfect Contrition
is the part of a mean spirit, and a token of a servile and mercenary soul;
besides, that this manner of treatment is apt to raise doubts of Conscience,
and troubles of mind: on the other side, an act of perfect Contrition is an act
of the highest perfection, and to perform it is a very difficult thing; it is
not usual, neither can we, ordinarily speaking, ascend at one step to the
highest and most perfect acts of a Virtue: wherefore we must begin with those
of the lower rank, and by them mount up to those of an higher class; this we
see, that nature her self teaches us in all her productions. But which is very
observable, it frequently happens, that we are deceived in this occasion; for
many are persuaded that they have perfect Contrition, as soon as they have
pronounced these words, I detest my sins, because God who is infinitely good,
is offended by them. But there is a great difference between saying these
words, and conceiving in our heart the true sense, which they import.

First then, we must begin with imperfect Contrition; after that we have
considered the great and lamentable mischiefs, which by sin are heapt upon us;
the privation of the grace of God; the loss of Paradise; Eternal Damnation;
then we must proceed to hate and detest it with all our heart; as our most
mortal Enemy: Next considering that sin, must needs be a horrible evil in it
self, and strangely offensive to the Divine bounty, since he punishes it with
so much rigor, we must go on to the hatred of sin it self, by reason of the
injury it does to God. An injury which derives its greatness from the Supreme,
the infinite Bounty, Sanctity, and infinitely adorable Majesty of God, whom
therefore it infinitely offends, and consequently becomes infinitely
detestable, and which ought to be hated and detested with a supreme, and, if
possible, infinite hatred, although there were neither Paradise, it could deprive
us of; nor Hell to punish it.

CHAP. VI. Of the means to obtain Contrition.
IF it were either the same thing to have Contrition, and to know it; or the
knowledge of it were sufficient, to have it; there would be nothing more
required, then what we have said, to perform the Act. But it is far otherwise,
Theotime, this great and important action is not so easy, as they imagine, who
believe, they have power to produce it every moment. It is a fruit, which is
not of our growth; it is a plant, which our Earth, now dry and barren by means
of sin, cannot bring forth, except it be watered from above, and prevented by
the blessing, or grace of God. God, (says the Prophet) must give his
benediction, and then our Earth, that is our Heart, will produce its fruit.
Dominus dabit benignitatem, and terra nostra dabit fructum suum. Psalm. 84.

It is not so facile to clear ones self of sin; as it is easy to fall into it.
A man may quickly cast himself into a deep pit by his own fault; but he cannot
get out without trouble, and the assistance of another. We sin by our own free
will alone, but by this alone we cannot free our selves from the guilt of sin;
it is necessary that the grace of God assist and withdraw us from it. Our ruin
proceeds from our selves; but our Salvation comes from God; he alone can
succor, or redeem us. Perditio tua ex te, tantummodo in me auxilium tuum.
Host. 13. This is an Article of Faith, which has always been believed in the
Church, and which the Council of Trent has defined of new. If any one says,
that without the preventing inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and his succor, a
man can believe, hope, love, or be sorry for his sins, as it is necessary to
receive justifying grace, let him be anathematized. Conc. Trid. Sess. 6. Canon.
3.

With what fear and trembling ought not those Souls to be seized, whose
conscience tells them, that they are in the unfortunate state of Mortal Sin?
What horror ought they not to conceive, when they seriously make this
reflection; that their Salvation depends upon God alone; and that they cannot
of themselves be freed from the danger they are in, except by his only hand,
whom they have so grievously offended, and who is their professed Enemy, as
long as they shall continue in that State?

But that which yet ought still to augment their fears, is that there is
nothing due to them from God, as long as they are, in that deplorable state,
his enemies: that he is not obliged to relieve them, having never promised it
to any person: but that he may most justly leave them in that condition;
because as St. Augustine says, God who has promised pardon to him that shall
do Penance, has not promised Penance to any one. O God! Theotime, what
considerable reasons of fear, and trembling are there, to see ones self, in
such a lamentable state, wherein he may be justly abandoned by Almighty God,
and left as a prey to the sworn Enemies of his Salvation? What good things
ought he not to do, who considers himself in this danger? or rather, (I will
not say what Evil, but even) what indifferent things ought he not to deny
himself? that, by doing good, and avoiding evil, he may both prevent the
misfortunes, which environ him at present; and avoid the eternal loss of his
Soul, which threatens him for the future.

Without question you see clear enough what he should do; first that he should
seek all means possible to appease the divine anger, and regain his favor;
which cannot be otherwise effected, but by ceasing to offend him, by performing
acts of condign Penance, and by pouring forth his Soul in hearty prayer, that
he may obtain from God the grace of Holy Contrition.

In the Second place, that he should apply himself to consider the sins he has
committed, meditate upon the motives which are capable to imprint in his Soul
an horror of them; then he should propose to himself the examples of true
Penitents; imitate them in their Penances, and conquer Heaven by the force of
tears and Contrition, as they have done.

We shall discourse of these two general means in the following Chapters.

CHAP. VII. Of the first means to obtain Contrition, which are three, avoiding
sin, works of Penance, and Prayer.
I Put these three means togeher, because they are so inseparable, that they
seem to make but one.

The first is to forsake sin, or cease from offending God; for how can you
expect to gain the Spirit of Contrition, or the Holy Virtue of Penance, whilst
you persist actually to offend him, and resist his grace? and how can you have
in your heart a true sorrow, and detestation of sin, when you take pleasure to
commit it? This is impossible. Sin is the destruction of divine grace; it roots
out of the Soul all pious thoughts; it banisheth all holy inspirations, and
disperses them at their first appearance, like a blasting North Wind, by its
cold and dryness; it scatters the Clouds, disperses the Rain, or dew of Heaven,
and parches up the Earth. This is what theWise man would signify by those
mysterious words of the Proverbs. Ventus Aquilo dissipat plavias: Auster
congregat dissipatas. Prove. 25. It is sin, which locks up the Heavens, and
hinders the rains of Grace from showring upon men, when they need it most;
whilst they stand obnoxious to his wrath. On the contrary, the fear of Gods
Judgments, which seizes upon Sinners, is like the favorable South Wind, which
gathers the Clouds, dissolves them into Rain, and pours them upon the Earth:
this fear is a gentle gale that breaths into the Soul the thoughts of Penance;
it moves us to conceive true sorrow for our sins, and at last brings us to the
so much to be desired Port, perfect Contrition.

The Second means is to abridge ones self of pleasures, and perform the works
of Penance: next to sin, there is nothing more opposite to Contrition, (which
is the fruit of sorrow) then pleasures. Contrition is not found but in
afflictions and miseries, of which the heart is incapable in the time of
pleasure. Job, speaking of Wisdom, says, it is not found in the houses of
pleasures and delights. Job 28. Non invenitur in terra suaviter viventium. Much
less Contrition, which is the beginning of Wisdom. Contrition is the offspring
of an afflicted heart ruminating on all his sins in the bitterness of his Soul;
and can this be found amongst divertisements and pleasures? No, no, It is most
certain, that he who resolves to be Penitent and contrite, ought to banish far
from his thoughts divertisements and pleasures, and betake himself to the works
of Penance, as Fasting, Alms-deeds, and the like.

The Third necessary means is Prayer, because Contrition being, as is above
declared, a gift of God, a gift which is not due unto us, but proceeds from his
pure bounty; it is certain, we have great need to demand, pray, or beg it of
him very earnestly; need to acknowledge our own misery, and the absolute
dependence we have upon his mercy. Upon this occasion it is, that we ought to
re-enter perfectly into our selves, and humble our selves in the presence of
God, in a profound acknowledgment of the misery, to which we are reduced by
this state of sin. It is upon this occasion we ought to employ those excellent
Sentences of the Prophet Jeremy; Ego vir videns paupertatem meam in virga
indignationis ejus. It is true, O my God! I acknowledge the extreme misery,
whither thy anger has justly reduced me. I am now in the darkness of sin,
instead of the light of thy grace, which I formerly enjoyed. Thou have turned
thy hand against me; thou have taken away all my forces, and environed me with
bitterness and pain; my Life is fallen into an abiss, out of which I cannot get
out. Considering my self in this state, I said, I was lost: but I had recourse
unto thee, O my God, I invoked thy Holy Name from the depth of my misery. Thou
have graciously hearkened unto me, do not turn away thine Ears from the
lamentations which flow from my heart, from the clamours, which I make, to
obtain thy mercy.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Motives of Contrition, and first of the grievousness of sin.
WHen you demand of God, Contrition by Prayer, and works of Penance, you must
not be wanting to your self, but endeavor on your part to procure it. This
endeavor consists in weighing attentively the motives, which are capable to
raise this sorrow in your heart, and in meditating upon the grievousness of
sin, and the reasons which may move you to an horror and detestation of it.
This practice is absolutely necessary for him, who desires to be truly
converted; But is not much in use; as God himself complains by his Prophet.
There is none, says he, that repents himself of his sins, saying, what have I
done? Jer. 8.

Do it then, as you ought, dear Theotime, and with all the attention of your
heart, whilst you read what I shall here propose unto you; and beg of God, that
he will make you comprehend, and understand this so important a concern; for it
is impossible without grace to know it exactly right.

You must then suppose, that the grievousness of sin is so great, that it is
incomprehensible, or unconceivable; and this truth alone, may make you judge of
the greatness of it. To comprehend this grievousness, you should have a full
Idea, or true definition of sin, which might perfectly explain it is nature; But
this is impossible. The sovereign good, which is God, cannot be defined,
because it is infinite; neither also can sin, which is the supreme evil. That
is infinite in goodness; this is infinite in malice: That possesses all
perfections; this is the accomplishment of all mischiefs. And as no created
Spirit can comprehend the Greatness, Bounty, and Perfections of God; so none,
but God, can understand the grievousness, malice, and miseries of Sin.

And the reason is very evident, because to understand well the grievousness of
sin, and the injury it does to God, we must know how great, how holy, how good,
how perfect God is; being that sin takes it is grievousness from the opposition
it has with the Greatness, Bounty, and Holiness of God. To know the greatness
of an offense, we must know, and well understand, the greatness and dignity of
the person offended. For this reason to compehend the grievousness, and the
injury it does to God; we must measure the greatness of God; but where is the
measure of this accomplishment of goodness and perfections, so much raised
above us? certainly we can never find it, nor by consequence the measure of
that Abyss of malice and misery, of which we speak here. Altitudinem Coeli and
profundum abyssi quis dimensus est? who can ever measure, says Ecclesiasticus,
the height of Heaven, or the depth of the Sea? Eccles. 1. Much less can the
greatness of God and the grievousness of sin be measured. If God be so high in
dignity and Majesty, that no created Spirit can reach him, it is true to say,
that sin is so profound in malice and unworthiness, that it is impossible to
comprehend it.

Yet nevertheless we must not despair to have an act of Contrition; although we
cannot conceive the grievousness of sin. For in that alone, which we said, that
we cannot comprehend its grievousness, there is all the imaginable reason
entirely to abhor and hate it; and lament, when we are so unfortunate, as to
fall into it. Sin then is so great an evil, that no created Spirit can conceive
its enormity; that to understand it, we must know God clearly face to face,
which only God himself can fully comprehend. What horror? what detestation
ought not we to have for so great and horrible an evil? and what sorrow ought
we to have, to see our selves, by our own ungracious will, become guilty of it?

Ponder this well, Theotime, and do not pass over lightly this consideration;
for it is admirable. I say again once more, there is nothing that can make us
hate sin, more then to know that we cannot comprehend it is grievousness; and it
is easy to show it by a contrary reason, but very evident: viz. That there is
nothing which is more capable to raise in us a love and respect toward God,
then when we are fully persuaded, that he is so great, so perfect, and so
amiable, that his greatness and perfections do infinitely surpass all that,
which we can conceive of him. Let us apply the same to the grievousness of sin,
and the evils, which it includes in it self; and we shall find, how detestable
it is. O sin! is it true then that thou art so great, that I cannot at all
comprehend the heinousness of the injury thou do to God? and not only I but
all the men and Angels together. Now if thy enormity be so prodigious, how can
I but hate thee? is not this sufficient to move a horour of thee? O monster of
wickedness! he must needs be blind that flys not from thee; O abiss of
misfortunes! how ought I to fear, lest I should fall into such deep precipices.

CHAP. IX. Of the same Subject, of the grievousness of Sin.
LEt us however attempt to gather some knowledge at least, of the grievousness
of Mortal Sin; and although we cannot Comprehend it as it is in it self, let us
learn, what the Holy Ghost has been pleased to let us know by the Sacred
Scripture. Read, Theotime, and be attentive.

What is Sin? It is a rebellion of the creature against his Creator; a
resistance against his commandments, by which it refuses to obey him, and be
subject to his holy will. This is what we learn from that wonderful reproach,
which God made to Sinners by Jeremy. From the beginning thou have broken my
Yoke, thou have burst my Bonds; Jer. 2. That is, all the considerations, which
kept thee tied to my Service, and thou have said I will not serve. Behold, what
Sin is, and what you have committed, as often as you have Mortally offended
God. Consider well this definition; but this is not all.

What is Sin? It is a horrible ingratitude committed against God, and a
forgetfullness of all his favors. Who is it that says this? It is he himself
by his Prophet. I have brought up Children, and exalted them: but they have
despised me. The Ox has known his owner, and the Ass his masters Crib: but
Jsrael has not known me, and my People has not understood. Isa. 1. and in
another place, The beloved was made gross, that is, he has enjoyed abundantly
the goods which I have sent him, and Spurned against me, he left God his maker,
and departed from God his Salvation. Deuteronomy. 32.

What is Sin? It is a Contempt of God, and his Commandments, by which one
declares, that he makes no account of his Greatness, nor power, of his
Promises, nor Threats. This is what he himself says above. My Children have
despised me. Jer. 3. And by another Prophet he complains. But as if a Woman
should contemn her lover, so has the house of Israel contemned me. Ezekiel. 5.
And by another he says, She has contemned my judgments, so that she was more
impious, then the Gentiles, and my precepts more then the lands about her. For
they have cast away my judgments, and in my precepts they have not walked. And
yet by another Prophet he reproaches Sinners with their contempt. The Son
honors the Father, and the Servant his Lord; if then I be Father, where is
my Honor, and if I be the Lord; where is my fear? Mala. 1.

What is Sin? It is an injury done to God in his own person, and before his own
face; knowing well that he beholds us; and without respect to his greatness,
and Sanctity. What is it, says he, that my beloved has done in my house much
wickedness? Jer. 11.15. and the Prophet Isaiah says, For Jerusalem is gone to
ruin and Juda is fallen: because their tongue and their inventions were
against our Lord, to provoke the Eyes of his Majesty. Isai. 3.8.

What is Sin? It is a revolting from God, and a renouncing of his friendship,
and grace, to follow ones own will, passion, pleasure, interest, and the like.
For this reason Divines, after a serious consideration of the nature of sin,
have thought, that they could explicate it no better, then by saying it was a
turning away from God, and a turning to, or embracing the creature. Aversio a
Deo, and conversio ad creaturam. Behold, what is done by sin. Hearken to the
judgment and complaint of God himself. Be astonished, (says he) O Heavens upon
this, and O Gates thereof be ye desolate exceedingly; for two Evils have my
people done; Me they have forsaken, the fountain of living water, and have
dug to themselves Cisterns that are not able to hold water. Jer. 2. The
meaning is, that he who sins, seeks his good and happiness in the creatures,
where he shall never find it. What greater blindness then this? See what they
do, who offend God mortally; and it is in this preference or esteem, which we
make of the creature before God himself, wherein Mortal Sin and its
greivousness does consist. For as the love of God above all things consists in
preferring him before all, that is before ones proper will, passions,
pleasures, honor, interest: So Mortal Sin, which is directly opposite to
Charity, consists in preferring all things, or any thing before God, and
choosing rather to lose the Friendship of God, then deprive ones self of those
apparent goods, which in reality are true Miseries. And he who resolves to
commit a Mortal Sin, performs this in effect: as if he should place on one side
the greatness of God, all his favors, all his promises, and all his menaces;
and on the other side his own Passion, his Pleasure, his Honor, or his Riches:
and having compared these two, so opposite objects together, says within
himself; I make more account of these miserable things, then of the greatness
of God, of his friendship, of his promises, and of his threats: and I renounce
all that, so I may content my Passions, my Pleasure, my Ambition, my Avarice,
etc. Consider this well, Theotime, and you may Comprehend something of the
grievousness of Sin, and the evil you have done to your self, when you have
been so blind, as to fall into it.

CHAP. X. A Further illustration of the grievousness of sin.
ALL that which we have said, is more then enough to give a judgment of the
heinousness of Mortal Sin; but because the more we sink into the matter, the
more copious is the Subject; behold yet one more consideration to discover its
enormity.

Sin is a resistance to the Divine will, or as St. Ambrose has very well
defined, it is a Swerving from the Law of God, and a disobedience to his Divine
Commandments. Proevaricatio divinae legis, and coelestium inobedientia
mandatorum. This disobedience offends God, and injures him so, as to violate
the right, which God has to be obeyed, and loved by his Creatures. It Is also
necessarily accompanied with all those indignities, which we have said above
are found in Sin, viz. Rebellion against God, Ingratitude, Contempt of him,
Violence committed in his Adorable Presence, and Esteem and preference of the
Creature before God, a Renouncing of his Friendship, and many other
Indignities: And this it is, which makes the injury done to God by this
Disobedience, most Heinous, and far surpass all that one can imagine.

And being that this vile and base injury is offered to a Person the most
Eminent and of highest Dignity, whose Authority is Boundless, and infinitely
raised above all that is great. Hence it is, that this affront is so immence,
that it infinitely surpasses all the abuses, and wrongs, that can be offered
unto man: it being a certain Rule, that an offense takes its heinousness from
the greatness of the Person that is offended: And thus an affront offered to a
Prince, does far Surmount that done to one of base condition. Now being that
God is infinite in Greatness and Majesty, it follows that an injury offered to
him is also infinite.

Add all these things together, an Infinite offense committed against the
Infinite Greatness of God, accompanied with all those Indignities we have
spoken of, with Rebellion, with Ingratitude, with Contempt of God, with
Preference of a creature before his Friendship, with Infidelity: and judge what
we ought to say of the greatness of the Injury, which Sin offers to God. But
above all consider the Sin, as committed by a Wretched creature, by a Miserable
servant, by a worm of the Earth, which before God is less then nothing; Judge
then I say, if you can, but you can never arrive at a perfect Judgment,
although all the knowledge of both Men and Angels were united in your
understanding.

An affront so great, that it made St. Augustine, and other Divines after him
to say, that it were far better the whole frame of the world should perish,
that is Heaven, and Earth, and all contained therein, then that a man should
commit any one mortal sin against God. Peccatum est inhonorare Deum, quod non
debet facere homo, etiamsi totum pereat quod non est Deus. Sin, says that Holy
Doctor, is to dishonor God, which a man ought not to do, although all things,
except God, be destroyed.

An injury so horrible that it made St. Anselm say, That if he should see on
one side Hell open with all its flames; and on the other side, one sole Mortal
Sin to be Committed; and that he were forced to make choice of the one, he
would rather choose to cast himself into hell, then sin mortally. S. Anselm de
similitudinibus. c. 190. And he adds the reason. Because, said he, I should
rather desire, being innocent and without sin, to enter into Hell, then enjoy
Paradise, being defiled with sin; for it is most certain, that only the wicked
are tormented in Hell, and only the just are blessed in Heaven. Although this
necessity of choice can never happen; yet the supposition, which this great
Saint makes, does manifestly show the grievousness of Mortal sin, and the
injury which by it is done to God: and it is grounded upon this manifest truth
in Divinity; that the evil of the fault is infinitely greater, and more to be
feared, then the evil of the punishment.

A wrong so heinous, that Divines with one accord agree, that if all the men in
the world, and all the Angels in Heaven, should unite their forces, to deplore
the injury offered to God by any one mortal sin, to do Penance, and give
Satisfaction to God for it; they could not all together in the least perform
that which it deserves.

A damage so great, an abuse so detestable, that only God himself was able to
repair it, only God himself could satisfy for it to the full; and to perform
this, it was necessary, that God should put himself in a state to satisfy, that
he should humble himself so as to become man, to offer himself in Sacrifice to
the Divine justice: a Sacrifice, which equalled the price, and also far
surpassed the grievousness of Sin; and in which two things were admirably
conjoined, the Divinity, and Humanity, this to be offered, and that to give
infinite value and merit to the offering; as a Father of the Church said
excellently well. De nostro obtulit Sacrificium, de suo contulit pretium.
Eusebius. Emis. hom. 6. de Pascha.

In fine, an injury so offensive and enormous, that the Flames of Hell, which
it has kindled, can neither purge it for all Eternity; nor appease the Divine
wrath, which it has incensed, against those, who neglective, whilst they
lived, to apply to themselves the Satisfaction made by the Sacrifice offered by
the Son of God upon the Cross, are dead in Mortal Sin.

Weigh well all these Considerations, Theotime, read them often, and endeavor
by frequent Meditation, to imprint them in your mind.

CHAP. XI. Of the deplorable effects of Mortal Sin, to discover better the
grievousness thereof.
SInce it is most certain, that the best way to know a cause, is to consider
its effects; doubtless the best means to discover the grievousness of Mortal
Sin, is to reflect on the Sad effects which followed from it.

We have said before, that we could not perfectly know Sin in it self, because
it is the Supreme evil, which is infinite: no more then we can understand in it
self the Supreme and Sovereign good, which is God. But as by the effects, which
we see of his Power, of his Wisdom, of his Goodness, we arrive at some
knowledge of God: So on the Contrary, we may find out in some sort the
heinousness of Sin, if we do but consider attentively the Dreadful effects, it
causes, and the horrible misfortunes which it carries with it. And all these
effects are, as so many Powerful motives of Contrition, to make us detest, and
abhor Sin.

To discover it the better, we shall observe some order, and search for it in
several places, viz. in our selves, in Heaven, in Hell, in God himself, and in
his Son Jesus Christ.

ARTICLE. I. Of the death of the Soul, or the sad effects which Sin produces
in his Soul, who commits it.
I Begin with the Death of the Soul, because this is the first effect, which
Sin produces, as soon as ever is is committed. Peccatum cum consummatum fuerit
generat mortem, Jac. 1. And I would to God, it were as sensible as it is real,
and that those, who are so unfortunate, as to fall into Mortal Sin, might
exactly know the greatness of the evil, which thereby they draw upon
themselves, as really in it self it is; and resent it, as it deserves. It is
for this reason, that I desire to explicate it unto you, and make you
understand it.

Sin then, (says the Scripture) is no sooner finished, but immediately it
causes Death. It Is certain, that it is not the death of the Body; for a man
does not dye in the moment, he has committed it. It is then the death of the
Soul, a thousand times more dreadful then that of the Body: for this does but
separate the Soul from the Body: but the Death which is caused by Sin, is a
Separation of the Soul from God; who is a Supernatural Life, as St. Aug. says.
vita corporis anima est, vita animae Deus est. And as this life, which God
gives the Soul, is infinitely more estimable then that, which the Soul confers
upon the Body, which it animates: so the Death which causes the loss of that
Divine Life, is infinitely more dreadful and Lamentable, then natural Death.

To understand this well, you must know what God has revealed, and we believe,
concerning a Soul, which has the Blessing to be in the State of the Grace of
God: And it is this; when God receives a Soul into his Friendship, he Clothes
her with the Robe of Sanctifying Grace, a supernatural and Divine quality,
which cleanses the Soul from all the spots of Sin, and renders her agreeable
to the eyes of God. And at the same moment he replenisheth her with Divine
gifts, as Faith, Hope, Charity: and other Christian Virtues: Then by the means
of that Grace, God dwells in that Soul after a particular manner, he makes her
his Temple and Habitation, where he is pleased to be adored, and loved by the
Souls, that possess him: Lastly, he interchangeably communicates himself unto
her, filling her with his holy Spirit, and Divine Inspirations.

All these truths are drawn from the express words of the Sacred Scripture. As
from that where God promises, That he will pour upon us a clean water, which
will cleanse us from all our stains: Ezekiel. 36. This water is Sanctifying Grace.
From that where he says, That the Charity of God is poured into our hearts by
the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us, Romans 5. That we are the Temples of the
Living God, and that the Spirit of God does dwell in us. 1. Cor. 3. from those
words where our Savior says; If any one love me, he will keep my word, and my
Father will love him, and we will come to him, and make our Dwelling with him.
Joh. 14. From those words of St. John. God is Charity, and he who remains in
Charity, remains with God, and God with him. 1. Joh. 4. There are a great
number of the like passages, which clearly represent unto us the state of a
Soul Sanctified by Grace, and the great happiness she enjoys in that condition,
wherein she possesses God himself, and is possessed by him.

Now all this felicity is constant and permanent, as to what relates to God,
whose gifts are without repentance, as the Scripture says: only the Soul can
deprive her self of, and destroy in her self this happiness.

This misfortune befalls us, when forgetful of the infinite blessing, we
possess, and permitting our selves to be surprised by the allurements of Sin,
we break that happy League, and Alliance, which God had made with us: And this
we do by a criminal disobedience, whereby we incur the displeasure of God, and
lose in a moment all those inestimable goods, which before we happyly enjoyed.

O God, Theotime, who can worthily express the dreadful misfortune, which
happens to a Soul by one mortal sin? and paint to the life the deplorable
state, to which it is reduced in the moment she offends? in which the Soul in
that very instant is deprived of the grace of God, and of one beautiful, and
as an Angel in his sight, becomes as hideous and hateful as a Devil. Quomodo
obscuratum est aurum, mutatus est color optimus. Thren. 4. Is there any
subject, where we may more sitly apply those doleful words of Jeremy? how
comes it to pass, that this Soul should be so defaced? what is become of that
grace, which made her more bright then gold? how is that divine beauty changed
into so hideous a form?

It is an effect of the divine Anger, which has justly filled that Soul with
cloudy darkness; which before had unjustly banished the light of Grace. But that
which is most to be lamented is, that that Soul which formerly had the honor
to be employed, as the Temple of God, now sees her self rejected by him with
horror and detestation; and the Holy Ghost retired from her, having abandoned
her to be the dewlling place of the Devil; according to that sentence of the
same Prophet, repulit Dominus Altar suum, maledixit sanctificationi suae. God
has rejected his Altar, and laid a curse upon the place, where he was adored
and sanctified. Thren. 2. Is it possible, Theotime, that you can read these
words without trembling, if you are in the state of Mortal Sin?

It is this forsaking of God, and this loss of his grace, which properly causes
the death of the Soul, infinitely more to be feared then that of the Body;
forasmuch as by the death of the body, we are only deprived of the presence of
the Soul, death being only a separation of the Soul from the Body; whereas by
the death of the Soul, we are deprived, or separated from Almighty God. Is
there any misery to be compared to this of being deprived of God? O my God! how
is it possible that men should esteem thee so little? If a man lose a
perishable good, as a Friend, or an Estate, this he laments most grievously;
and we loose our selves, and are not at all concerned: can there be any thing
either more unjust or more injurious? Is not that most exactly true, which St.
Augustine says upon this Subject? He seems not to have the bowels of Christian
Charity, who laments a Body, from which the Soul is departed; and does not at
all weep for a Soul, from which God is separated.

That I may yet make you understand more sensibly the deplorable state of a
Soul fallen into the displeasure of God; and your own condition, if you are
under that misfortune: I shall propose here an admirable, and moving
description, which a Holy Author made in these words, which he addresses to a
Soul fallen into Mortal Sin; and to you your self, if you are in that unhappy
state.

Aperi oculos anima misera, and vide quid eras, and quid nunc es? quo loco
eras? and quo nunc es. Eras sponsa altissimi; eras templum Dei vivi; eras vas
electionis, Thalamus regis aeterni, Thronus Salomonis, Seeds Sapientiae; eras
soror Angelorum, Haeres caelorum: and quoties dico eras, eras; toties tibi
lachrimandum est; cum subitam tuam cogitas mutationem. Sponsa Dei facta est
adultera diaboli: Templum Spiritus Sancti mutatum est in Speluncam latronum:
vas Electionis in vas corruptionis: Thalamus Christi in Volutabrum porcorum;
Seeds Sapientia in Cathedram pestilentiae: Soror Angelorum in Sociam Daemonum;
and quae instar Columbae ante^ in Caelum Volitabat, nunc, valut serpens, reptat
in terra. Plange itaque super te, anima misera; plange, quia te plangunt caeli;
te plangunt Sancti; te plangunt lacrymae Pauli, quia peccasti: and peccati,
quod commisisti, paenitentiam non egisti.

Open thy eyes miserable Soul, says this holy Doctor, speaking to a Soul,
which is fallen into Mortal Sin: and see what you were, and what you are, in
what place you were, and where you now are at present. You were the Spouse of
the most high: You were the Temple of the living God; you were a Vessel of
election, the Couch of the eternal King, the Throne of the true Solomon, the
seat of Wisdom; you were Sister to the Angels, and Heir of Heaven; and as often
as I say you were, you were; so often ought you to lament and weep, when you
consider your sudden change. Your Soul, which was the Spouse of God, is become
the Adulteress of Satan; the Temple of the Holy Ghost is changed into a Den of
Thieves; the Vessel of Election into a Vessel of Corruption; the Bed of Solomon
into a dunghill of unclean Beasts; the Seat of Wisdom into the Chair of
Infection; the Sister of the Angels is become a Companion of the Devil; and
she, who mounted like a Dove even unto Heaven, creeps now upon the Earth like a
Serpent. Bewail then your self, O miserable Soul; bewail, and lament, since the
Heavens weep for you; since all the Saints deplore your misery; the tears of
St. Paul are shed for you; because you have sinned, and have not done Penance
for what you have committed.

These words, Theotime, are not to be read slightly; read them often, applying
them to your self with attention; and without doubt, if you are not totally
obdurate, they will make a great impression on your heart, when you consider
attentively the unfortunate and deplorable state your Soul is brought into by
Sin.

ARTICLE II. Of the effects of Sin in Heaven, and upon Earth.
IF you desire another reason of the hatred, and horror you have conceived
against Sin, Theotime, raise your thoughts to Heaven, and see the disorders it
has caused there. This Infernal Fury has spared nothing; it has conveyed
it is rage even unto the house of God, which it has filled with War, and
Confusion; it has banished one part of the Angels thence, and shut the door to
men, and to you your self: let us see these misfortunes one after another.

God in the beginning of the World created an innumerable multitude of
Celestial Spirits of several Orders, and different perfections; with which he
filled Heaven, and composed his Heavenly Court, for the performance of his will
both in Heaven and on Eaath. His design was to replenish them all with the
happiness of his sight, and the perfect possession of the Divinity: And for
this effect, besides the natural perfections he endowed them with, he had
created them in his grace, and adorned them with all supernatural virtues; thus
to afford them a means to dispose themselves to Glory, which he had prepared
for them, and to merit it by their actions, and the practice of those same
virtues.

When they were in this state; behold, Theotime, what Sin did; When they were,
as I said, in this state, brim full of mighty hopes; upon the point of
receiving the fruit of the grace and virtues which God had communicated unto
them, and to enjoy the perfect vision of the Divinity, which would have secured
their happiness for ever; behold Sin, by their inadvertency, steals into the
mind of one part of them, overthrows their fair hopes, and makes a confusion in
the house of God himself. This was a mischievous thought of Pride, begun in one
of the chiefest Angels, who permitting himself to be surprised by the love of
his own perfections, and the brightness of his excellent beauty, aspired to
surpass all others, in that degree, that he would in some things be like unto
God himself; demanding an Authority equal with his in the government of all
Creatures, choosing rather, as St Bernard considers, to be separated from God,
then be Subject unto him. Miser, qui sine Deo esse maluit, quam sub Deo.
Lucifer was followed in this extravagance by many of the other Angels, who,
adhering to his pride, listed themselves, as it were, under his banner. They
had not persisted long in this Rebellion; when God, who cannot endure the guilt
of Sin, be it in whom it will, gives us, upon occasion of this first
disobedience, the manifest marks of the hatred he bears to that infernal
Monster. For by a Solemn Decree, the effect of his indignation, he banisheth
from his Kingdom this Rebellious Angel with all his followers, and casts them
down headlong from the height of Heaven to the most profound pit of Hell. Thus
that Celestial Spirit, who was, but the instant before he sinned, one of the
most beautiful Creatures of God, and, as one may say, the Masterpiece of all
his works; initium viarum suarum, became by his sin an infernal Dragon; a sworn
and unreconcilable enemy both to God and Man.

What is it that has caused this lamentable change? sin alone: it was sin
alone that God could not endure in his most perfect Creatures. The Heavens, as
Job says, are not pure in his presence, and he has found disorder even in the
Angels. Job. 15. He found sin in Heaven, and in the Angels themselves; and he
has not pardoned them, as St. Peter says, but has chained them in Hell to be
there Tormented, and thereby to manifest unto all creatures the hatred he bears
to Sin. 2 Pet. 2.

If Sin was so dreadful to the Angels in Heaven; it has not been less
Terrible to men upon earth: if it was able to banish them so quickly there; it
has not been less effectual, or less speedy in Shutting the Gates of Heaven
against us here. It was, when the first man, who being created in the grace of
God, after he had received all possible assurance of his Friendship both as to
this world, and to the next, forgetful of his duty and of himself,
treacherously conspired with his Capital Enemy, and broke the Commandments of
God, in eating the forbidden fruit.

He had no sooner fallen into this offense; but the Anger God appeared against
him, and banished him with scorn out of the Earthly Paradise, that Garden of
delight, where but a while before he had been placed with so much love; Both he
and all his posterity were condemned to labor, death, and all the miseries we
even now groan under, for that first transgression of the Law of God.

But that, which is yet more terrible, is, that the Gates of Heaven, which till
then were open, were immediately shut, as well against himself, as against all
his posterity, without the least hopes of his ever being able to re-enter those
happy mansions, by any means he, either of himself, or any of his offspring of
themselves, could use. O sin, how dreadful art thou, and what a train of
misfortues do thou bring after thee!

This misery and desolation continued four thousand years, and more; during
which time no man ever entered into heaven, not even the just themselves and
those who dyed in the Grace of God, until the coming of the Son of God into
the world, who by his Death opened the Gates of Heaven, so long shut. During
that time, how many millions of souls were excluded for ever, and without
recovery, from that celestial inheritance. This happened to all those, who in
that compass of time died in their Sins, and without doing penance for them.
But after the way was open to heaven by the Merits of Jesus Christ, how many
are there still, that enter not at all? Hell is filled daily with millions, and
Paradise continues in comparison like a desert. Why so? It is an effect of sin
alone and impenitence. O, how well did the Wise man say, it is sin which makes
men miserable. Miseros facit populos peccatum. Prove. 14. Is it possible,
Theotime, that you should run so slightly over these fatal and horrible effects
of sin, that they should not move you in the least?

I might here recount the innumerable miseries, the continual and daily effects
of Sin: Death which it has introduced from the beginning; barrenness of the
Earth; Rebellion of living creatures; the deluge which drowned the world near
two thousand years after the Creation; Plagues and Pestilence; war and famine;
and all the Miseries, as well public, as private, which we see and daily feel,
are so many unfortunate effects of Sin, whether of that of our first parent, or
of those which men continually commit. For as the wise man says, Fire, hail,
famine, are made to revenge Sin. Eccl. 39. But I shall pass by all these evils,
although most dreadful and horrible, to come to others infinitely greater and
more terrible, whereof those are but the fore runners, according to that
infallible Testimony of the Son of God. Haec omnia initia sunt dolorum, Mar.
13. all these miseries, says he, are but the beginnings of others far greater.

ARTICLE III. Of the effects of Sin in Hell.
LEt us sink down into the Pit of Hell, that so we may conceive a more lively
apprehension of the enormity of Mortal Sin: we shall there see the frightfull
evils, which, this Monster has produced; and by the vastness of so many
dreadful effects, frame a judgment of the malice of that cause, which has
brought them forth; and we shall there learn two things, the first to detest
Sin, the author of so many evils: The Second to conceive a wholesome fear of
falling into that abiss of misery into which man is thrown by Sin. That which,
St Bernard said, being most certain. It is necessary we descend into Hell
alive, that is, think seriously and often on it, That we may escape falling
into it at the hour of death.

Consider then, Theotime, attentively, what Faith teaches us concerning Hell;
that it is an Eternal fire, which God has prepared for the Devil and his
Apostate Angels; and with which he has also decreed to punish the Sins of men,
who follow the rebellious example of those Ambitious Spirits.

This we learn from that terrible Sentence, which the Son of God shall
pronounce at the day of judgment against the wicked. Go ye accursed into
Everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Mat. 25. A dreadful
sentence, which contains no more then four words: but in those four words it
comprehends Hell entirely, and all the evils, which compose it.

First it teaches us, that the fame punishment, which is prepared for the
Devils, is also appointed for men; and that they shall be Companions of those
wicked and damned Spirits, as they were their followers in their rebellion
against God: and by this we may see what Mortal sin is, which renders us
obnoxious to the same punishment and damnation with the Devils. Ponder this
well, Theotime, and behold what it is to be damned together with the Devils,
and as the Devils are damned; and how great that offense must necessarily be,
which deserves a punishment equal to that, with which the Devils are tormented.

But what will that punishment be? I confess we are not able to comprehend; but
the Son of God by his infinite wisdom has summed it up in four words, that we
may more easily conceive it. Words which contain all the horror of Hell, Go
says he, ye accursed into Everlasting fire. Mat. 25.

By these words are denoted the Separation from God, the curse of God, Fire,
and Eternity. Behold in four words what Hell is, behold the punishment of
Mortal Sin! To be separated from God, to be accursed of God, to be condemned to
fire, and that for ever. Who can think of these things, and not tremble with
fear and horror? Stay some time here, Theotime, this is not a subject to be
read in have: revive these thoughts often, and pause a while upon each of these
frightfull punishments.

To be separated from God, the Author and Fountain of all good, whose only
aspect gives a blessing to all Creatures; and who no sooner turns away his
face, but all things are in trouble and confusion; as the Prophet has it, Ps.
103.

To be cursed of God, that is, of Goodness it self. To be cursed, that is,
hated, rejected with Indignation, abandoned to all possible mischiefs, without
relief, without comfort, without hope.

To be condemned to Fire, that is, to the most horrible of all torments.

And this for all Eternity, that is, without hope ever to be delivered from it;
so that neither a hundred years, nor a hundred thousand years, nor a hundred
thousand millions of years, make up the least part of that dreadful duration.
The unfortunate Damned shall be cursed of God for ever. They shall be damned to
the Fire of Hell, and that for ever. From that very moment that this final
decree shall be pronounced against them, there will be no further recourse, or
hope of relief. This will be a dreadful Thunderbolt, which if once it falls
upon their guilty heads, will never be withdrawn. It will incessantly torture
them, without ever giving them the least repose. And during all eternity they
shall never forget those four words of their Condemnation: Go ye accursed into
everlasting Fire. O mighty God! how terrible art thou in thy Judgments? Is not
he strangely blind, and wonderfully insensible, who fears not to fall into thy
hands at the hour of Death? Who can live without an apprehension of that
horrible Thunder of thy final Judgment? It is not like the punishments and
afflictions, which thou sendest to us during this life; and yet how fearful
are we of these, which last but for a time? whereas that shall never end.
Sagittae thae transeunt: vox tonitrui tui in rota. Psalm. 76. Thy Arrows, says
the Prophet, that is, the afflictions of this life, are but passing; at least
they end with life: But that terrible Judgment, which thou layest upon the
wicked, is a Thunder that shall never cease. From the moment that it shall
issue from thy hands, it continually rowls over their heads, and oppresses them
without ceasing, and yet makes them not to dye.

ARTICLE IV. A continuation of the same Subject.
THis Subject is too vast, and too important, to content our selves with the
little that we have said: Let us not leave it off so soon, Theotime, let us
meditate again and again upon these four punishments of Mortal Sin, that we may
comprehend them well, fear them, and conceive a Sacred horror of the cause,
from whence they come.

First then, the Damned shall be separated from God, shall be cast out of his
sight, never to see him more; and to be eternally deprived of the beatifical
vision, and of all the felicities included in it. In a moment they shall see
themselves fallen from all those inestimable goods, which God has prepared for
his faithful servants; which neither Eye has seen, nor Ear has heard, nor
ever entered into the heart of man. 1 Cor. 2.9. Then they will perfectly know,
what they have lost, they will be continually afflicted with rage and despair,
to see that they have lost so rich treasures, without hopes of ever recovering
them again. Then will the Prophecy of David be fully accomplished, which says,
the sinner shall see the blessings and favors, which God has bestowed upon
the just, and finding himself deprived, will rage with anger, gnash his teeth,
and will pine away with grief, and all his desires will be frustrated, Psalm.
112. and avail him nothing: for it is certain, that God will make the damned
know the happiness, which they have lost; and this knowledge will be one of
their greatest punishments, and the cause of all the rest; and that, which will
highly increase this pain, will be the knowledge of the cause, viz. sin, which
has cast them into this final or never-ending misery. They will see that there
was no other cursed cause of their utmost and irreparable desolation then that
of sin; and the sorrow, which they shall conceive of this loss, shall be so
much more increased, as they shall more clearly understand, that it was by
their own fault, that they are deprived of so great happiness; in that they
have preferred fleeting and deceitful pleasures, before real, and eternal
blessings. From hence it is, that their sorrow and never-ending lamentations
spring; from hence their tears and gnashing of teeth; whereof the Son of God
speaks in the Gospel: but all to no purpose or effect. As long as God shall be
God, they shall continually understand that Prophecy, Vsque in aeternum non
videbit lumen, Psalm. 48.20. They shall for ever be deprived of light: and those
words of the Angel in the Apocalips. c. 22.15. Foris canes, and impudici and
homicidae, etc. From Heaven shall be cast Dogs and lascivious persons,
Murderers and Idolaters, and Liars. This is the miserable state to which those
accursed of God, shall be reduced being separated from him for evermore; and
that by a just judgment of God, who will forget them in the other, who forgot
him in this present life, as a father of the Church says excellently well:
Vltra nescientur a Deo, qui Deum scire noluerunt: morituri vitae, and morti
sine fine victuri. Eusebius. Emis. hom. 3. de Epiph. God will never acknowledge
them for his servants, who would never acknowledge God for their Master. They
shall dye to this mortal life, to live eternally to an everlasting death.

This is a most horrible punishment, but this shall not be all, for in the
Second place, the Damned shall be accursed of God. What is it to be accursed?
Do you understand well this word, Theotime, to be Cursed? and do you not
tremble, when you know it? For to be cursed by God is not only to be out of his
favor, to be loathed by him, which yet are dreadful evils; But it is to be
detested of God in that manner, so as to be rejected by him, and abandoned to
all possible misfortunes. The Curse of Almighty God is not like that of men;
for this is but a desire, or imprecation of some evil, which one man wishes to
another: and this does not allways take effect, because men desire evils, which
they are not able to inflict. But the curse of God is efficacious; it causes
the evil, which it wishes, puts it in execution, without any one being able to
hinder, or resist it. Voluntati enim ejas quis resistit. Romans 9. For if there
be any resistance, it is that, which increases the curse, and the evil, which
the cursed endure.

The opposition, which will augment the curse of the Damned, will consist in
this. Their wicked and rebellious will shall eternally resist the will of God:
and the will of God shall perpetually resist, and confound theirs. There never
will be any agreement, says St. Bernard, between those two wills; because the
one is just, right, and equitable; the other is unjust, perverse, and wicked,
nunquam recto pravoque conveniet: There will be an eternal opposition between
these two wills; The one will incessantly desire, the other will perpetually
hate the punishment of sin, from which however she shall never be delivered:
she will indeed, continually employ her utmost endeavors to quit her self of
her pain, but to no purpose. She will be incensed against her own torments, and
against God himself. O what a torture is this, could we but understand it
rightly? Quid iniquis voluntatibus tam contrarium, quam semper conari,
impingere semper, and frustra. And is there any torment, (continues the same
St. Bernard) greater then that of the depraved will of the damned? to be always
carried on the one side with a continual desire, and to be met on the other
with a continual resistance, and all this to no purpose, to no effect. Quid tam
paenale, quam semper velle, quod nunquam erit, semper nolle, quod nunquam non
erit? What affliction more painful then always to desire that, which will
never come to pass, and continually to wish to be freed from that, which they
shall perpetually eudure. In aeternum non obtinebit quod vult, and quod non
vult, nihilominus sustinebit. The Damned shall continue during all eternity,
without obtaining what he desires, and yet shall everlastingly suffer the
evils, which he would not suffer. Who, says St. Bernard, will put all this in
execution? Rectus Dominus Deus noster qui and justitias dilexit. St. Bernard.
l. 5. de Considerat. c. 12. It will be God, who is upright and just; and who
for that reason can never agree with the unjust and depraved will of the
Damned; but on the contrary will perpetually resist it, and eternally confound
it. A misfortune, says the same Saint, which shall certainly befall all those,
who shall set themselves against that straight rule, which knows not how to
bend, or yield to the contrary, Vae universo, quod obvium fortasse offenderit
cedere nescia rectitudo.

Such shall be the effect of the curse of God upon the Damned, from the first
moment that it shall fall upon their heads. Does it not hence appear how
dreadful Damnation is? But this is not all.

For in the third place, those wretched and accursed Souls shall be cast into
the torment of fire, even into the fire of Hell. This is the Minister and
Instrument of the Divine Justice, the fruit and issue of Mortal Sin. Fire,
says the Prophet, shall go before, and consume his Enemies all about him.
Psalm. 96.3. And in another place, Our Lord in his anger shall surround them
with trouble, and flames of fire shall devour them. Psalm. 20.10. But what fire,
Theotime? That fire which the divine fury, as the Scripture says, has
enkindled against the wicked, and will burn even to the bottom of Hell. Deuteronomy.
32.22. That fire, in comparison whereof our Elementary fire is but a painted
Figure. As St. Augustine says; that fire, whose ardour is inconceivable, which
burn, not only Bodies; but Souls also and Spirits by a wonderful Virtue, which
the divine justice grants unto it, raising it, above the power of Corporal
nature, to be able to torment unbodied creatures: That fire, which by another
quality, no less admirable, burns all without either consuming any other, or
ever spending its own substance. Our fire consumes the things, it burns; and
when it has wasted them, spends it self for want of fuel: but the fire of Hell
is of a quite contrary nature. It conserves its proper matter, it burns without
either consuming the matter, or ever diminishing it self. For this reason our
savior calls it, ignis inextinguibilis, an unextinguishable Fire, and a Father
of the Church has given the reason. Because the fire of Hell being created by
God for the punishment of Sin, it chastises the sin as it is commanded,
without consuming the Author. Illa enim non casualis, sed rationalis exustio,
quia culpam jubetur inquirere, substantiam nescit absumere. Eusebius. Emis. hom.
1. ad. Manachos.

O Fire! is it possible that men should fear thee so little? is it not a
wonderful thing that so many words should be necessary to create in men a
dread of that infernal fire? whereas we are so sensible of that, we see and
feel amongst us. If a small spark fall but on our hands, it makes us cry out
amain: if one were constrained to put his finger in the fire but for a quarter
of an hour, he would not be able to endure it, and yet the fear of the fire of
Hell moves us not at all. The Prophet cries out to all the world, Who of you can
dwell with a devouring fire? or who can inhabit everlasting flames? Isai.
33.14. Yet in the mean time, there are but very few that concern themselves to
avoid that horrible torment, or the object that deserves it, which is sin: or
think seriously of the means to escape it at the hour of death, which are
Penance, and a virtuous Life. Ponder this, Theotime, and do not follow the
throng of those blind people, who run thus headlong to their ruin; and without
either foresight, or prevention, precipitate themselves into this infernal fire.

Now, for the better prevention of this dreadful misfortune, let us consider
its continuance; which will not be for a day, or a year, or a hundred years;
but for all Eternity. Inignem Aeternum, that is, this fire, and all the other
torments of the Damned, shall never end, they shall endure as long as God shall
be God. In this life we have this comfort in our greatest afflictions, that
once they will have an end: Death the most fearful of all evils puts an end to
all the rest: in the worst of miseries one wishes that Death will come, and it
comes at last. But in Hell we shall not have as much as this Satisfaction;
Death there is inexorable: it is always present and allways absent. The Damned
see it continually, it is always before their eyes; and yet is always flying
from them; as it is said in the Apocalips; c. 9.6. Men shall then seek Death,
and shall not find it, they shall wish to dye, and Death shall fly from them.
What more frightfull State then that where one can have no other comfort then
that, of Death, and yet Death will never come? there will be no other Life for
those miserable Creatures then a perpetual Death; and no other Death then to
live continually amidst those Tortures: as the learned St. Paulin in his Poetry
said admirably well.

Vita erit sine fine mori: and mors Vivere poenis;
Et duranta suas pascere carne cruces.
Their Life shall be an endless Death, and their death shall consist in this,
to live in Torments, and by means of their never-to-be-consumed body
continually to maintain their Punishment. Their Torments, says another Father,
would incessantly destroy them; but the justice of God will not permit them to
dye, and they will continue in that state for all eternity, without ever
putting an end to their misfortunes, which will always fly from them, and
eternally avoid them. Occidente poena, and vivificante sententia, stabit
saeculis materia reparabilis, and nunquam ad metam malorum termino fugiente
perveniet. Eus. Emis. hom. 1 ad Manachos. From hence proceed those horrible
Cries and Lamentations, from hence that Rage and everlasting Despair of the
Damned, who shall clearly see, that they shall never be freed from their
Miseries. Their minds shall always be full of this sad thought; Thou shall
never be freed from hence. What? not after a thousand years? not after Ten
thousand years? not after a Hundred thousand years? nothing less. Not after a
Million of years? no, Never. Thou shall be Eternally Tormented. in ignem
aeternum, in ignem aeternum, in ignem aeternum. O Eternity! how Dreadful art
thou? O Theotime! is it possible you can read this without trembling? as for my
part, I declare, I can never think of it without an Horror. But it is to
little purpose to have a dread of Hell, if we do not endeavor to avoid it:
wherefore let us come to the Conclusion which follows.

The Conclusion of this ARTICLE. Of the pains of Hell.
IT is of infinite importance, not to read slightly and in passant, these
frightfull pains, that shall never have an end; but into which we may daily
fall. For this reason, Theotime, I conjure you to read them often with great
attention, and add three or four reflections, which here I shall set before you.

The first is, that all which we have said, or can be spoken of these Torments,
is nothing, if compared to what they are in themselves. Humane discourses
rather diminish then augment them. There can be no exaggeration on this
Subject, for the Punishment does far surpass all our expressions.

The Second is, that their pains are a just Punishment of Mortal Sin. There is
not any other, besides that cursed cause, which has brought forth these so
dreadful effects of the Divine Anger: And which has set God and man at such a
Frightfull and final distance. Iniquitates vestrae diviserunt inter vos, and
Deum vestrum, Esai. 52.2. These so Vast and Eternal Pains, may make us
understand three things. The greatness and enormity of Mortal Sin; the Hatred
which God bears it, since he punishes it so dreadfully: And the detestation we
ought to have of it, as well for those Pains, as for the hatred God bears to
Sin, Ponder this well, Theotime, and reflect seriously upon it.

The 3d. is, That you have merited these pains of Hell, by the Sins you have
committed; and already deserved to be of the number of those unhappy damned, of
whom we but just now spoke: To suffer the Tortures which they endure: to be
from this instant out of hopes of ever seeing God, or ever being freed from
Hell. Is not this consideration enough to make you weep and lament? and is not
this an urgent motive to raise in you a detestation of Sin, which has cast you
into such eminent danger, the only thought whereof ought to make you tremble?

But in the fourth place, reflect upon the cause, which has hitherto preserved
you from that dreadful danger; and you will find no other, then the sole
goodness of Almighty God, which has not treated you according to your deserts,
permitting you to dye in that sinful State, as most justly he might have done;
and as he has done to others that had committed no greater sins then yours:
Where had you now been, had he treated you in that manner? You had been before
now eternally lost, and damned for ever. And why has he not done it, but only
out of that infinite goodness he has shown you, expecting daily your
repentance? O, Theotime, how well may you say with the Prophet, Misericordia
Domini quia non sumus consumpti: quia non defecerunt miserationes ejus. Thren.
3.22. Without question it proceeds only from the sole mercy of God, that you
have yet time to work your Salvation. How perfect then ought your love to be
toward him, who has showed himself so merciful toward you? and what can you
refuse to do, both for his sake and your own Salvation, who has yet granted
you time, wherein you may secure it.

The fifth and last Reflection is, that you cannot now work your Salvation, nor
avoid for the future that Eternal Damnation, except you change your life, and
do Penance, to which I exhort you in this Treatise: They are the express words
of the Son of God, repeated thrice in the fifteenth Chapter of St. Luke. Dico
vobis, nisi poenitentiam habueritis, omnes simul peribitis. I say unto you,
unless you do Penance, you shall all perish. Take notice, he says All without
exception, either of old or young, or what condition soever. Conclude from
hence, and make your resolution: And remember, that upon this resolution
depends your Salvation and your Eternity. Wherefore do not make a slight one,
but a constant and an effectual resolution; that is, a purpose followed by the
effect of a real and serious Conversion.

ARTICLE V. Of the effects which Sin produces in respect of God himself.
THis Title is surprising, and, I declare that if it be taken according to the
rigor of the expression, it imports a thing equally incredible, as impossible:
For how can God, who is perfectly unchangeable, receive any alteration in
himself from external causes? This cannot be. That Sin should have filled
Heaven with disorders, Earth with miseries, Hell with confusion and horror, is
but too true: But that God himself should be sensible of these effects, this is
that which cannot be easily understood.

It is true, Theotime, that this is hard to be understood; but the Sacred
Scripture, that Oracle of Truth, represents unto us in so many places the
different effects, which Sin seems to cause in respect of God, that we cannot
doubt it. For of all the passions, which men conceive against evil, or against
that which is offensive to them; as Grief, Sadness, Repentance, Hatred, Anger,
Indignation, Fury: There is none which the Scripture does not take notice of,
as remarkable in God against Sin.

It says in Genesis, c. 6. that, God seeing the Sins of men, was touched with
an hearty sorrow, and repented himself that he had Created man, who had abused
his liberty so heinously to offend him. Tactus dolor cordis intrinsecus,
dixit, paenitet me foecisse hominem. It says, that those, who Sin, contristate
the Holy Ghost. Nolite contristare Spiritum Sanctum. Ephesians. 4.30. God hates the
wicked and his wickedness. Wisd. 14.9. that he is angry against those, that
offend him. That Sin enkindles his Fury and Indignation. Iratus est furore
Dominus in populum tuum, and abominatus est haeriditatem suam. Psalm. 105.40.
The whole Scripture is full of these expressions, which give us plainly to
understand, that Sin which has caused a disorder in all Gods creatures, has
not spared the Creator; and that this Infernal Monster, as much as possible,
attaques God himself, and were it possible, would destroy him.

It is true, Theotime, (and this we ought to observe well in this place) that
these different affections, which the Scripture attributes to God, in respect
of Sin, are not to be found in God in the same manner, as in men; for they
cause in men a discomposure of the mind, from whence they are called Passions,
or the sufferings of the Soul; but they make no such change in God, who being
unchangeable cannot be moved, or suffer by different affections. When therefore
in Scripture it is said, that God for example, is touched with Grief, Hatred,
Anger, and the like, this is to be understood, as Divines express it, no
further then as to what concerns the exterior effects, which appear to us, and
are such, as are amongst us the usual effects of a sorrowful and angry mind;
and not as to any change of affection, which in God is none. Quantum ad
effectum, non quantum ad affectum.

But this is no hindrance, but that we may draw from these passages of
Scripture, infallible consequences to prove the enormity of Mortal Sin. For it
is reasonable to judge of the malice of a cause, by the evil effects, which of
its own nature it is capable to produce; although it happen that the effect may
not follow, by reason of some extrinsecal impediment. Sin therefore of it self
being capable to produce in God all those Passions, we have spoken of, though his
Sovereign perfection renders him incapable to receive them; this does not
diminish in the least the malice of it; which is always such, that in as much
as in it lies, it produces in God all those passions, and excites in him
Grief, Sadness, Hatred, Anger, Fury and Indignation.

O Sin, how wicked and cruel art thou! since thou have no regard to God
himself; but endeavourest to attaque that Sovereign Majesty, even in his Throne
of Glory. A Prophet once said; let Samaria be destroyed, because it has raised
bitterness and sadness to his God. Pereat Samaria, quia ad amaritudinem
concitavit Deum suum, Osea. 14. But with how much greater reason ought we to
say, that Sin should for ever perish, seeing it attaques even God himself, and
in as much as in it lies, fills that infinite Ocean of Sweetness and Bounty
with Gall and Bitterness.

Behold, Theotime, the reasons we have to detest and abhor Sin, from whence we
may form to our selves a motive of true Contrition; Behold how we are to detest
Sin, not only by reason of the evils which it heaps upon us, whereof we have
spoken above; but for the evils with which it affects even God himself, for
once it is capable to cause all those effects in God, (although it does not
effectually produce them, for the reason above mentioned) it follows of
necessity, that the injury which it offers to God, is dreadfully beyond measure
great.

Conclude then with a strong resolution, to hate this enemy of God, this, if
possible, disturber of the Deity.

ARTICLE VI. Of the Effects of Sin in the Person of Jesus Christ.
THat which Sin could not effect in God, it has brought about in his only Son
our Lord Jesus Christ; and if the Divinity, by reason of it is infinite
perfections, be raised above the attempts of the malice of this Infernal
Monster, the most sacred humanity of the Son of God has suffered for all,
beyond all that which we can either speak, or think. Consider this well,
Theotime, and observe once more the enormity of Mortal Sin, by the number and
greatness of those evils, which it made him to suffer, who undertook to satisfy
for it, and destroy it.

Consider first, that it was Sin which made the Son of God descend from Heaven;
that is, which obliged him to take our humanity upon him, and stoop to that
wonderful abasement of his Person, (which St. Paul called annihilation, or
becoming nothing. Phil. 2.6.9.) as to make himself Man for us and our
Salvation; to take the habit and form of a Servant, to put himself in a
capacity to satisfy the Divine Justice for the infinite injury done him by
Mortal Sin: An injury never to be repaired, but by one who should be God and
Man.

Secondly, this adorable Mystery of the Incarnation was no sooner accomplished,
but the first thought of the Son of God made Man was to offer himself to his
Eternal Father, a Sacrifice to the Divine Justice in satisfaction for all the
Sins of Men, as he himself said by the Prophet, Psalm. 39.7. The Sacrifices, and
all Holocausts which hitherto have been offered to appease thy wrath against
sin, were not able to give thee satisfaction: wherefore I am come, and knowing
that it was thy will that I should satisfy. I am content, O my God! and embrace
with all my heart, this thy good pleasure, and decree.

From that first moment even until the time of the Passion of the Son of God,
his life was a continual Sacrifice which he offered to his Father; the divine
love always burning, and never permitting him any repose, until he had
accomplished the work he came for; until by his death he had conquered, and
destroyed, that cruel Enemy he came to fight with, which was sin. This is that,
which he himself testified, when he said, I have a Baptism, wherewith I am to
be Baptized, and how am I straightened interiourly until it be dispatched. Luke
12.5.

He who could recount the pains and travels of the life of the Son of God, his
fast, his preaching, his watchings, his prayers, and all that which he has
done and suffered, as well in Soul, as body, during the 33 years of his mortal
Life, would easily perceive, how all that tended to the destruction of sin, for
which he principally came into the world.

The time at length approaching, wherein he was to enter into that last Combat
of that so great and signal War, which he was come to wage to free us all from
sin, and the captivity of the Devil its first Author; what was he not obliged
to do and suffer that he might conquer so potent an enemy? it is true that he
gained a glorious victory, but it was with the loss of his precious life, and
at the price of his own death. But what death, Theotime? A death full both of
sorrows and reproaches, the death of the Cross: A death accompanied with all
imaginable affronts, and executed by those that he had in the highest degree
obliged; betrayed and delivered by one of his Disciples to his mortal enemies;
abandoned also and denied by his own Disciples; arrained before a Judge;
accused as a Criminal; Sentenced and condemned as a Malefactor; exposed to the
scoffs and derisions of the Multitude. Before his execution he was Scourged
with no less cruelty, then shame and disgrace: delivered over to the insolence
of Soldiers, who Crowned him with Thorns as a mock-King, in derision and scorn.
In fine, led to execution, nailed to the Cross, exposed to the view of all the
world between two Thieves, as if he had been an Impostor, a Cheat, and the
worst of men. Amidst these excessive pains of his Body, and yet far greater
anguishes of his Soul, overwhelmed with sorrow and confusion, he expires upon
the Cross, and commends his Spirit into his hands, who sent him.

O Theotime, have you ever seriously thought of these sufferings of the Son of
God, your Savior? But perhaps you have not reflected upon that which caused
them; wonder at his goodness, but be not surprised, if I tell you, that it is
nothing else but Sin: It was Sin alone that Crucified the Son of God. It is
true they were the Jews, who persecuted him to death; it was Pilate who
condemned him, and the Executioners who nailed him on the Cross: It is also
most true that he offered himself unto death, and underwent all these
hardships, because he was so pleased; Oblatus est quia ipse voluit. Isa. 53. It
is moreover most certain that his Eternal Father desired that of him, and
obliged him to drink that bitter Chalice: But it is also without question, that
Sin was the first cause of the suffering of the Son of God; it was that which
first prosecuted him, this also was his most cruel Executioner. If he offered
himself to death, it was, because he had willingly charged himself with our
Sins. If the Eternal Father would also have him suffer, it was to receive from
him the satisfaction which was due to his Divine Justice upon account of Sin.
God, says Isaias, c. 53. had laid on him all our Iniquities. And the Eternal
Father himself said, that he had stricken him for the Sins of his people.
Propter scelus populi percussi eum.

Hearken here to the description, which the same Prophet makes, speaking of the
torments of the Son of God, which he saw, as clearly in Spirit, as if he had
beheld them in effect. There was no Beauty in him, nor comeliness, and we have
seen him despised, and most abject of Men, a man of sorrows, and knowing
infirmities, and his look as it were hid and despised; whereupon neither have
we esteemed him. He surely has born our infirmities, and our sorrows he has
carried, and we have thought him as it were a leper, and Stricken of God, and
humbled. And he was wounded for our iniquities, he was broken for our sins. The
discipline of our peace upon him, and with his Stripes we are healed.

Behold dear Theotime, how much our sins have made Jesus Christ to suffer.
Behold to what condition that cruel enemy has reduced the Son of God: Is not
this sufficient to make us judge of the Greatness and enormity of Mortal Sin,
seeing it has made him to suffer so great torments, who had undertaken to
destroy it, seeing also the fault could not be expiated, nor the damage
repaired, but by the death of God made man, whose sole life is infinitely more
estimable and precious then those of all Men, Angels, and other possible
creatures put together? Ought we not then to say that the wounds we have
received by Sin, are truly dreadful, since they could not be cured by any
thing less then the blood of the Son of God? Agnosce homo, quam gravia sint
nulnera, pro quibus necesse fuit unigenitum Dei filium vulnerari. Si non essent
haec ad mortem, and ad mortem, sempiternam, nunquam prohis filius Dei
moreretur. Bern. Sermon. 3. de Not. Dom. O man (says St Bernard) acknowledge how
great those gashes were, that obliged the only Son of God to be wounded to cure
them. If those Sores had not been mortal, and the causes of an eternal death,
the Son of God had never dyed for their recovery.

Can there be a more considerable motive to lament and abhor our sins, then
when we reflect that they were the cause why the Son of God our Savior
Suffered so much, and also why he died upon the Cross? The Jews once wept over,
and bewailed the destruction of the Royal City of Jerusalem, because of the
loss of their King; Cecidit corona capitis nostri: vae nobis, quia peccanimus!
Thren. 5. How much more reason have we to lament our misfortune who by our sins
are the only cause of the death of Jesus Christ, our King, our Redeemer, and
our Glory?

Weigh well, Theotime, and meditate upon this motive of sorrow and contrition;
it will pierce your heart, except it be harder, and more obdurate then the very
Stones; and say with St Bernard, ubi supra. Pudet itaque, dilectissimi,
propriam negligenter dissimulare passionem, cui tantam a majestate tanta video
exhiberi compassionem. Compatitur filius Dei, and plorat; homo patitur, and
ridebit.

It is a shameful thing for Christians not to acknowledge the evils, which sin
has brought upon them, when they consider, what so supreme a Majesty, as that
of the Son of God, has been obliged to suffer for them. The Son of God takes
compassion on the miseries of man, and weeps for sorrow; whilst insensible man,
who is overwhelmed with his own Sins, is not concerned at all. O Theotime, have
a care, I will not say only, that you never become so blind and insensible, as
to flight the grievousness and enormity of mortal Sin, but that you never
permit a day to pass, in which with all the vigor of your heart, you do not
conceive new hatred against that infernal Monster, which could not be
destroyed, but by the passion and death of the Son of God our Savior.

CHAP. XII. The practice of Contrition upon the Precedent Motives.
LEt us now resume all that, which we have said concerning the Motives of
Contrition, since the Eighth Chapter, that we may come to the practice of this
great Virtue, without which it is impossible to be justified in the sight of
God.

We have said that to have Contrition, we must know the enormity or
grievousness of Mortal Sin, and we have made that Enormity appear from several
heads.

First, because it is incomprehensible in it self, as we showed in the Eighth
Chapter.

2dly, From the knowledge we have of it from the Sacred Scripture, which
discovers unto us the several Signal and most enormous indignities of Sin;
whilst it treats of it, as a Rebellion against God; a detestable ingratitude; a
contempt of his Holy will, a postponing the Creator to the Creature, and a
preferring of our own, before the will of God; which we spoke of in the 9th,
Chapter.

3dly. From the horrid offense or injury which by Sin is done to God; an injury
really infinite, and so great, that no pure Creature, either Man, or Angel is
capable by himself to make satisfaction for it; As we have seen in the 10th.
Chapter.

4ly. From the dreadful effects, which by sin are caused in all places and in
all sorts of Subjects; in Heaven, in Earth, in Hell; in the Angels, in Man, in
God himself, and in his Son Jesus Christ; as we have showed in the several
Articles of the 11th, Chapter.

After all these Motives thus treated, to give you an insight into the nature
of that sorrow, which is called Contrition of your Sins, you must read over
these same Motives with much attention again and again, not once or twice, but
many times; you must beg continually of God that he will vouchsafe to grant
you his Grace to understand them well, and that your Soul may be moved with
them: in reading them you must pause some time upon those which touch you most;
you must weigh them well, and imprint them in your heart: and having understood
them, cast your self upon your knees, and deplore your Sins in the presence of
God, upon those motives which you conceived best, and which affected you most;
demand of him pardon, and beseech him to show his mercy toward you, making use
of this, or the like prayer.

O my God! have pity on me, and let me partake of the effects of thy great
mercy. I acknowledge now the evil, which I have done, and apprehend the
grievousness of my Sins. Thou art he, O my God, whom I have offended; whom I
have attacqued, rebellious, ungrateful, and perfidious Creature, as I am. Thee
have I abandoned to follow my pleasures and passions; I have lost thy grace;
and I, who have been created to thy Image and likeness, by my Sins have made my
foul like unto those monsters of ingratitude, the Devils. I have lost Heaven my
blessed Country; I have merited Hell and Eternal Damnation, which I shall never
be able to avoid without the assistance of thy great mercy. But above all I
have infinitely offended thy bounty. The injury which I have offered it, is so
great, that it caused thy Son Jesus Christ my Savior to suffer death. O my
God! how can I worthily deplore so great an evil! who will give water to my
head, and a fountain of Tears unto my eyes to deplore night and day my misery
and malice, and to do Penance for my sins?

Make this or the like prayer; but make it from the bottom of your soul; make
it with an humble and contrite heart in the presence of God, in acknowledgment
of your sins and misery. Run it not over briefly; take time to make it; make it
long, and for many days: Put your self in the State of a true Penitent in the
sight of God, and, that you may perform it better, make use of this means,
which I shall give you.

CHAP. XIII. Of Examples of Penance taken out of Holy Writ.
ALltho' what we have said may be very effectual to excite Contrition, and a
true sorrow for our Sins; yet we will add in this place another means, which
without question must needs be more efficacious. They are some Examples of true
Penitents, which we find in the Holy Scripture, as well in the Old, as New
Testament. These are the true models, by which we may frame ours, and learn
what is true Penance, and how to practice it. Read then, Theotime, and attend.

Consider David after his Sin, how full of interior trouble and concern he was
for the evil he had done; bedewing, as he says, his bed with his tears, and
having always his Sins before his eyes, demanding mercy of God, and beseeching
him to turn away his eyes from his Iniquities, not to take away from him his
Holy Spirit; not to contemn the Sacrifice, which he offered him, of an
afflicted mind, of an humble and contrite heart. Behold a true Penitent, behold
what true Contrition is. Vade and fac similiter. Imitate this Example, and you
are a true Penitent. You will find these excellent dispositions of a penitent
mind in the seven Penitential Psalms, if you read them with attention. Behold
King Ezechias weeping and lamenting in the presence of God, and promising him
to pass again over in his heart, and in the bitterness of his Soul all his
misspent years, to bewail his Sins, and obtain remission of them. Read his
Canticle which begins Ego dixi in dimidio. Esai. 38. Cast your eyes upon the
good Israelites, who were sent Captives into Babylon after the taking of
Jerusalem, doing Penance for their Sins, which had thrown them into that
miserable state; crying out to God from the bottom of their hearts, Baruch. 2.
We have sinned against the Lord our God in not obeying his word. To the Lord
our God belongs justice and uprightness; but to us nothing but shame and
confusion, which our iniquities have deserved: We have sinned, we have done
evil, we have dealt unjustly, O Lord our God, in all thy Commandments. Turn
from us thy anger; hear, O Lord, our Prayers, and our Petitions; open thy eyes
and consider that the dead praise thee not, but the Soul which is sensible and
afflicted with the greatness of the evils she has done, and performs due
Penance for them.

Consider Manasses also in his Conversion groaning under the weight of his
Sins, and lamenting his Iniquities with such a sorrow, that he acknowledged
himself unworthy even to lift up his eyes toward Heaven; so great, he confessed,
were his offenses! You will perceive these words to proceed from a truly
penitent Soul, overwhelmed with sorrow for his Sins. Oration Manasses. It Is
true, O Lord, I have infinitely offended thee, and my Sins are more in number
then the Sand of the Sea; I am unworthy to lift up my eyes toward Heaven to
demand thy mercy, having provoked thy anger, as I have done, by my Iniquities:
But now, O my God, I prostrate my self from my heart before thee to beg thy
mercy. I have sinned, O my God, I have sinned: I acknowledge all the evil I
have done, pardon, O Lord, pardon. I beg of thee, and earnestly beseech thee,
do not destroy me with my Iniquities; do not reserve me to the utmost rigor of
thy Justice; do not condemn me for ever unto the fire of Hell: Remember that
thou art my God; the God of Penitents, and thy immense bounty will best appear
in me, whilst it makes thee to save a miserable Sinner unworthy of thy grace,
and gives me occasion to praise thee eternally for thy infinite goodness.

Go to the Gospel, and there you will find more pressing examples of Penance
and Contrition.

There you may see a holy Penitent, moved to that degree with sorrow for her
Sins, that she seeks the Son of God, and having found him, casts her self at
his feet, washes them with her tears, (such was the compunction of her heart,
and so abundantly did they flow) wipes them with her hair, and annoints them
with precious Ointment: thus consecrating these Riches, that Hair, those Tears
to pious uses, which till then she had employed in vanity. And thus that
sorrow, she had so happily conceived, broke forth into all the Signs of the
love of God, and spared nothing to serve him, from whom she expected the
remission of her Sins. So that She deserved to hear from the mouth of our
Savior. Luc. 7.47. that her Sins were forgiven her, because she loved much.

There you shall find the head of the Apostles unfortunately fallen, denying
his divine Master three several times. But he had scarce ended his last denial,
when our Savior by a glance of his eye which penetrated Peter's heart, makes
him to remember himself, acknowledge his fault, and conceive so great a grief,
that going out he wept bitterly for the Sin. Egressus for as flevit amare. Mat.
26.75. And the grief continued all his life.

You will find in the Gospel two other examples of true penance, which the Son
of God himself proposed in two parables, which he set forth for that intent.

The first is in the person of the Prodigal Son, under which figure he sets
before our eyes a perfect pattern of a Sinner returning again to God by means
of Penance. Luke 15. This poor strayed young man after he had spent all his
Estate, is forced by the sense of his miseries to reflect, or return to
himself, and say; O how many hired Servants are there in my Fathers house, who
abound with bread, and live at case, and I miserable wretch am ready to starve
with hunger. I will arise, and go to my Father, and say, Father I have sinned
against Heaven and against you, I am not now worthy to be called your Son,
permit me only to be like one of your hired Servants. He had no sooner spoke
these words, but presently without delay he puts them in execution; Leaves the
place of his misery, comes and casts himself at his Fathers feet, to beg pardon
and mercy at his hands; and such and so great was this his repentance; that
whereas he only demanded a place amongst his Servants, he was admitted unto
that of his Son which he had lost.

Consider well this pattern, Theotime, imitate it in your Repentance, and
return to God.

First, Practice well that, which is signified by these words, in se reversus;
returning into himself; for one must return into ones self to return to God;
that is to say, one must acknowledge the miserable condition, to which he is
reduced by Sin; the distance from God, the loss of his grace, the lack of
Spiritual favors, and particularly of Divine Inspirations; and above all, the
continual danger of Damnation, wherein one is.

Secondly, in this view of your misery, conceive a horror of it, and form in
your heart a prompt and firm resolution to return unto your Heavenly Father, in
those words of the Prodigal Son, Surgam and ibo ad Patrem: I will rise from my
misery, and I will go toward my Eternal Father; I will declare my fault, and
ask him pardon, submitting my self in all things to his will.

Thirdly, do not deferr, no more then the Prodigal Son, the performance of your
resolution; begin immediately and in earnest to do Penance for your Sins:
Prostrate your self in the presence of God, and beg his pardon, prepare your
self for a good Confession, using all the necessary means to make it well: and
in this Confession, or even before, make use often of those words of the
Prodigal. Pater! peccavi in Coelum and coram te, jam non sum dignus vocari
filius tuns: fac me sicut unum de mercenariis tuis. But ponder well what they
signify; for by those words you profess to God that you have grievously
offended his Fatherly bounty; that, as a degenerate Child, you have abused all
his graces; that you have not been ashamed to affront him even in his prefence,
and in the sight of the whole Court of Heaven; that you acknowledge your self
unworthy to appear before him, or from thence forward to be treated by him, as
his Child; that you only implore his mercy and the pardon of your Sins,
protesting to serve him faithfully from henceforward, to do Penance and
accomplish all his Commands, as a good and faithful Servant. O what an
excellent pattern is this, Theotime, if you did but know how to imitate it well.

The other example is that of the Publican; in whose person the Son of God has
again represented to the life, the dispositions, which he requires in a true
Penitent: And that he might set it forth to the best advantage, behold over
against him a false or feigned Penitent, who had nothing in him, besides an
appearance or a deceitful show of Penance.

Two men (says he, Luke 18.) went up into the Temple to pray, the one was a
Pharisee, the other a Publican; the Pharisee standing prayed thus with himself:
O God, I give thee thanks, that I am not like other men, Thieves, Adulterers,
Unjust, as also this Publican; I fast twice a week, I pay exactly the tenths of
all my goods. Behold an example of a feigned Penitent, who has no sorrow for
his own sins, but who looks more into the sins of others, then his own; who
justifies himself by the sins he has not committed, instead of condemning
himself for those he is guilty of: who esteems himself just before God, when he
is exempt from some certain sins, although he commit others, and sometimes
greater. Who thinks he sufficiently satisfies for his sins by some exterior
good works, as fasting, and the like, neglecting in the mean time, Penance of
heart, and amendment of life. Behold the Idea of a false Penitent, which is but
too frequently found amongst Christians. Look now upon the Picture of a true
one.

On the contrary, says our Savior, the Publican standing afar off would not
so much as lift up his Eyes to Heaven; but knocked his breast, saying, God have
mercy upon me Miserable Sinner. In this Example are set forth all the
dispositions of a true Penitent.

First, a profound humility, which made him stay below in the Temple at a
distance, and separated from others, as if he apprehended himself by reason of
his sins unworthy to approach to God, or intermix himself amongst the just. But
by how much he retired farther off in himself, by so much, says St. Augustine,
he approached nearer to God. Publicanus autem, de longinquo stabat, and Deo
tamen ipse propinquabat; cordis conscientia removebat, pietas applicabat. Sermon.
36. de verse. Dom.

Secondly, the shame and confusion he had to appear before God with a
Conscience laden with sins: a confusion so great, that it hindered him from
raising his Eyes toward Heaven.

Thirdly, the sorrow he had in his heart for having grievously offended God, in
token whereof he knocks his breast, denoting by that action, (says St.
Ciprian) the sins concealed within. Sed percutiebat pectus suum, ut peccata
intus inclusa testaretur. De Orat. Dominica.

Fourthly, the pardon he emplored of God, as a true Penitent, having no other
motive but his own unworthiness on the one side, and on the other the pure
mercy of God, by which alone he hoped for pardon, and not by his own Merits.

Behold, Theotime, Examples and patterns of true Penance, by which we ought to
form and model ours. They are proposed to us by the Holy Ghost for that end:
and the two last were drawn, and formed by the Son of God, to teach us how to
behave our selves in that great action. For this reason if you resolve upon
Penance, and a serious Conversion; you must read them attentively; Consider
exactly all and every one of their actions, so to conform your self to them, as
near as you can. And as you have imitated those Penitents in their Sins and
extravagances; so also imitate them in their Penance. As St. Ambrose said to a
great Emperor: Qui secutus es errantem, sequere poenitentem.

The Third Part of this Treatise of Penance, which is Confession.
HAving spoken of Contrition and the preparations necessary to obtain that
Eminent Virtue; we now come to the Confession of Sins, which is the Second part
of Penance, as we have said above in the Second Chapter; which you would do
well to read once more in this place, for it serves as a foundation to all,
that we are about to say of Confession; which we shall treat with all possible
brevity, yet not without giving you all the knowledge, which is necessary to
make it well. But I beseech you, Theotime, read with attention and Application
of mind what we shall say.

CHAP. I. Of the Institution and Necessity of Confession.
THE first thing, which is necessary to be known in this place, is, who it was
that instituted Confession, and of what necessity it is for the Salvation of
Souls.

We cannot better learn these two truths then from the Holy Church, which has
clearly explained them by the Council of Trent. Sess. 14. Chap. 1.

The Council says, that Penance was always necessary, before the law of
Grace, for all those who had sinned Mortally, and that they could never receive
the remission of their Sins, but by detestation and hatred of Sin, and a holy
sorrow of mind for the enormous offense they had committed against God: Yet that
this Virtue was not raised to the dignity of a Sacrament, before the coming of
the Son of God, who instituted it on the day of his Resurrection, when being in
the midst of the Apostles he breathed on them, as the Scripture says, and said
these words: Receive the Holy Ghost, whose sins you remit they are remitted,
and whose sins you retain they are retained. Jo. 20.23.

By this so remarkable an action, says the Council, and by those so distinct
words, the Fathers with a common consent have always understood, that the power
to remit, or retain Sins, was given to the Apostles and their Lawful
Successors, to reconcile those unto God, who had fallen into Sin after Baptism.
Con. Tred. Sess. 14. c. 1.

And in the fifth Chapter, treating of the institution, and necessity of the
Confession of Sins, which is the Second part of this Sacrament, it speaks in
these terms. Concerning the Institution of the Sacrament of Penance already
explicated; The Universal Church has always understood, that our Lord
instituted the Entire Confession of Sins, and that it is necessary by divine
right for all those who have fallen into Mortal Sin after Baptism. Because our
Lord Jesus Christ being ready to Ascend into Heaven has left Priests in his
place in Quality of Presidents and Judges, to whom all the Sins which the
Faithful had committed after Baptism, ought to be discovered, that they might
give their Judgment, either of Absolution or Retention, by Virtue of that
power, which was given them.

From all this Doctrine of the Holy Church we learn two truths: The first is,
that Confession is is instituted by Jesus Christ. The second, that it is
necessary by Divine right for the remission of Mortal Sins committed after
Baptism, as Baptism is necessary for the remission of Original Sin.

We must notwithstanding take notice that in case of necessity, and where
Confession is impossible, it may be supplied by Contrition, as Baptism is also
supplied by the same action in those, who are capable to make it, supposing
that in this Contrition be included a will to receive Baptism, or make a
Confession: But in this case it is necessary that the Contrition be perfect,
and proceed from the pure love of God.

CHAP. II. What is Sacramental Confession?
THis word Confession is understood two ways in Scripture, for sometimes it
signifies the praise of God, sometimes the accusation of Sins; and the reason
is, because that word signifies an avouching, and an acknowledgment; and to
Confess signifies to avouch or acknowledge any thing. When we acknowledge the
greatness of God or his benefits, this is called Confession, which signifies as
much as praise or benediction which we give to God: When we acknowledge the
Sins we have committed, it is a Confession by which we accuse our selyes. This
made St. Augustine say that Confession belongs not only to Sinners, who accuse
themselves, but also to him that praises God. Confiteri non solius peccatoris,
sed etiam laudatoris. Aug. Sermon. 8. de verb. Dom. And St. Bernard adds, that
these two Confessions are necessary, the one for Sinners, the other for the
Just. Cum mala tua confiteris Sacrificium Deo Spiritus contribulatus; cum Dei
beneficia, immolas Deo Sacrificium laudis: absque confessione justus judicatur
ingratus, and peccator mortuus reputatur. Confessio igitur est peccatoris vita,
justi gloria. Bern. Sermon. 40. de diversis. Each one of these, says he, offers a
Sacrifice to God, the one of Contrition, the other of praise. Without the
first, Sinners continue in Death, and the Just without the second are accounted
ungrateful to God; and thus Confession gives life to Sinners, and glory to the
Just.

We speak here in this place only of the Confession of Sins, and of that only
as it is a part of the Sacrament of Penance, which we define thus: An
accusation of all the Sins one has committed which is made to the Priest as
Vicar of Jesus Christ, to receive Absolution thereof.

In this definition we must particularly take notice of the word Accusation,
which signifies much, but ordinarily is but little understood: for it does not
signify a simple recital of their Sins, as it happens to the greatest part of
Penitents, who Confess their Sins, as if they were recounting a Story: This
word then betokens quite another thing, and means a declaration which the
Penitent makes of his Sins to the Priest, as a Criminal to his Judge, that is,
to denounce them, to acknowledge ones self guilty, and to blame ones self, to
demand pardon for them, professing a regret or trouble of mind for having
committed them, protesting not to offend any more; and submitting ones self to
the Conditions and Punishments the Judge shall please to impose.

Behold what, properly speaking, Sacramental Confession is; which is much
different from that which is frequently practiced by Penitents.

It is rightly called, (says the learned Catechism of the Council of Trent. de
Penitent. n. 51.) an Accusation, because Sins are not to be so recounted as
though we boasted of our wickedness; nor are they to be so told, as if for
divertisement to some idle hearers we were telling a Story. But they are so to
be declared by a mind accusing it self, as that we desire also to revenge them
in our selves. That is, we must accuse our selves with the spirit, and
disposition of a Criminal before his Judge.

And the reason is manifest, because the Council of Trent above cited says,
that the Sacrament of Penance is instituted by the Son of God as a Tribunal and
Judgment, where the Sins of the Faithful must be discovered before the Priest;
who ought to judge them, and where the Penitent by consequence ought to appear
as culpable: Now he cannot appear as such, if he be not accused, and he cannot
be accused, but by himself: the declaration then of his Sins must be such an
Accusation as we have spoken of, being it is made with this intent to obtain
remission, and pardon.

CHAP. III. Of the Conditions necessary for a good Confession.
IT is easy to form a judgment of them from the precedent definition: For being
it is an Accusation, it follows, that it ought to have two Conditions amongst
others: It must be entire, that is, of all the Sins they have committed, and it
must be made with sorrow for having committed them. He who accuses himself,
that he may obtain pardon, must accuse himself of all the evils he has done,
and testify the sorrow he has for his faults.

These two Conditions require or produce some others: for the Integrity
requires it should be Clear and Short: the sorrow produces a shame for having
sinned, and a Submission to the will of the person offended, that he may obtain
pardon upon what conditions he shall best think fit.

Thus one may put six conditions necessary for a good Confession. It ought to
be Entire, Clear, Short, made with confusion and Shame of the Evil, with Sorrow
for having committed them, and with Submission to the person offended; this
Latin Verse will make you remember them.

Integra, Clara, Brevis, Verecunda, Dolens, Humilisque It ought to be Entire,
that is, of all the Sins they remember, after a diligent and sufficient Examen.
This is to be understood of Mortal Sins; and without this condition the
Confession is null. The reason is because Mortal Sins cannot be pardoned
separately one without another, being they are all and every one opposite to
Sanctifying Grace, and any one amongst them remaining in the Soul, it is an
hindrance, not permitting Grace to enter there; whence it follows, that if one
conceal but one only Mortal Sin in Confession, the Sacrament cannot produce its
effects, which is the Sanctification of the Soul, by the infusion of Grace.

It ought to be Clear, that is, in terms easy and intelligible, as much as the
Penitent is able, who ought to have a sincere will to make himself understood
by his Confessor, and therefore he must as much as may be avoid obscurity; at
least he is obliged not to affect, or desire to be obscure; for this would be
an evident sign that he has a mind to conceal some Sins.

It must be Short, not to say any more then what is necessary to make himself
rightly understood, and to avoid superfluous words, the repeating the same
thing, and unprofitable Stories, which are but too frequent amongst Penitents.
He must simply tell his sins in this manner. I accuse my self that I have
committed such a Sin: and adding only that which is necessary to make the
Confessor understand the quality of the sin, or answering to the question he
shall ask to inform himself.

It must be Shamefaced, that is, expressed with civil and modest words, and
with an interior sentiment of confusion for having offended God. A confusion
which makes us blush to see our selves criminal in the sight of God; but
without making us by any means, conceal our sins; but rather making us
ingeniously and humbly to declare them to him who has the place of God. For
the Penitent, who acknowledges himself culpable in the sight of God, has no
trouble to discover them before men: Justus prior est accusator sui. Prove. 18.
The Just man, that is, he who desires to become just, is the first accuser of
himself. And that other Sentence of Isaias, according to the Septuagint
Version. Dic tu peccata sua ut justificeris. Isai. 43. Discover thy sins that
thou may be justified.

It ought to be Sorrowful, that is, with a sentitiment of grief and regret for
the Sins he accuses himself of; otherwise it would not be an Accusation.

In fine, it must be Humble, that is, the Penitent ought to acknowledge himself
culpable, declare that he deserves to be punished, and submit himself unto the
Conditions the Judge shall appoint for the remission of his Sins.

CHAP. IV. Of the Defects in Confession.
AS we have said, that there are six Conditions required, so also it is
manifest that there are six Defects. The want of Sorrow, Clearness, etc. It is
notwithstanding true, that every one of them do not make the Confession null;
but only the want of those Conditions absolutely necessary, which are
Integrity, and Contrition; which we told you above were the two general
Conditions from whence the others spring.

The want of Integrity renders the Confession null, as also the want of true
and necessary Sorrow: and this is a certain Maxim, which we must hold in this
matter: that there are two things necessary in the Penitent; entire Confession,
and true Contrition. If one of these are wanting by the Penitents fault, the
Sacrament is null, and the Confession Sacrilegious.

The want of the other Conditions render the Confession imperfect, but not
invalid; except they be such as destroy one of those two Essential Conditions;
Integrity or Sorrow. Thus the defect of clearness may be such, that it makes
the Confessor not understand all the Mortal Sins: and in that case it renders
the Confession null; and especially if that obscurity be affected and on
purpose; the want of obedience may be so great, that it destroys Contrition;
and so of others.

Now there are three Cases, where Integrity makes the Confession defective. The
first, when willingly and knowingly one conceals a Mortal Sin for shame, fear,
negligence, or otherwise.

The second, when one conceals it indirectly; as when one accuses himself in
terms obscure, or ambiguous, with design that the Confessor should not
understand all that he would say, or at least perceiving he did not understand
every Mortal Sin; or when one accuses himself by halfs, leaving the rest to be
guessed at, or to be asked by the Confessor, which happens often to young
people.

The third, when one has not made a sufficient Examen of his Conscience, but
goes presently to Confession, knowing well enough he is not sufficiently
prepared: For although there be difference between concealing and forgetting a
Sin in Confession; and that forgetfulness does not make the Confession invalid;
yet this is to be understood only, when the forgetfulness is not voluntary or
caused by our negligence: for when we are the cause of such forgetfulness, it
is certain it is a Sin, which renders the Confession null, by the rule that he
who desires the cause, is judged also to desire the effect, which infallibly
follows it.

As to the sorrow for Sins, there are many cases wherein the Penitent may want
it to that degree, that the Sacrament is null thereby.

First, when one has made no act, neither before nor during Confession, nor
before he receives Absolution: In this case the Confession is invalid, although
it may proceed from a pure forgetfulness, that they did not perform that
action; because it is essential and absolutely necessary for the Sacrament, and
which cannot be supplied by any other action.

Secondly, when one makes those acts, but without due conditions: as without
supernatural motives, or with a reserve or exception of some Mortal Sin, for
which one has a complaisance or affection; in a word, without the Conditions
we have spoken of before in the second Part, fourth Chapter; which you must
read over again in this place.

Thirdly, when one has not a sincere resolution of amendment, although he
believes he has; this is judged to happen, when the Penitent will not leave
the occasion of Sin, practice the necessary remedies, obey his Confessor in
reasonable things.

CHAP. V. Of the Conditions necessary to make the Confession entire.
ACcording to the Doctrine of the Church there are three: To declare the
Species or Nature of the Sin, the Number, and the Circumstances that change the
Species or Nature of it.

First, we must confess the Species, Sort, or Nature of the Sin: It is not
sufficient to say in general terms, I have sinned, I have very much offended
God; but we must tell particularly in what: I have, for example, committed
Theft, or Blasphemy, or Detraction.

The reason of this rule is given by the Holy Council of Trent; because, says
it, the Priests are constituted Judges in this Sacrament, to give a judgment
of the sins of men. Now it is manifest they cannot exercise that judgment
without the knowledge of the Cause; nor observe the necessary equity in the
enjoining of the Penance, except the Penitents declare their Sins in
particular, and not only in general.

Secondly, they must discover the number, that is, how often they have fallen
into each sort of Sin. This is also absolutely necessary, that the Confessor
may judge aright: because he, who has committed a Sin often, is much more
Culpable, then he who has done it but seldom.

Thirdly, we must explain the circumstances which change the Species or Nature
of Sin, as the same Council has declared in express terms; and this is to be
done for the same reason, that obliges us to confess the Sins of different
Species, or sorts. Thus in Theft one must express the circumstance of a Sacred
place, in which he robbed, or a Sacred thing, which he has taken: because this
circumstance changes the Species, and makes it a Sacrilege.

In the sin of impurity, one must discover the quality of the person with whom
he has sinned: whether it be a Single or Married Person, or relation, for
these circumstances make different sins, of Fornication, Adultery, or Incest.

In fine, Penitents, and particularly young people are often defective in these
three rules. For first, as to the Species, or nature of the Sin, it happens
frequently, that they do not declare it at all. For example, concerning the sin
of Impurity, they say no more then that they have willingly entertained evil
thoughts, without mentioning in the least, whether they were accompanied with
any immodest touches of themselves, or other effects which follow; which are
sins of another Species, and more grievous then the thoughts. They will confess
they have touched others uncivilly, without discovering how, or what sort of
persons. They will accuse themselves of Detraction of their Neighbor, but not
offer to declare the thing they have said.

Secondly, as to the number it happens often, that telling the Species they are
afraid to discover the number entirely, and therefore conceal some part, the
number sometimes causing as much shame as the Species it self and quality of
the sin. In which case the Confession is no less invalid and Sacrilegious, then
if they had concealed the very Species of the sin.

Thirdly, they frequently commit the same fault by the notable circumstances,
which they are afraid to discover. For example, if they have robbed, or done
some notable injury to their Neighbors Goods, or cheated him at play, they are
afraid to tell the quantity, lest they should be obliged to restitution.

In all these occurrences when one willingly and wittingly conceals these
notable circumstances, the Confession is null. Have a care, Theotime, to avoid
these considerable faults, which often happen in Confession, for want of
discovering the Species or kind of the sin, the number or notable circumstances.

CHAP VI. An observable Advice concerning the number of Sins.
I Have here an advice of great concern to impart unto you, dear Theotime,
about the number of sins. That is, to avoid in Confession two extremes equally
Vicious: the one is a Supine negligence; the other is too much exactness and
scrupulosity.

There are some, who that they may not trouble themselves with a just examen,
discover nothing of the number of Mortal Sins, or if they do, that which is
very uncertain: I have done it for example, twenty times more or less, or else
in declaring a greater number then they are guilty of, to comprehend therein
the number they might have committed: this does not satisfy the exactness which
is necessary in Confession.

Others on the contrary are so much troubled in the search of their Sins, and
the number of them, that they are never quiet, but vex themselves with
continual doubts and anxiety of mind, never believing they have sufficiently
examined their Sins. This makes them that they think of nothing but this
examen, and little or nothing of the principal concern, which is Contrition.

These two faults must necessarily be avoided. For the first may render the
Confession invalid for want of integrity; the other for want of Contrition.

Those who sind themselves guilty of negligence, ought to remember what
diligence is necessary to dispose themselves for a thing of such high concern,
as is the obtaining the remission of their Sins; and since without confessing
them all, as far as they are able to remember, that cannot be acquired; it is
necessary they should beforehand apply, as much as possible, their mind and
attention thereunto, to the end they may remember. This is the rule which the
Council of Trent gives in this matter. Ses. 14. in the fifth Chapter of
Confession. Ex his colligitur oportere a panitentibus, omnia peccata Mortalia
quorum post diligentem sui discussionem conscientiam habent, in confessione
recenseri, etiam si occultissima illa sint. It is necessary, says the Council,
that the Penitents must declare all their Sins they remember after a diligent
examen, even those that are most hidden.

And as to the others who trouble and disquiet themselves with the Examen of
their Sins, they are to be fully persuaded of this truth; that God requires no
more of them in this, or any other occasion, but what they are able to perform;
and that after they have done what morally speaking they are able to remember
their Sins, they ought to satisfy themselves, to declare what they remember,
and rest in quiet; it being most certain that other sins which they have forgot
are to be comprehended in that Confession; and that they are pardoned them in
the absolution they receive.

This also is a rule of the Holy Church in the Council of Trent, which condemns
those of impiety, who say that the Confession of all their Sins, is an
impossible thing, and a Torture or Hell of the Conscience: being it is certain,
says the Council, that the Church requires no more of the Penitents, but that
every one after he has made a careful Examen and search into the bottom of
his Conscience, should Confess those Sins which occurr to his memory: and that
other Sins, which, notwithstanding such an Examen, they do not remember, are
esteemed generally to be comprehended in the same Confession: and it is of
these Sins we say to God with the Prophet: Cleanse me from my hidden Sins, O
Lord. Psalm. 18.13.

Those who embrace this maxim of the Church will easily find quiet of mind,
and banish the difficulties which arise from their Confessions. It is true,
they are still in doubt, whether in their Examen they used that diligence which
the Church requires: We shall tell you hereafter in the ninth Chapter wherein
it consists; in the mean time I shall mind you of two things here for your
comfort.

The first, that this great and obliging diligence reaches only to Mortal Sins.
As for Venial Sins, as we are not in rigor obliged to Confess them, so
likewise we are not to make such an exact examen of them: and as it is an
excellent thing to make the best Confession we are able; so it is the part of a
weak Soul to be troubled with scruples, and anxieties of mind.

The second Advertisement is, that when, after a serious examen of our Sins, we
cannot call to mind the number of them; as it happens in sins of habit or
custom, which are frequently committed, as ill Thoughts, dishonest Words,
Oaths, and the like, it is sufficient to discover, as near as one can, the time
since he was first subject to it: and in that time to take notice, as much as
may be, how often he may have fallen, if he have fallen often, as every day,
every week, or otherwise; and after one has declared what he can in this
manner, he ought not to concern or trouble himself any further.

CHAP. VII. An observable Advice concerning the Circumstances of Sins.
THE particular accidents which intervene, and are not of the substance of a
deed, but only accompany it, are called the circumstance of an action, as the
quality of the person who sins, the place, the time, the design with which he
acted, the end which was proposed, the means that were made use of, the
consequence and evil effects of an action, as Scandal or the like. All which
are comprehended in this verse.

Quis? quid? ubi? quibus auxilij? cur? quomodo? quando?

Amongst the circumstances there are some which are light, which render not an
action worse then it is of it self, and of these we do not speak. There are
others that are notorious and which aggravate exceedingly an action, and make
it more heinous, which are those of which we treat in this place. Now of these
there are two sorts.

Some which aggravate a Sin to that degree that they change the Species or
nature of it: thus the circumstance of a Sacred place, or a Sacred thing which
is stolen, changes the Sin of theft into Sacrilege, which is a different
Species or sort of Sin.

Others aggravate only the sin without changing the Species, and are called
simply aggravating Circumstances.

As to the former there is no question, but it is necessary to declare them in
Confession, as we have said above in the fifth Chapter. And for the other there
are authors, who hold one is not in rigor obliged to confess them.

Although this opinion may be true in Speculation, yet in practice it is very
difficult to make use of it, as one ought, by reason that it is very hard to
discern well the Circumstances which frequently occur. And this is the reason
why not sticking to this opinion, it is necessary that in practice we follow
and observe these two Maxims.

The First, that it is always better and more secure to declare in Confession
the circumstances which aggravate the Sin.

The Second, that it happens frequently that one is obliged to declare them, as
in these following examples.

1. When one cannot discern whether a circumstance, which one believes to be
notorious, change the sin or no. And who is it except he be a very
understanding person that knows this?

2. When it falls out that a circumstance makes a sin to be Mortal, which
otherwise without it would be but Venial. Thus to steal sixpence is but a
Venial sin, but to steal sixpence from a poor man that had nothing else to live
upon, is a Mortal Sin. He who strikes another and does him no hurt, commits
but a venial sin; but if in striking him he had an intention to wound him
notoriously, he commits a mortal Sin; and he ought to declare that intention,
when he accuses himself that he has struck him.

3. One is also obliged to tell the aggravating circumstances, when it chances
that a circumstance aggravates a mortal sin, not only notably but extremely
and with excess. For example: A man who has robbed five pounds has sinned
mortally; another who has stoll'n twenty thousand pounds, has also committed
a Mortal sin, but imcomparably a greater. This excess ought to be expressed in
Confession.

4. This declaration is ordinarily necessary, that the Confessor may understand
the grievousness of the sin, and the state of the Penitent, without which he
can neither impose a convenient Penance for the sins past, nor prescribe
remedies to avoid them for the future.

In fine, to declare ingeniously his sins with all their circumstances is a
sign of a sincere and truly penitent heart, desirous to cure his Maladies, and
save his Soul.

For this reason, Theotime, when you accuse your self of a sin, explicate
distinctly and clearly the circumstances, which seem to render it more grievous
in the sight of God. For example, how you did it; whether by passion or malice,
whether with an intention to hurt another or displease him; whether any
scandal, or any other ill effect followed from the sin; whether it was in a
holy place, or the like: And answer always with much sincerity to the questions
which your Ghostly Father shall ask you concerning your sins.

CHAP. VIII. How great an evil it is to conceal a Mortal Sin in Confession.
I Would to God this evil were as rare and unheard of amongst Christians, as it
is great in it self, and of most dreadful consequence to those that commit it.
But it happens by a strange misfortune, that it is but too common amongst
Penitents, and particularly amongst simple and young people, by reason they
know not how grievous a sin it is, and the dreadful consequences it draws
after it. This is the reason why I treat of it in this place.

First then, Theotime, you must know, and hold as most certain, that to conceal
willingly in Confession any Mortal Sin, or what you believe is a Mortal Sin, is
also a Mortal Sin: The reason is taken from the Command of our Savior, who, as
the Council of Trent above cited says, giving to the Apostles and their
Successors the power to remit or retain sins, has also obliged the Faithful
to Confess all the sins which after a sufficient Examen they remember. Thus to
conceal a Mortal Sin in Confession, is a formal disobedience to the Law of
Jesus Christ in a matter of the highest concern.

Secondly, this Sin is a formal and positive untruth in a matter of the highest
consequence, viz. The justification, and eternal Salvation of the Soul; an
untruth not told to Man but to God, whose place the Priest holds in Confession:
Now to tell a lie to God is a strange Crime. Remember the rigorous punishment
which God by S. Peter laid upon Ananias and Saphira his wife, for having told
an untruth in a thing of less importance, where they denied only part of the
price of some goods they sold, which they concealed. You have not, said the
Apostle, lied to men, but to God. Act. 5.4. And at these words they fell down
dead at his feet.

Thirdly, this Sin is not only a disobedience to the Law of God, and a base
lie; but also a sin of Sacrilege, and that one of the greatest magnitude.
Sacrilege is one of the heinousest sins one can commit; for it is an abuse and
a profanation of a consecrated and holy thing, that is to say, of a thing
dedicated to God, and which partakes of his sanctity. And as amongst holy
things there are some more holy then others, so amongst Sacrileges there are
some greater and more enormous then others, according to the proportion of the
thing that is profaned. Now the abuse and profanation of the Sacrament of
Penance, by him who conceals a Mortal Sin, is not only an abuse of a holy
thing, but of a thing most holy. Because the Sacraments are not only
exteriourly holy, like Churches, Altars, and holy Vessels, which are holy
because they are Consecrated to holy uses; but they contain holiness in
themselves, because they cause and bestow it upon men. If then it be a horrible
Sacrilege to profane a Church, overthrow an Altar, abuse a Chalice, judge what
we ought to say of the abuse and profanation of a Sacrament, and what a
horror we ought to have of such a Sacrilege.

Fourthly, consider the evil you do in abusing this Sacrament in particular,
for this Sacrament is instituted to appease and pacify our Lord, and to
reconcile us unto him. Now in making a false Confession, you provoke God to
anger, by those very means, which he has appointed to appease him: you make
him your enemy, at the same time that you go to make your atonement with him;
and you change the Sacrament which is a Judgment or Sentence of Absolution,
into a Judgment or Sentence of Condemnation. O how miserable are you! are you
not in dread of that Curse of the Prophet? Woe be to you, says he, that turn
judgment into wormwood. Amos. 5.7.

Fifthly, consider the great injury you do to the adorable Blood of the Son of
God: for by this Sacrament the merits of that blood are applied to us for the
remission of our Sins; and when the Priest pronounces the Sacred words of
Absolution, he pours upon us that precious blood, which washes us, as St. John
says, 1. Jo. 1.7. from the spots and stains which we had contracted by all our
sins. But when you are so void of grace, as to make a false Confession, and
having made it, to permit the Priest to give you Absolution, you frustrate the
effect of the blood of the Son of God, which falling upon a Criminal and
unworthy Subject, as you then are, is more profaned, contemned, and violated,
then when the Jews shed it upon the Earth, and unworthily trampled it under
their feet. Be afraid here of that menace of the Apostle in the Epistle to the
Hebrews, 10.28. where he says: He that despises Moses his Law, dies without
mercy: -- of how much more severe punishment, think ye, shall he deserve, who
treads under foot the Son of God, and esteems the blood of the Testament,
wherewith he was sanctified, as an unholy thing, and does affront the Spirit of
grace. Ponder well upon these three injuries: for all these you do by a false
Confession.

Sixthly, consider how little reason you have to commit so great evils in thus
concealing your sins in Confession; this cannot proceed but either out of fear
or shame, which are the two inseparable Companions of Sin; as Tertullian says,
in Apologet. Omne malum aut timore, aut pudore natura suffudit. As for fear,
what is it that you can apprehend in this occasion? If you fear to be defamed,
consider that you discover your sins but to one man alone, and so this cannot
defame you; but besides, he is obliged to secrecy by all both Divine and Humane
Laws; and he cannot violate that secret but he makes himself worthy of death
both before God and Man. So that there is no danger of your honor. Are you
afraid to be reprehended by your Ghostly Father? this is what sometimes hinders
simple people; who yet in reality are not simple, but blind and stupid, to
commit so dreadful a sin for fear of so small an evil; and to be more
apprehensive of the reprehension of a Ghostly Father, who does not do it, but
merely out of Charity and for your good, then you are afraid of the offense of
God, and to be reprehended and condemned by him, to be scoffed at by the
Devils, and lost for evermore. Has not he lost his wit who makes such a choice?
The same is to be said of those, who conceal their sins for fear of a great
Penance, which is yet a more unsupportable stupidity and blindness; yet this
happens sometimes, and chiefly amongst young and ignorant people. Let us now
come to speak of shame, which is the second reason, why the Penitent conceals
his sins in Confession, as vain as the former.

And first, I agree and acknowledge that Sin deserves we should be ashamed of
it, and that he is not truly penitent that has not this shame, and that he
justly merits that reproach which God gave to a Sinner. Hierem. 33. Thou have
the forehead of a dishonest woman, thou will not blush for thy crimes. But I
maintain, that shame ought not to hinder any one from discovering all their
sins in Confession; that which withholds us from such a declaration is not
shame, but a weakness of mind, or to say better, a folly.

For Theotime, can there be a greater folly then not to desire to cure a great
evil by another which is much less? then to choose rather to damn ones soul for
ever, then to save it by a shame or confusion which lasts but for a moment?
What would you say of a Criminal, who having deserved death should refuse the
pardon offered him by the King upon this Condition; that he would discover his
Crime in secret to a Judge, appointed by him? would not all cry out, that this
man had lost his Wits? yet this is his case, who conceals any thing in
Confession. Blind that you are, who choose rather to dye and be lost Eternally
then confess your sins to the Judge, whom God has appointed to take cognizance
of them; who will rather hide the wound that will cause your death, then show
it to the Surgeon who will cure it without fail; who choose rather to blush
one day before God in the presence of Angels, Men, and the whole Court of
Heaven, then now to be ashamed, and blush but for one moment before your
Ghostly Father. When you conceal your Sins from Men, do you think by that means
to hide them from the sight of God? you fear the sight of Man, and apprehend
not at all that God should know them. Is not this to disesteem the Divinity,
and scoff at God.

In reality this shame is not so great a punishment, if we do but make a true
Judgment of it. But suppose it were a thousand times greater, consider that it
is but a punishment for your sins, and that you have deserved it, yea, and a
far greater confusion, and an eternal disgrace: why then will you not suffer it?

Behold the great advantages it will bring you, the remission of your Sins, the
quiet of your Conscience, the friendship of God, and Eternal Salvation. O happy
confusion! It is this of which the wise man speaks. Eccl. 4.25. There is a
confusion that brings grace and Glory, as there is another which brings Sin,
which is that mischievous shame of which we speak in this place.

But in fine, consider one thing to which there is no reply, viz. That it is
impossible you should ever be saved without confessing that sin which you are
troubled to declare. Perform all the good work you please of Prayers,
Austerity, or Almsdeeds, as long as you retain any one mortal Sin in your heart
without declaring it in Confession, there is no Salvation for you; and if you
dye in that State you are lost for ever.

Do not tell me that you will confess it some day or other hereafter; but for
the present that you cannot do it. Remember that the longer you defer it, the
greater will your shame and confusion be, and you will have more trouble to
declare it.

But in expectation of that day, I ask whether in the interim you will go to
Confession or no? if you will, then you will commit so many sacrileges, as will
make you a thousand times more Criminal in the sight of God; and which will
draw upon your head the divine anger and vengeance. If you do not go to
Confession; in what a disorder and confusion do you put your conscience? and to
what danger do you expose your Salvation? who has told you that that day, or
time will come which you propose to your self, and that you shall not dye
before; and without Confession, being you would not confess, when you had both
time and means to do it.

For Conclusion, my dear Theotime, if you be in that miserable State, I conjure
you to look to your self, open your eyes and awake from that Lethargy. Consider
how it is the Devil that deceives you, and raises in you that wicked shame, or
that foolish fear, by which he would work your eternal Damnation, as he has
done to many others of your age, and condition.

Call to mind that poor possessed person in the Gospel whom the Devil had
rendered both deaf and dumb. His misery did in such a manner move the Son of
God that he wept. Mark 7. Suspiciens in Caelum ingemuit, and ait Ephpheta quod
est adaperire, and statim solutum est vinculum linguae ejus, and loquebatur
recte. Raising up his eyes to Heaven, says the Gospel, he wept, and said, be
open, and presently his tongue was untyed, and he spoke plain. The miseries,
which we consider in the body of that possessed man, are found daily in the
Soul, which the Devil has possessed by Sin; only with this difference, that
the condition of this Second is far more dangerous then the first. They were
the spiritual miseries represented in the body of the deaf and dumb man, which
drew tears and sighs from the Son of God. Take pity on your self, and render
not your self unworthy of the compassion he has for you. Be no longer deaf to
the commands he has given you to declare your Sins in Confession, nor to all
those reasons which oblige you to it. Courage, make a strong resolution, and
execute it readily, and have a care you be not remiss. The Son of God will
assist you in it with his grace, he will open your mouth freely to confess your
Sins, you will receive a thousand Consolations from him, and praising his holy
name you will sing forth, been omnia fecit, and surdos fecit audire and mutos
loqui. He has done all things well, he has made the deaf to hear, and the
dumb to speak.

CHAP. IX. Of the preparation for Confession, or, Examen of Conscience.
THere is no doubt but we ought to prepare our selves for Confession; and being
our memory, ordinarily speaking, is not so tenacious as to keep in mind things
past, except we apply our selves to call them back; it follows that the same
authority, which obliges us to an entire Confession of our sins, does oblige
us also to make beforehand an examen of Conscience, that so we may remember
the three things abovementioned, viz. The Species, the Number, and the most
notorious Circumstances. This made the Council of Trent say, that one is
obliged to declare all their sins which they remember after a diligent examen.

It is certain that no general rule can be prescribed for this preparation,
which does not depend upon the circumstances of the Person, of his capacity, of
time, of necessity, and such like: for there is more time required to prepare
ones self for an Annual then for a Monthly Confession: Those who have an ill
memory, or who observe not their daily actions, or seldom examen their
Consciences, have need of a longer preparation then others.

We must follow herein that most judicious method which the Catechism of the
Council prescribes: In confessione summa illa eura and diligentia ad hibenda
est, quam in rebus gravissimis ponere solemus. Catechis. ad Parac. de Poenit.
Sacram. n. 62. That is, to use the same diligence in this preparation we are
wont to employ in affairs of greatest importance; wherefore as in those
occasions every one applies himself seriously, and with all his power, and
uses all imaginable diligence, and endeavors that nothing may be wanting,
which is necessary to compass his design; we must do the same in this of
Confession, where we do not treat of any temporal concern, but of the securing
our Eternal Salvation, by gaining the remission of our Sins; a remission which
cannot be otherwise obtained, but by means of a good Confession.

To practice well this general rule, we must perform these three things.

First, we must pray to Almighty God, and beg of him he will vouchsafe his
Divine Light, whereby we may see our sins: this is a means which we must never
forget, and which we may say, is absolutely necessary. The heart of man is so
secret, that he himself oftentimes does not know himself, and none but God can
search it to the bottom. Our Conscience is sometimes so darkened, and so
obscured, that we are not able to see into it, either by means of our memory or
knowledge; only God by his grace and inward light, which he communicates to the
Soul, is able to dissipate and disperse that darkness; which when he does, we
easily discover many spots, which before we did not see; as we see in the rays
of the Sun many things, which, when we had only a lesser light, were hidden
from our eyes. Wherefore, Theotime, in this preparation you must never desist,
but continually pray to God for this heavenly light. Psalm. 17.29. Deus meus
illumina tenebras meas: O my God clear the darkness of my Soul, that I may
discover my sins: Come O Holy Ghost, and dart me from heaven a ray of thy
divine light.

Secondly, you must observe some method in searching out your sins, that so you
may not forget any: the best is to run over in order the Commandments, of God
and of the Church, with the seven Deadly Sins: For being every sin is a
transgression of the Law of God, we cannot more easily fall into the account of
the sins we have committed, then by running over his Commandments, and
examining upon every one by it self, whether we have transgressed against it,
in what? and how? and being one may offend against them, not only one, but many
ways, it is necessary that we know the diverse Sins which may be committed
against each, either to learn them by books which treat thereof, or by the
instruction of some understanding Person: We shall set down hereafter an exact
Examen.

Thirdly, to make yet better this examen of your Conscience, you must retire
into your self, there to take cognizance of your inclinations; your chief
passions; the Sins which you most ordinarily fall into; the occasions you have
to offend God; the persons you converse with; the places you have frequented;
the affairs you have been concerned; in the particular obligations of your
state; the omissions you are guilty of, and many other such like things.

If you practice well these three means Theotime, you comply with the
diligence, which God requires at your hands in this preparation; but practice
them with serenity and quietness of mind, without racking or torturing your
Soul; for disquietness and anxiety of mind, are so far from being an help, that
they are an hindrance to Confession.

Remember that God requires nothing from you but what you can perform; perform
it then orderly and faithfully, and when you have done, concern not your self
any more about your examen, but beg pardon of God for your Sins.

CHAP. X. Of the distinction which must be made between Mortal and Venial Sin.
IN this examen of Conscience we must not only employ the memory to remember
the Sin, but also the judgment to discern the quality and grievousness of them;
it being certain, that all Sins are not equal, or alike.

The first, and the most signal difference, which ought to be observed, is that
of Mortal and Venial: the knowledge of this distinction is absolutely necessary
in this place; because Mortal Sin depriving us of the grace of God, cannot be
remitted but by a penitential sorrow; it requires an entire Confession, a far
greater sorrow and another kind of satisfaction then Venial, which does not
destroy the grace of God in a Soul, may be forgiven without the Sacrament, and
does not require necessarily to be Confessed, although it be always very good to
do it.

That you may understand this difference right, you must know,

That every Sin is a trangression of the Law of God; but with this difference,
that it is sometimes heavy, or heinous, and sometimes light.

It is heavy, when it is acted in a matter of concern, with knowledge and
consent.

It is light, when it wants either all or any of these three conditions: That
is, either when the thing it self is light, or being heavy is without
sufficient consent; or with consent, but without knowledge of the evil; so that
it be not an affected, wilful, or voluntary ignorance.

The first is called Mortal, taking it is name from it is effect; by reason of
the death it causes in the Soul, by depriving her of the grace of God, which
is its Life.

The second is called Venial, because offending God but lightly, it is more
pardonable.

The heavy Trangression offends God grievously, it makes one incurr his
displeasure, robs the soul of Grace, makes it lose the right it had to Heaven,
which is the inheritance of the Children of God, and renders it subject to
Eternal Damnation.

The light Transgression offending God but slightly, does not make the Soul
incurr his absolute displeasure, but only it causes some small diminution of
the love, which God has for her.

All that, which the Scripture says of the ill effects of Sin, is to be
understood of the first transgression, as Jac. 1.15. That it causes death.
Isa. 59.2. That it sets God and man at a distauce: And in a word, all that
which we have said above in the Second part. Chap. 10.

And that which the Scripture says, that Prove. 24.16. The Just Man falls seven
times a day, that Jac. 3.2. All of us offend God many ways, that 1. Jo. 18. If
we say we have no Sin we deceive our selves, Is all to be understood of the
Second.

As these two sorts of sins are much different as well in their weight or
enormity, as effect; so also are they very unlike in their remission: for
Mortal sin cannot be pardoned, but by the Sacrament of Penance, or perfect
Contrition out of the Sacrament, but always with relation to the Sacrament, and
an obligation to receive it: whereas venial sin may be remitted by the only
remorse for having committed it, accompanied with a resolution of amendment.

For this reason in Confession we must take great notice of the Sins which are
Mortal, or which we believe to be so, that we may Confess them exactly and
entirely, without concealing any, deplore them in the sight of God, and do the
Penance they shall deserve.

CHAP. XI. Of the Confession of Venial Sins.
AS for Venial Sins, the Council of Trent has given us two rules to follow.

The first is, that to obtain the remission of them, it is not absolutely
necessary to Confess them, and they may be forgiven by only Contrition, and a
sorrow for having committed them. The reason which the Council of Trent gives,
is, because Venial Sins do not at all destroy Sanctifying grace: and so it is
not necessary they should come under the Jurisdiction of the Sacrament of
Penance, which is Instituted to restore that Grace to those who have lost it.

The Second rule is, that although there be no necessity, yet it is very
profitable and wholesome to Confess the Venial Sins, for many reasons. 1.
Because by the Sacrament of Penance they are pardoned both with more certainty,
and more Grace. 2ly, By confessing them one learns better to know, and correct
them. 3ly, It is a very profitable means to avoid Mortal Sin, as well by reason
of the Grace which one receives by the Sacrament, as also because he that has
a care to cleanse his Soul from lesser Sins, will be more solicitous and
apprehensive how he falls into greater, according to that sentence of our Lord,
in modico fidelis in majore fidelis erit. Luc. 16.10.

Now there are two things which are to be observed in the Confession of Venial
Sins.

The first is therein to avoid Scruples and disquiet or anxiety of mind; an
error which many commit, who examen themselves of their venial Sins with the
same trouble or concern, as if they were Mortal, and spend so much time in that
examination, that they think little or nothing of the means how to amend them.

The Second thing to be observed is, that when they confess venial Sins, they
always conceive a sorrow for having committed them, and make a Resolution to
amend them. Without these two acts, it is to no purpose to confess them; they
are not forgiven, although they receive Absolution of their other Sins, whereof
they had Contrition.

Nay, and I tell you more, that if it happen that one have no other but Venial
Sins to Confess, and have not sorrow or remorse for any of them, the Absolution
would be null; and such a person would commit a Sacrilege, by reason the
Sacrament would want one of its essential parts, which is Contrition. This is a
thing we must have a great care of, for it may happen very easily.

But when I say we must resolve, or have a will to amend our Venial Sins, I
speak of a real and sincere will, which may be effectual, and not of a
perpetual relapse, as it frequently falls out.

You will say that this is very hard, and that it is impossible to be without
Venial Sins. To this I Answer, and it imports you to observe it well, viz. That
there are three sorts of venial Sins, some which proceed from weakness, others
that are committed by inadvertency and surprise, others which we call Sins of
Malice, that is, which spring from our sole will with a perfect knowledge. Such
are those which are committed on set purpose, or by an affected negligence:
which one will not at all amend, or which happen by some tie or irregular
affection which he has to any thing.

As to the Sins of weakness, or surprise, it is true, we can never be totally
exempt from them; and for these it suffices to have a good will to amend as
well as one can.

But as for Sins which proceed from our will, it is in our power to amend, and
we are strictly obliged to it, because they very much displease God, and the
consequences are extremely dangerous.

These Sins, Theotime, although they seem light, produce very ill effects. They
are light if they be considered each one by themselves, but being neglected and
multiplied, they become very dangerous. They do not destroy Sanctifying Grace;
but they dispose us very much to lose it. All together they do not make a
Mortal Sin; but they dispose the Soul to fall into it. They do not directly
cause Death; but they cause weakness and maladies which bring Death along with
them, that is, which make us fall into Mortal Sin. In a word, although these
Sins do not break the league and amity betwixt God and the Soul, which is in
Grace, yet by little and little, they diminish it, and by this diminution
Charity is weakened in us, and God also by degrees withdraws the graces and
assistances which he vouchsafes us in all our Spiritual necessities: And thus
having less strength we more easily fall into Mortal Sin, when Temptation
comes. Alas, Theotime, how many are there, who have, and daily do lamentably
fall, the first source whereof was their neglect in correcting venial Sins.

Take great care of this resolution to amend them; whether it be, that you are
in the State of Grace, that you may conserve it, by avoiding these sorts of
Sin; or you are not, lest you make your self more unworthy by your neglect of
them.

CHAP. XII. Of Interior and Exterior Sins, or of the Sins of Thought and
Action.
IT is also very necessary, and to be observed in Confession and examination of
Sins, to know that there are Sins that may be committed interiourly, or by a
voluntary or willing thought only, and others which proceed even to the
exterior action. Thus to take Pleasure in a thought of revenge or to desire
it, is an interior Sin, or a Sin of thought; actually to put in execution the
same revenge, is an exterior Sin, or a Sin of action.

It happens frequently that Penitents who are not well instructed, confess
exterior Sins, when they have committed them, but say nothing of interior
Sins and those of thought, when they have not proceeded unto action or effect.

However it is most certain, that interior Sins are the first Sins, and very
Criminal in the sight of God; and even exterior Sins are not Sins, but because
they proceed from the heart, that is from the will, which is the source of the
Good and Evil which we do. It is that which causes all the Evil which is in
our Actions; and they are not wicked, but in as much as they are ordered and
consented to by the will.

This was the reason why our Savior said, that the heart is the Fountain of
all our Sins. Mat. 15.18. From the Heart (says he) come Adultery, Fornications,
Evil Thoughts. And the wise man says, Prove. 6.18. that God has in Abomination
the Heart that contrives evil thoughts. And in another place, Wisd. 1.3. that
Wicked thoughts separate us from God.

You must have a care then, Theotime, when you Confess, to accuse your self of
the Sins of Thought, when you have committed them; although you have not put them
in execution; nay even when afterward you have retracted them in your heart,
for this retractation does not hinder the evil from having been consented to in
thought; and although it would have been far greater if you had actually put it
in Execution, yet however to have only desired it cease not to be very
heinous.

Now I would have you observe that there are three degrees in these Sins of
thought: The first is Complacence, the second Desire, and the Third the
Resolution.

Complacence in an evil thought is a Mortal Sin, if it be voluntary or or with
a willing mind, and if the thing one thinks on be in it self a Mortal Sin; as
an impure Action, a Notorious Revenge, or the like.

The Desire, which frequently follows the Complacence, is also a Mortal Sin in
the two Circumstances abovementioned, when it is carried away voluntarily to
an evil thing; and we see it is forbidden by the two last Commandments of the
law of God. Now if you would know what is meant by a desire; Desire is a
Conditional will, or a will to do the evil if it lay in our power, and if we
had an occasion.

The Resolution to do the evil is also a Mortal Sin, and greater then the
other two, and must be confessed although it were not put in Execution, and even
although he have retracted and changed his resolution, as we said before.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Sin of Action, and of Omission.
THis difference of Sins is also very necessary to be known, as well for
Confession, as for the Conduct of a Christian Life.

Sins that consist in Action are easily known, confessed, and avoided; but Sins
of Omission are hardly understood, seldom Confessed, and scarcely avoided;
being it is hard to know when one is wanting to this obligation.

Yet this Sin is often as great as that of action: and a man shall be Damned
for not doing that which he is obliged to do, as soon as he that commits the
evil which is forbidden him.

For the Law of God, Theotime, whereof Sin is a transgression, does not only
forbid evil, but also commands good. There are some of these precepts which are
negative, and forbid evil; as those, Thou shall not Kill, Thou shall not Steal;
and others are conceived in positive terms, and command some good; as those,
Thou shall love the Lord thy God, Keep holy the Sabbath day.

Each Commandment in reality is both positive and negative: for those which
command a good, forbid the opposite evil, and those that prohibit an evil,
command the contrary good. For example, the precept which commands us to love
God, forbids us to do any thing that displeases him: And the Commandment that
prohibits us from robbing, obliges us to make restitution of the goods, to him
whom we had robbed: and thus of others. And there is never a Commandment
against which one may not Sin both by Commission, and Omission.

This being so, it is of great concern when one is to go to Confession, that he
examen himself of the Sins of Omission, as well as those of Action, and that he
accuse himself not only of evil actions which he has done, but also of the
good works he has not done, when he was obliged.

In the examen which we shall give you hereafter, we shall put the Sins of
Omission together with the others upon every one of the Commandments of God.

But chiefly we must examen carefully these Sins of Omission, when we search
into the Sins which belong particularly to our state: For each state and
condition has peculiar obligations against which one Sins very frequently, by
notorious Omissions, which are very great Sins, and which are not always
observed, as they should be, by those who often fall into them. From hence it
is that we do not amend them, and that at the hour of Death we find our selves
far more charged with Sins, then ever we imagined during our life.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Sins of Ignorance, Passion, and Malice.
I add here also this distinction, or these several branches of Sins, because
they conduce very much toward the making us understand the quality of them, and
how to form a better judgment of their enormity.

This distinction springs from the Nature of Sin, which is a voluntary, and
free action: As it is voluntary it must be performed knowingly: as it is free
it must be done in such a manner, that the will might not have done it.
Knowledge is hindered by Ignorance; the power not to do it, is hindered by
Passions, which carry the will on to do evil, or withdraw it from good: I say
hindered, that is, either diminished, or totally taken away. When Knowledge is
wanting, it is a Sin of Ignorance; when the power not to do it is hindered by
Passion, it is a Sin of Passion; but when we are free both from the one and the
other, Passion as well as Ignorance, then it is a Sin which proceeds from the
will alone, and is called a Sin of Malice, that is, of the will acting with
full knowledge, and of her own accord, without being pushed on or retained by
any Passion.

It imports you much that you should be well instructed in this Point,
Theotime, because the greatest part of the world excuse their Sins either upon
account of their ignorance, or weakness, which is but too ordinary amongst
young people. It is true there is sometimes ignorance or passion found in their
Sins: but they must not excuse themselves for that: for I shall make it out,
that neither Ignorance nor Passion do allways diminish them; and that the
greatest part of their Sins are Sins of Malice. And for the greater facility we
shall divide this Chapter into Articles.

ARTICLE I. Of the Sins of Ignorance.
IT is called a Sin of ignorance, which one has committed for want of
sufficient knowledge either of the action that he has done, or of the evil
which there is in such an action.

Ignorance of the action is called ignorance of the Fact. Ignorance of the evil
which is in the action, is called ignorance of the Law; of which we may be
ignorant two ways, either totally, or in part: Totally, when we believe there
is no ill in the action; in part, when we believe, indeed there is some, but
not so much evil in it, as in effect there is. Either of these ignorances may
happen two ways, either by our fault and our will, or without any fault or will
on our side.

It happens by our fault, when we are willing to be ignorant of a thing,
whether expressly and on set purpose, or implicitly by a certain affected
negligence, wilfully neglecting to learn what we do not know.

It happens without any fault of ours, when there is neither an express will,
nor any notorious negligence on our part, and it does not belong to us to know
it, or to be instructed in it.

This being supposed, it is easy to tell when it is, that ignorance diminishes
the Sin; when that it takes it away totally; and when not at all.

First, when ignorance does not proceed at all from our fault neither directly,
nor indirectly, it is certain it takes away the Sin totally, and that the
action which we do is not a Sin; the reason is because there is no Sin without
a will, and there is no will where there is no knowledge. Thus when Noe by
drinking Wine at first was overseen, his excess in drink was not a Sin, because
he knew not then the force of wine, nor could know it.

Secondly, when ignorance proceeds from our fault by an express will, or gross
and affected ignorance, it neither takes away, nor diminishes at all the Sin;
on the contrary it rather augments it. The reason is, because he that desires
the cause desires also the effect. If then I desire to be ignorant of the evil
that is in an action, and it happen by that ignorance that I Sin more freely,
and without remorse; I am the voluntary cause of the Sin whose enormity I would
not know. Such was the ignorance of the unchaste old men in the History of
Susanna, of whom it is said, Dan. 13.9. That they cast down their Eyes, that
they might not see Heaven, nor remember the Judgments of God. Such is the
ignorance of those that will not be instructed in what they ought to know, nor
advertised of the evil they do, and who will not understand to do well. As the
Prophet says, Psalm. 35.4. This is what frequently happens to young People.

Thirdly, as the total ignorance of any evil in an action, takes away all the
Sin, when it does not proceed from our fault; so the ignorance of the part of
the evil in which is a Sin, takes away part, that is, diminishes the Sin: This
is to be understood of that ignorance which does not proceed from our fault,
nor is it in our power to be better instructed. Such is the ignorance of young
People when they begin to fall into Sins of impurity, for they know well enough
that there is ill in it, which appears by the doubts they have in their
Conscience, and by the shame they have to Confess: But they do not understand
that the ill is so great as in reality it is, until such time as they are
instructed, and till then their Sins are not so great, although they be almost
always Mortal Sins.

ARTICLE II. Of Sins of Frailty, or of Passion.
THe Sins of frailty are those which proceed from the will moved with some
passion.

Passions are actions of the sensitive Appetite, which is an inferior part of
the Soul, and moves toward things forbidden by the law of God; such as are
Love, Hatred, Sadness, Fear, Anger.

Some push on the Soul to do that which is forbidden it, as Love, Hatred, Joy,
Choler: others withdraw it from doing the good which is commanded as Fear,
Sadness, Despair: Those cause the Sins of Action, These the Sins of Omission.

Passions diminish the liberty of the will, because being pushed on, or
withdrawn by other causes then by her self, she does not act with all the
liberty she has in that action, either to do, or not do what she will.
Besides, these Passions diminish also the judgment hindering the understanding,
which guides the will, from judging of things so clearly, as otherwise it would.

They diminish by consequence the Sin, which is found in an action, or
omission, and this differently: sometimes less, sometimes more, and sometimes
totally, and othertimes they diminish them not at all, but rather augment them.

They diminish sometimes but little, when they are but light, and the will may
easily overcome them.

They diminish the Sin much, when they are strong and violent; because for that
time they notoriously diminish the judgment and liberty; however as long as
they leave man with the knowledge of the evil which he does, the Sin continues
still.

They totally take away the Sin, when they are so violent, that they totally
cloud the reason, so that one does not perceive at all that there is a Sin;
which never happens, but in the first motions of passion; which being a little
appeased, the mind returns to it self, and knows what it has done, and from
thenceforward he Sins if he continues in his Passion.

In fine, Passions do not at all diminish the Sin when they are voluntary; and
this happens when they are willingly excited, or when one entertains them, and
endeavors to augment them, as it happens too often; and in this case they are
not Sins of Passion, but of malice.

ARTICE III. Of Sins of Malice.
BY Sins of Malice we do not understand here, Sins which are maliciously
committed, whether purely to displease God, or for the sole pleasure which one
takes in doing ill: These Sins are rather Sins of Devils, then men, and those
who are so unfortunate, as to Sin thus, begin in this world to live the life of
Devils, which God often punishes also with the punishment of Devils, which is
Obstinacy and Impenitence. These are the Sins which our Savior calls Mat.
12.32. Sins against the holy Ghost which are neither forgiven in this world nor
the next.

Sins of Malice, whereof I speak in this place, are those, which are committed
without Ignorance and without Passion, that is with full knowledge and entire
liberty; and they are called Sins of Malice, because being committed neither out
of ignorance nor passion, they proceed only from the ill inclination of the
will, which scruples not to offend God, upon condition it may compass the
enjoyment of its Pleasures or other sensible content, which it seeks by Sin.

These Sins are very great, and highly displeasing in the sight of God, being
they have nothing to excuse them, as the two former had. These must be
Confessed very exactly, declaring fully this circumstance, that they committed
them knowing well what they did, and on set purpose; and it is necessary that
they do great penance for them.

As these Sins are great, so they ought to be rare and unheard of amongst
Christians; but it happens by a sad misfortune that there is nothing more
common. And if the lives of men were well examined, the greatest part of Sins
would be found to be Sins of Malice.

For as concerning Ignorance, though much of it is found amongst the ordinary
Sins of men, and for that reason it is said, that every man that Sins is
ignorant: How often does it happen that the ignorance with which they Sin is
affected and voluntary? one searches after it expressly and with design; he
will be ignorant of that which he is obliged too know; he will not be
instructed; he fears to look too narrowly into his own actions, and he obliged
to the good by the knowledge which he shall have of it. To do thus, is it not
to desire the Sin upon set purpose and out of malice? for this reason they fly
all those things that may instruct them, as reading of Books, Sermons, or
amongst Preachers they care not for those that reprehend vice, or discover the
ablest Ghostly Father; They seek the less understanding and most indulgent;
They do not consult at all about the doubts of Conscience, or if they do, they
discover not all, they seek after favorable resolutions to indulge themselves
in remiss and false opinions, they frame a Conscience to Sin with more liberty.
What is this but wilfully to run into a precipice, and shut their eyes, that
they may cast themselves headlong more freely, and without fear?

As for Passions, we must say the same of them, as of Ignorance: It is true
they diminish Sin, when they are not voluntary; but when one seeks them on
design, or is pleased to cherish or increase them, these are not Sins of
Passion; but of Malice: Now how ordinary is this amongst men? He that has a
desire of revenge, does he not endeavor to nourish his hatred and indignation
against his enemy? He speaks against him on all occasions, and is ravished with
delight to hear one speak against him.

He whose heart is possessed with impure love does all he can to cherish it; he
applies his care and thoughts that way; all his Senses are employed therein, as
his Eyes, Ears, Tongue, Touch; he loses no occasion, he searches after them
with much care and solicitude; he follows all the motions of his Passion
without resistance, or any the least constraint upon himself. What is this but
to Sin on set purpose and malice? And thus running over the greatest part of
the Sins of men, we shall find that they principally spring from the will, and
men are vicious because they will, or have a mind to be so.

For this reason, Theotime, do not use to flatter your self in your. Sins,
because you are young; do not excuse your self with the ignorance of your
youth, nor with the passions which push it on: remember that often and often
again you make your ignorance and passion voluntary or wilful; and that your
Sins proceed from the inclination you have to ill, which you will not correct,
and thus the greatest part of your Sins are Sins of Malice.

ARTICLE IV. Of Sins which spring from a Vicious Habit.
I Add here this fourth Article, forasmuch as next to ignorance and passion,
there is another cause which draws the will to Sin, and seems to diminish it;
viz. A vicious habit; that is, an inclination or facility to fall into a Sin,
which facility is contracted by often repeated actions of the same Sin; for it
is the property of actions to produce suitable habits.

When this habit is strong and inveterate, it causes one to fall into Sin
without ignorance and without passion; witness those, who Swear upon all
occasions, who have their mind always full of evil thoughts, who have nothing
in their mouth, but immodest words, and so of others.

This inclination is sometimes so great, that it draws after it a kind of
necessity to fall into the evil: as St. Augustine says in his Confessions,
deploring the unfortunate experience he had of it. Ex voluntate perversa facta
est libido, and dum servitur libidini, facta est consuetudo, and dum
consuetudini non resistitur, facta est necessitas. S. Aug. l. 8. Confess. c. 5.
The will, says he, that is once depraved, begets an inclination to ill: the
inclination produces a habit; a habit when not resisted brings a necessity: Yet
this necessity does not take away the sin, because it does not take away the
liberty of the will, which is always Mistress of her habit; and which by means
of grace may overcome it. If you ask, whether a vicious habit diminish the Sin?

I answer, that of it self it does not diminish it at all, because it was
freely contracted by the will, and it is in her power to overcome it.

Hence to judge whether a vicious habit diminish the Sin, we must consider how
the will behaves her self in respect of the habit, that is, whether she be
displeased, whether she be afflicted, whether she make any endeavors to
correct her self, and be delivered of it. For in this case the habit without
doubt lessens the Sin, and when one falls therein, he is more excusable in the
sight of God; and if the Sin be Mortal, it is less grievous then if it were
committed without a habit.

But if he who has contracted a vicious habit does not strive to amend; his
Sins are nothing less for being committed by a habit, and then they are no more
sins of frailty, but become sins of malice; because he willingly nourishes the
cause that produces them. And being he does not efficaciously desire to
correct his vicious habit, he is rationally supposed to consent to all the
Sins, that spring from thence.

Take good notice of this rule, Theotime, that you may be able to judge aright
of the quality of the Sins which you commit by habit, and do not easily excuse
your self upon this account; They frequently proceed from your own fault and
will.

CHAP. XV. Of the Sins that are committed by Error, or by Doubt.
THese also are two other Fountains of Sin, which are necessary to be known and
examined by reason of the great number of Sins, that spring from them.

We call it error in this place, when one believes there is a Sin in the action
or omission, when in reality there is none, or that it is a Mortal, when it is
but a venial Sin.

I Enquire, whether an action or omission, performed in this error is a Sin?
without doubt it is, and ought to be confessed, and one ought to have a
diligent care of himself for the future, in regard to the like occasions.

The reason is because Sin consists in the Will, and the will acts not but as
it is guided by the judgment. When the judgment proposes a thing as ill,
whether it be an action or omission, if the Will embraces it, she consents to
it as bad, in as much as she knows no other quality; and Sins, as if the thing
were evil in effect; because the sin does not consist in the effect, but in the
affection. And this is the reason why we say that an erroneous Conscience
obliges, that is, when one believes that it is ill to do, or omit, an action,
he is obliged to follow that belief, although false, till such time as he shall
be informed of the truth.

You must mark this well, dear Theotime, for two reasons. First, that you may
avoid sinning thus by error, which happens but too often to young people, who
believe frequently that actions or omissions are sins, when they are not; yet
nevertheless commit them; and you ought firmly to hold and follow this rule,
never to perform an action, or omission, which you believe to be a Sin.

Secondly, that you may apply this truth to your Confession, in which you ought
to examine the Sins you have committed in this error, and to judge of the sins
you have committed, whether action, or omission: do not only examine whether it
were a Mortal sin in it self or no? but whether you did not verily believe it
was a mortal sin? for then it must be Confesied, as if it were a Mortal sin.

Perhaps you will draw from hence a consequence in your favor. If then, you
will say, I judge either an action or omission to be lawful and exempt from
sin, although in effect it be not, it follows, that I shall not sin at all in
committing it.

I answer, that this is sometimes true, when this erroneous judgment proceeds
from an innocent ignorance, or where there was no sault at all of ours, or that
it was not in our power to be instructed in the contrary: But if this error
arise from a culpable ignorance, and because we would not be better informed,
as it often happens; in this case it does not at all excuse the sin; as it is
above said.

As concerning doubt, this also is very often the cause of sin, and it concerns
us to know it: We call that a doubt, when one is uncertain whether an action,
or omission be a sin or no. This doubt is either very great, or small, or
betwixt both: it is very great, when it inclines the judgment to determine that
it is a Sin: light, when it rather resolves that it is not: mean or betwixt
both, when it hangs in suspense, and we know not on which side to incline the
balance: Hence it is easy to tell when a doubt causes a Sin, and when not.

A very strong doubt makes an action, or omission a sin; because it is
esteemed, as much as a judgment.

A light doubt does not make a thing to be a sin, in as much as it does not at
all destroy the contrary credence by which one believes there is no sin in it.

As for the doubt which is in the middle betwixt these two, and which leaves
the judgment in a total uncertainty neither being able to affirm nor deny, it
is so far from excusing from sin, that he, who in this doubt resolves to do an
action or omission, which he doubts whether it be a Mortal sin or no, sins
Mortally: The reason is, because acting in that formal doubt he is supposed to
desire it such as it might be in it self, and as it might be evil, he was
resolved to do it in case it were so. This deserves to be carefully remembered.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Sins which we Commit in others.
WE are not only guilty of those sins which we commit by our selves, but also
of those which we commit by others, that is, of sins which others commit
through our fault.

These Sins are often very heinous and of great consequence. These are those of
which David speaks when he says Psalm. 18.13. Cleanse me O Lord from my hidden
Sins, and pardon thy Servant from those which I commit in others. Yet there is
nothing more common amongst men, nor of which they take less care, for want of
sufficient knowledge, or understanding of the different ways by which one may
concur to another Sin. Wherefore I shall here treat of them briefly.

To sin by another, is to be the voluntary and culpable cause of the Sin, which
another commits. I say voluntary and culpable; because if we are the cause of
the sin of another, without our fault, we do not Sin,

Now we may be the cause of the sin of another two ways, positively, and
negatively; by action or by omission. By action, when we do or say something,
which induces our neighbor to sin. By omission, when we are wanting to say or
do something, that might hinder our neighbor from offending God.

I said when we do or say, to denote two ways, whereby we may cause sin in
another positively. viz. by our actions, and by our words. By our actions,
which give ill example to our neighbor, or an occasion to offend God. By
words, which induce others to evil.

The first way is called the sin of scandal, the second inducement to evil.
The first happens as often as we do any action, which is either wicked, or
esteemed so, which we know or ought to know, that it will be the cause that our
neighbor will offend God.

The second happens different ways, viz. by Teaching, Commanding, Concealing,
and Soliciting to Sin by Entreaties, Threats, etc.

The One and the Other of these ways are very common amongst men, and probably
are the cause of the greatest part of those sins, which are daily committed.
The Son of God says Mat. 18.7. Vae mundo a Scandalis; necesse est enim ut
veniant Scandale; Veruntamen vae homini illi per quem Scandalum venit, etc.
That it is a great misfortune, that the world should be so filled with
scandalls, as it is, and that this cannot otherwise be then a most lamentable
case for him who causes the scandal, and that it were better for a man to
have a Millstone tied to his neck and cast into the bottom of the Sea then to
give Scandal unto his neighbor, that is, then to make him fall into sin.

Besides this way of positively contributing to the sin of another by actions,
or words, there is another, which we may call negative; which happens when any
one refrains from doing or saying something, which might hinder our neighbor
from offending God. For not to hinder one from sinning, when we may, is to be
the cause of the Sin of another. This happens in many cases, of which we shall
discourse hereafter at the end of the examen of Sins.

The Fourth Part of the Treatise of Penance, which is Satisfaction.
CHAP. I. What Satisfaction is.
IT is the third part of Penance, which consists in doing or suffering
something to repair in some manner the offense or injury, which is done to God
by Sin.

I say to repair in some manner, because the great reparation for Sin was
performed by the Son of God; who by his Precious Blood and Death, has exactly
repaired the injury which Sin did to God, and merited a general Pardon of all
the punishment, which the Divine Justice could require.

This reparation has opened and facilitated a way to a reconciliation with God
after Sin. For as much as the merits of our Savior being applied to us, as
they are, by the Sacraments of Baptism and Penance, restore us again to the
Grace of God, which we had lost, and make us receive the remission of the
eternal Punishment due to our Sins: All this through the merits of Jesus
Christ, and by the virtue of the Satisfaction, which he has given to God the
Father for the same Sins. A satisfaction, without which we should always have
remained incapable of satisfying God, and by consequence of ever returning
again into his Grace and Favor.

But as it is in his power, who receives him again into his favor, by whom he
has been offended, to admit him on such conditions as himself shall think sit;
and either to remit him all the punishment, or to oblige him to undergo only
part of it; it has pleased the Divine wisdom in respect of us to make use of
both the one and the other of these two ways of reconciliation; though more
ordinarily of the second.

For in Baptism he receives us into his Grace, and remits us all the Punishment
due to our Sins. But in Penance he remits us indeed the Eternal punishment,
but still reserves some Temporal pains to be imposed upon the Penitent, to the
end he, the Penitent, may satisfy on his part according to his power, and for
other reasons, which we shall speak of.

In the undertaking of this Temporal punishment, consists the satisfaction
whereof we speak in this place, which is the third part of Penance.

CHAP. II. That God pardoning the Sin obliges to a temporal Punishment.
THis is a fundamental truth in the matter of satisfaction, and it is very
necessary to understand it well, that we may know what satisfaction or a
Penance, is, and how much it imports us to comply with it.

I said above that God ordinarily makes use of the second sort of
reconciliation, which imposes an obligation at least to suffer some punishment
for sin: which is easy to be proved.

He has always practiced this in the Old Testament; Nay even from the
beginning of the World.

When he pardoned the first man his sin, it was upon condition to do Penance by
labor, to which he condemned him; and in effect it was a very severe Penance,
which continued all his Life.

When he pardoned David his sins of Adultery and Murder, he told him by his
Prophet, that he should be chastised by the death of his Child; and he remitted
him nothing of all the menaces with which he threatened him by the same Prophet;
That he himself should see the dishonor of his house: the dissension amongst
his Children, and other misfortunes which were foretold him, and all which came
to pass.

For this reason the Penitents of the Old Testament, when they begged of God
pardon of their sins, they never as much as asked to be exempt from all
punishment, but only not to be chastised according to the rigor of the divine
justice; they desired to avoid his fury, and the more fignal effects of his
wrath, but they submitted themselves to the fatherly correction he should be
pleased to impose upon them. Reprehend me not O Lord said David Psalm. 27. in
thy Fury, nor punish me in thy Wrath. And a little after he declares that he is
ready to do Penance and to suffer for his Sins, ibid. v. 18. Ecce ego in
flagella paratus Sum; I am prepared says he for Scourges. Another begs of God
that he will Chastise him, but not in his Fury. Corripe me Domine, veruntamen
in judicio non in furore. Hierem, 10.24.

There are a vast number of the like examples in the old Testament, which show
evidently that God does not pardon Sins, but with an obligation to do Penance;
and that the Penitents of that time never pretended, nor required to be exempt
from suffering for their Sins.

Yea even there have been some of the most illuminated amongst them, who have
sounded into the depth of the punishment, which God has reserved to himself in
the other Life, and who knew that God punished after death the Sins of the
just, which had not been sufficiently expiated during Life. So Judas Machabeus,
not only a great Captain, but also high Priest of the Law, after a signal
Victory sent orders to Jerusalem to offer Sacrifice for the sins of the
faithful, who had been slain in that fight. And the Scripture 2. Match. 12.46.
approves that action, as an holy and wholesome thought; assuring us that by
prayers and Sacrifices the dead are released from their Sins. But this cannot
be understood of Sin, as to the fault, or the eternal punishment, which cannot
be remitted after Death, no more then the fault from whence it springs. It must
then be understood of the Temporal punishment which the dead ought to satisfy
for in the other Life, and from which they may be released by the Prayers and
Sacrifices of the Living.

As to the new Law, here also God has still continued the same manner of
receiving Christians into his Grace, in obliging them to satisfaction by
temporal punishment; and that with so much more reason, as the Law they profess
is more holy and more perfect.

This is the Reason why our Savior has said Mat. 12.35. that at the day of
Judgment we must give account of the least Sins, as idle words: This sentence
shall be given after death: There we shall give an account of our sins, there
to receive the punishment: This shall not at all be an eternal punishment, for
they will not at all deserve it; it must then be a temporal punishment, which
must be undergone, and by which we must satisfy in the other Life, if we have
not satisfied during this.

Hence also it is that the same Son of God by giving to his Apostles power to
remit and retain sins, has also given that of binding and loosing Sinners.
This power of binding reaches to many things: but amongst others it contains
the Power of obliging Penitents to make satisfaction for their sins; and in
releasing them from the bonds of the guilt and eternal punishment, it imposes
upon them a temporal pain, for the satisfaction of the Divine Justice. Thus
the Church has always urderstood that power of binding, as the Council of
Trent has declared Ses 14. c. 8. adding Can. 15. an Anathema to those that
hold the contrary.

This is the cause, why the same Church which is infallible in the
interpretation of the sentiments of her Spouse, has always made use of this
power from the Apostles even unto this present time, having always received
Sinners unto the Sacrament of Penance, by imposing upon them wholesome penances
for their sins. For which she her self has made rules and Canons, prescribing
different penances for different sorts of Sins.

CHAP. III. Excellent reasons out of the Council of Trent to show why God,
remitting the Sin by Penance, obliges the Penitent Sinner to a Temporal
Punishment.
THe holy Council of Trent treating of Penance, brings so efficacious and
moving reasons to evince this truth, that to omit them here, Theotime, would be
to deprive you of a signal satisfaction.

It draws the first from the great equity of the Divine Justice, which treats
those in a different manner who are differently or unequally guilty; as those
are who have sinned before Baptism, and those, who have offended after they
have received it. For as concerning the former, as they have sinned with more
ignorance, and without having received so many graces as Christians have, God
remits them by Baptism not only all their Sins, but also all the punishment
which he might justly exact in satisfaction for them; granting them an absolute
and entire pardon or an act of oblivion and indemnity of all that is passed in
favor of their entrance into Christian Religion. But he treats otherwise with
them who relapse into sin after Baptism, whose faults are infinitely greater,
because then they have a clearer knowledge of the sin, and offend after they
have been delivered from the Slavery of Sin and the Devil: After they have
received the grace of the Holy Ghost, by which there Soul became the dwelling
place of God, so that by sinning they violate the Temple of God, and
contristate the holy Spirit, which they banish from their Souls. These reasons,
which so much aggravate the sins of Christians, are also the cause why God does
not pardon them with so much indulgence, but obliges the Penitent after the
remission of the fault, to some satisfaction for the sin.

Certainly, says the Council, Ses. 14. c. 8. the equity of the divine justice
requires that he should deal otherwise with them, who before Baptism have
sinned by ignorance, then with them who by Holy Baptism have been delivered
from the servitude of sin and the Devil, and after they have received the gift
of the Holy Ghost have not been afraid to violate the Temple of God and
contristat his holy Spirit. Sane and divinae justitiae ratio exigere videtur,
ut aliter ab eo in gratiam-recipiantur, qui ante Baptismum per ignorantiam
deliquerint; aliter vero qui semel a peccati servitute liberati, and accepto
Spiritus sancti dono, scienter Templum Dei violare, and Spiritum sanctum
contristare non formidaverint.

From thence the Council descends to the second reason, which they derive from
the goodness of God, which imposes these punishments for our advantage, as
follows. Et divinam clementiam decet, ne ita nobis absque ulla satictfactione
peccata dimittantur, ut occasion accepta peccata leviora putantes, velut
injurii and contumeliosi S. Sancto in graviora labamur, thesaurizantes nobis
iram in die irae.

It is very agreeable to the divine bounty not to remit our sins without
obliging us to some Satisfaction, lest by occasion of too much mildness we
should think our sins less then they are; and from thence take occasion to fall
into greater, and to become injurious and contumelious to the Holy Ghost; and
draw upon us the divine wrath in the day of Anger.

Proculdubio enim magnopere a peccato revocant, and quasi fraeno quodam
coercent hae satisfactoriae paenae, cautioresque and vigilantiores in futurum
poenitentes efficient; medentur quoque peccatorum reliquiis, and vitiosos
habitus male vivendo comparatos contrariis virtutum actionibus tollunt. For
without doubt these satisfactory punishments have a wonderful Virtue to divert
Penitents from Sin, and serve as a Bridle to withdraw them, and teach them to
have a greater Guard for the future: besides they cure those relics and
disorders which sin had left in the Soul, and root out the Vicious habits
contracted by a disorderly way of living.

In these last words the Council comprehends a third reason, which they draw
from the wholesome effects, which follow from Satisfaction, which are the
correction of past faults, and amendment of Penitents for the future.

They add yet two more, viz. That the works of penance duly performed are a
powerful means to avert the punishment, which the divine Justice has prepared
in readyness to throw upon us. And that by these pains, which we suffer for our
sins, we become more like and better resemble our Savior Jesus Christ who has
suffered for our Sins; and from whose merit our satisfactions derive all their
force or merit; And we are assured, Romans 8.17. that if we have a part in his
sufferings, we shall also partake of his Glory.

The words of the Council are, Ibid. Neque vero in Ecclesia Dei unquam
existimata fuit ad amovendam imminentem a Domino paenam, quam ut has
paenitentiae opera homines cum vero animi dolor frequentent.

Accedit ad haec quod dum satisfaciendo patimur pro peccatis Christi Jesu, qui
pro peccatis nostris satisfecit, ex quo omnis nostra sufficientia est,
conformes efficimur, certissimam quoque arrham inde habentes quod si
compatimur, and conglorificabimur.

CHAP. IV. Wherein Satisfaction consists, and whether it be Essential to the
Sacrament of Penance.
WE have already said that it consists in doing or suffering some painful
thing to recompense the Temporal punishment, which God has reserved after the
remission of sin.

This satisfaction may be performed two manner of ways, either in Virtue of the
Sacrament by the impaition of the Priest, or out of the Sacrament by the sole
Devotion of the Penitent.

That only which is imposed by the Priest is Sacramental, and makes a part of
the Sacrament of Penance.

That which the Penitent performs upon his own free motion is an effect of the
virtue of Penance, with which his heart is filled; and although it do not make a
part of the Sacrament, it is nevertheless very profitable and wholesome; yea
often very necessary to supply the defects of the Penance imposed by
Confessors, which ordinarily come very short of the punishment which their
Sins deserve in the sight of God.

It may be asked whether Sacramental Satisfaction be essential to the Sacrament
of Penance? that is to say, whether or no, it be so necessary, that without it
the Sacrament would be in valid as to the remission of Sins?

To which it is necessary that we answer under a distinction betwixt
Satisfaction effectual or actual, and affective only, which is a sincere will
to satisfy. For the first is not at all of the essence of the Sacrament, so as
without it the Absolution should be null: for it is certain, that Absolution
may be given to a Penitent before he has actually made any Satisfaction
imposed by the Priest; which is evident from the practice of the Church, which
frequently gives Absolution before Satisfaction be actually performed.

But as to the will of fatisfying God, it is so necessary, that without it the
Absolution would be of no effect: The reason is because that will is
inseparable from true Contrition; and he who has it not at all, cannot have
the necessary sorrow for his Sins, nor be truly Penitent: because it is the
proper effect of Penance to endeavor to destroy Sin, and repair the injury it
does to Almighty God, as St. Thomas says, 3. p. q. 85. a. 2. In Poenitentia
invenitur specialis ratio actus laudabilis: viz. operari ad destructionem
peccati in quantum est offensa Dei.

Besides as it is not the intention of God to forgive the Sin, but by obliging
the Sinner to a Temporal Punishment, so neither can it be, that he who will
not, or does not design to undergo that pain, receive the remission of his
Sins, which is not given him but upon condition to endure it. Moreover by that
resistance to the Divine Will he commits a Sin in his very Confession, and by
consequence renders himself incapable of Absolution. This Conclusion we shall
see more clearly hereafter in the Chapter.

CHAP. V. Of the Conditions Satisfaction ought to have on behalf of the Ghostly
Father.
PEnance depends upon two persons, the Priest that imposes it, and the Penitent
who accepts and performs it. There are certain Conditions which it ought to
have on either side. I shall speak briefly of the one and the other, that not
only the Penitent may know what he ought to do to acquit himself of it with
advantage, but also what the Confessor on his side is obliged to do, that he
the Penitent may receive with greater submission and more obedience the Pe^ance
which shall be enjoined him.

The Penance then, which is enjoined by the Confessor, must have three
conditions: It must be Just, Charitable, and Prudent: that is, imposed with
justice, with charity, and with Prudence. with Justice, in regard to the Honor
and Interest of God; with Charity in respect of the Salvation of the Penitent;
with Prudence in order to the forming a right judgment of the quality of the
Penance, that the foresight of the effects may follow.

These three conditions correspond to the three Characters of a Confessor in
the Sacrament of Confession, of a Judge, of a Father, of a Physician: he ought
there to behave himself as a just Judge, as a charitable Father, and as a wise
Phisician.

First it must be Just, that is proportioned to the Sins, as well in respect of
the enormity, as the number; for if the Penance be too rigorous, it is an
injustice in respect of the Penitent: if it be too light or easy, it is an
injustice done to God. The first happens very seldom, but the second
frequently, and renders the Confessors very often extremely culpable in the
sight of God: which are the reasons why God, as S. Ciprian says, does not
receive from Penitents the Satisfaction which is due unto him. Laborant, ne Deo
satisfiat lib 1. ep. 3.

This proportion of the Penance with the Sin is not to be understood of an
exact and rigorous proportion; for that cannot possibly be observed by man,
none but God knowing the Punishment which each Sin deserves. But it is to be
understood of a Moral and prudent proportion; so that a greater proportion be
assigned to greater or more numerous Sins; and a lesser, for less heinous and
fewer Sins: All this must be enjoined according to the ability of the Penitent,
which depends upon the strength of their bodies, the disposition of their minds,
their age, their sex, their state, and the like.

And in this the Confessors ought to proceed with much circumspection,
remembering that they are not the absolute Masters and Arbiters in the imposing
of Penances, as they please; but that they act as Ministers of Jesus Christ:
and that it does not appertain to the servant to dispose at his pleasure of
what belongs to his Master.

For this reason the Council of Trent speaking of Satisfaction, gives this
advertisment to Confessors, worthy to be observed, and which they ought always
to have before their eyes: I shall cite it in this place not only for the
Confessors, but also for the Penitents sake; that they may know in this point
the obligations heir Confessors have; and that they may understand, that they
are not absolute masters of the Penances they enjoin,

The Priests of our Lord, says the Council ses. 14. c. 8. ought, as far as the
Holy Ghost and Prudence shall suggest unto them, to enjoin convenient and
wholesome penances, having regard to the quality of the Sins, and the ability of
the Penitents: for fear lest if they should connive at their Sins, and use them
too indulgently, enjoining some light works for most heinous crimes, they may
become partakers of others Sins: and afterward they add, That they have a
particular care that the Penances they impose be not only a means to conserve
the Penitents in Grace and cure their infirmities, but also serve to punish
their past offenses. Debent ergo Sacerdotes Domini, quantum Spiritus and
prudentia suggesserit, pro qualitate criminum and poenitentium facultate,
salutares and convenientes satisfactiones injungere; ne si forte peccatis
conniveant, and indulgentius cum penitentibus agant, levissima quaedam opera
pro gravissimis delictis injungendo, alienorum peccatorum participes
efficiantur. Habeant autem prae oculis ut satisfactio quam imponunt, non sit
tantum ad novae vitae custodiam, and infirmitatis medicamentum, sed etiam ad
praeteritorum peccatorum vindictam, and castigationem.

If Penitents would but consider well this advertisement, and the obligation
which their Confessors have to weigh well the penances they enioyn them; they
would not complain, as frequently they do, that their penances are too severe,
whereas they are far inferior to what they deserve.

Next to Justice, Charity is necessary in enjoining of Penance, where the
Priest ought to be mindful, that he is a Father of his Penitent, to
communicate unto him the life of grace. Now this is to be understood of a true
and real Charity and according to the will of God, which is the Salvation of
the Sinner, and which consequently ought to make him only solicitous for the
Salvation of the Penitent, using to that end both mild and severe remedies as
he shall judge most proper and most convenient.

Thus Charity avoids two extremes, the one of too severe Confessors, who
behave themselves in regard of their Penitents, as some Fathers do toward
their Children; whom they treat always with so much rigor, that they rather
ruin them, then amend them. The other is of too soft and indulgent Confessors,
who either following their own facil and complaisant nature, or negligently
performing that dreadful Office, treat all their Penitents with an equal, but
less discreet, sweetness, enjoining ordinarily but slight penances for Mortal
Sins, how great or how numerous so ever they be.

These two extremes are vicious, and have frequently very ill consequences, for
the former renders Confession troublesome and tedious, and discourageth
Penitents. The other makes it unprofitable, or of little or no effect for their
amendment. This indiscreet mildness fausters them in their vices, without
putting them to the trouble to correct them; as we see by too frequent
experience, and the acknowledgment of Penitents themselves, who frequently
avouch that this excessive mildness has been very prejudicial to them; and
indulged them in their Sins.

Those Ghostly fathers ought first to remember that by this their mildness,
they become guilty of others Sins, according to the above cited advertisement
of the Council of Trent in the 3. chapter Secondly, they wrong their Penitents in
an high degree whilst they think to favor them. They hinder them from doing
Penance, and from satisfying God by their good works, and are the causes why
they relapse into their Sins. This is the Doctrine which St. Cyprian delivers
in his 14. Epist. Haec qui subtrahit fratribus, decipit miserios, ut qui
possunt agere poenitentiam veram, and Deo patri and misericordi precibus and
operibus suis satisfacere, seducantur ut magis peccent. And moreover they ought
to consider that they are no less injurious to the Sacrament of Penance, and to
other Confessors, who administer that Sacrament, as they ought, with more
exactness. For the Penitents accustomed to this great indulgence cannot endure
Confessors, who are more exact in their duty, although they treat them with all
the prudence imaginable, and with much Charity. They complain of them, they
condemn them, they fly from them, and seek out the most indulgent, and most
commonly the most negligent in the performance of their duty.

There is a mean to be observed betwixt severity and sweetness; we must mingle
and temper the one with the other; as well in the reprehensions, which are
proper to be given them, as in the penances one ought to enjoin: And all this
conformable to the dispositions of the Penitent; for we must act with more
sweetness, with an humble and contrite Spirit, and with more Severity with him,
who is void of these good qualities: we must employ mildness toward timorous
Souls, and Severity toward those, who are hard and difficult to be moved; and
so of others.

Thirdly, there remains Prudence, which is the third condition which Penance
ought to have. This is that which governs and directs the two precedent
Conditions, Justice and Charity, and which applies them in their proper place,
and as they ought to be. Now this is not mere humane Prudence only, but a
Prudence inspired by God, and which we ought to beg of him. Wherefore the
Council said above, As much as the Holy Spirit and Prudence shall suggest unto
him.

This Prudence in the enjoining of Penance consists in the observance of many
things, but particularly three. viz. that the Penitent be able to comply with
the penance; That it be advantageous to him; And that it be secret for secret
Sins.

The Confessor must foresee whether or no the Penitent be able to perform the
penance enjoined him; he must enquire of him whether he can comply with it; and
know whether he understand the reasons he alleges; and he must either show
him the means how to perform it, or give him another penance.

He must, as much as possible, enjoin such a penance as may be for the
Salvation and amendment of the Penitent, so that making satisfaction to the
divine Justice, he may be confirmed in his grace and in the way of virtue. This
is done excellently by the imposition of such satisfactory pains, as serve also
for a remedy against the Spiritual distempers of the Penitent. For example,
Fasting against intemperance and Luxury; Alms-deeds against Covetousness and
Prodigality, and so of the rest.

In fine, the Penance must be Secret; that is, such as may be secretly
performed, and without being taken notice of by others; so that there be no
rational fear, that by the Penance the Penitent may be judged to have committed
some notorious Sin, from whence Scandal may arise to others, and infamy to the
Penitent.

This is to be understood, when the Sin is Secret, and the Penitent is in good
repute amongst those with whom he lives; for if the Sins are public or known
to others, or if he be not accounted a very good and virtuous man, it is not
only no harm, that the Penance be known to others; but it is often very proper
and sometimes necessary, that he may edify those by his Penance and Coversion,
whom he had scandalized by his wicked way of living.

CHAP. VI. Of the Conditions of Satisfaction in respect of the Penitent.
THE Penitent contributes two things to the Sacrament of Penance, the
acceptance of it; and the putting it in execution; which is the reason why the
conditions which it requires of him are, that it be well accepted, and duly
performed.

First, the Penance must be well accepted, and before the acceptance it is no
part of the Sacrament; because, as the Council of Trent has it, the Sacrament
is composed of three actions of the Pentient, Contrition, Confession, and
Satistisfaction. Now Satisfaction begins to be an action of the Penitent by
acceptance.

Secondly, it is not only necessary that the Penance be accepted, that so it
may be a part of the Sacrament; but the Penitent also is obliged to accept it,
if he intend to receive the Sacrament.

This Second follows out of the foregoing truth; for the non-acceptance of the
Penance would render the Sacrament defective at least in the integrity of its
parts; nay, more, it would signify that he has no mind to satisfy the Divine
justice, and yet this mind or will is essential to the Sacrament, and
necessarily included in Contrition; as is above declared.

Thirdly, the Penitent is not only obliged to receive such a Satisfaction as
himself thinks fit, but such an one as the Priest shall judge reasonable. And
the reason is, because the Priest is his Judge having power to oblige him to
the punishment at the same time he remits his sins; and by consequence the
Penitent ought to follow, and submit himself to the judgment of the Priest: and
if he refuse the Priest may deny to give him Absolution.

The Catechism of the Council of Trent, de Penit. Sacram. n. 29. declares this
truth in terms very proper to be cited in this place, to convince the Penitents
of this their obligation. See how it speaks.

Penitentia est veluti quaedam delictorum compensatio, ab ejus Voluntate
profecta, qui delinquit, ac Dei arbitrio in quem peccatum commissum est,
constituta. Quare and voluntas compensandi requiritur, in quo maxim contritio
versatur, and Penitens sacerdotis judicio, qui Dei personam gerit, se
subjiciat, necesse est; ut pro scelerum magnitudine paenam constituere in eum
possit.

Penance is a certain Compensation or recompense for Sins, that is, a virtue or
action by which one gives to God in some sort the honor which he had taken
from him, proceeding from the will of him who has offended; and appointed by
the will of God against whom the Sin was committed: wherefore the will of
making recompense is also required in Penance, as being the chief part of
Contrition: and it is a necessity incumbent upon the Penitent, to submit
himself to the judgment of the Priest who represents in that place the person
of God, that he may ordain a punishment according to the greatness of the Sin.

By this Authority Penitents may see the obligation they have to submit
themselves to their Confessors, and accept of the Penance they enjoin, in
which Confessors also ought to proceed with much discretion, as we have said,
regarding always what is most expedient for the Salvation of the Penitent.

In fine, that this acceptance of the Penance may be well performed, it must be
done with these three conditions, humbly, willingly, and sincerely.

Accept it then humbly Theotime, that is, with respect, submitting your self to
the judgment of your Confessor, as your Judge, your Father, and your Physician,
and of him that holds the place of God: if you find any difficulty in what he
shall ordain, declare it modestly and follow his directions.

Accept it willingly, acknowledging that you deserve a greater punishment, and
that this chastisement is far less than what you owe to the Divine justice.

Accept it sincerely, that is, with a good and steady will fully to perform all
he shall Command you.

As to the performance of the Penance, it ought to be exact and faithfully
complied with: there is an obligation to discharge ones self of this Duty.
First, because it is a part and belongs to the perfection of the Sacrament:
2ly, because it is enjoined by an authority, which has power to oblige, since
God has declared, that to be bound in Heaven which the Priest binds upon
Earth. 3ly, because it is in virtue of that acceptance one receives absolution.

There is then an obligation of complying with that penance, which one has
accepted; and he who on set purpose, or by wilful negligence fails to perform
it, commits a Sin and an offense against God: and this more or less greivously,
according as the omission is more or less considerable; for if it be but a
slight omission, it is but a venial Sin; but if it be a notorious omission, as
of the whole penance, or the greatest part of it, it may be a mortal Sin: which
is to be understood if the Penance was enjoined in satisfaction for a Mortal
Sin.

Acquit your self then faithfully, Theotime, of your Penance, as obeying God in
the person of your Confessor; discharge your self of the promise you have made
him, and complete the Sacrament.

But remember to perform it willingly, devoutly, and secretly.

Willingly, to avoid the fault which those commit who never perform it but with
pain and trouble, whereby they loose the greatest part of the merit they might
otherwise have. It is a strange thing that men should run after Sin with so
much earnestness and pleasure, and should have such an Aversion and Horror
against Penance which is a remedy against it: And this is the complaint which
Tertullian makes of his time. Nauseabit ad antidotum qui hiavit ad venenum. We
nauseate the Remedy, and love the Poison.

Perform it also devoutly, but especially with a true Spirit of repentance, and
an acknowledgment that it is a certain satisfaction you make to God for the
injury you have done him by your Sins. Place them always before your eyes,
deplore them as David did, iniquicatem meam ego cognosco, and peccatum meum
contra me est semper. Psalm. 50.4.

In fine, perform your Penance secretly, if it be great, and if it be given you
for great Sins, but which are altogether unknown to those amongst whom you
live; that you may neither scandalize any one, nor defame your self: It was for
these two reasons, we said in the precedent Chapter, that the Priest ought to
enjoin such a penance that may be secretly complied with when the Sins are
wholly secret; and the Penitent also must keep his Penance secret, that he may
avoid the same inconveniences.

And yet this is a thing wherein Penitents and particularly young people are
frequently faulty, declaring indiscreetly their penances to others, which
cannot but be of very ill consequence, when their penances are signal and
notorious.

If the penance be enjoined you for Sins that are known to others; as you ought
not to affect to publish it, so neither ought you to avoid the making of it
known; being it may serve for the edification of others, and satisfy for the
scandal, which your Sins have caused.

CHAP. VII. Of the Works which may be enjoined for Penance.
THe most ordinary works of Penance are prayer, fasting, almsdeeds, and
whatsoever may have a relation to any of these three: such as in respect of
Prayer, are reading pious books, Meditation, Confession, hearing Mass.

In respect of fasting, all the Mortifications of the body, Labor, retrenching
our selves even of lawful Pleasures, Abstinence from things either Hurtful,
or Dangerous.

In regard of Alms, all the Helps and Assistances one can give to their
Neighbor.

These three sorts of works are very proper for Penance, and agree with it
admirably well.

For first, by these three works we submit to God all the goods which we
possess, the goods of the Mind, those of the Body, and of Fortune. The goods of
the mind by Prayer, which subjects the Spirit to God; those of the Body by
Fasting and other Mortifications; and those of Fortune by Almsdeeds.

Secondly, because almost all our Sins consist in the abuse of some of these
three things. Pride proceeds from the abuse of the goods or advantages of the
mind; Luxury, from those of the goods of the Body; and from the abuse of our
Riches proceeds Covetousness: We repair that abuse by the three abovementioned
works. Prayer humbles the mind, Fasting tames the body, and Alms makes good use
of Riches.

These three works are highly praised and commended in the Scripture, as having
a wonderful force to appease Gods anger after Sin, and obtain of him all
manner of favors.

It is said of prayers, Judith. 9.16. That the Prayers of the humble and good
have always been pleasing to God. Eccle. 35.21. That the Prayer of him that
humbles himself penetrates the Clouds. Peircing, as I may say, the Heavens to
mount to the Divine Throne and make it self be understood and graciously heard.
This made St. Augustine say, that it is the same for Prayer to ascend unto
Heaven, as for Mercy to descend from thence. Ascendit Oration, and descendit
miseratio. And he adds elsewhere, that to make Prayer mount more easily up to
Heaven, it is good to give it two wings, viz. Fasting and Alms.

As for Fasting, it is said, Tob. 12.8. That Prayer is good with Fasting. That
the Fasting and Penance of the Ninevites appeased Gods wrath against them. When
God exhorts his People to penance, he assigns fasting as one of the most
efficacious means. Convert your selves to me in Fasting, Tears, and
Lamentations. Joel. 2.13.

And as for Alms, it is said, Tob. 4.11. That it delivers from Sin and Death.
And that it will not permit that the Soul which gives it should be lost. That
Dan. 4.24. by it we must redeem our Sins. That Eccl. 29.15. we must hide our
alms in the bosom of the poor, and it will Pray and obtain of God an
exemption from all evil for him that does it.

There is a great number of other passages in the Holy Scripture to show how
powerful these three works are to obtain the mercy of God, and remission of
Sins.

These three works have each of them three singular qualities, which render
them more amiable, and commend them to our more frequent practice. For they are
Satisfactory, Meritorious, and impetratorious.

They are Satisfactorious in respect of the temporal punishment, by reason of
the trouble which they give of Sins past, either to the Body or Mind; and by
these pains or trouble willingly undergone, one Satisfies for the punishments
which are due to the Sins he has committed.

They are meritorious in respect of grace and glory; which is common to all
good works performed in the state of Sanctifying grace.

They are impetratorious, that is they have a particular virtue whereby to
obtain of God the favors which we demand, and that according to the intention
of those who do them: and by how much better, that is, with more Fervor, and
with a more Humble and Contrite Spirit they are performed; by so much more
easily they obtain what they demand.

In fine, with all these admirable qualities, they have yet another of no less
note, which in all reason should make them more lovely and more desirable. And
it is this, they are good against the maladies of the Soul; and serve not only
as a remedy to cure past Sins, but also as a preservative against them for the
future.

CHAP. VIII. That the Penitent who truly desires to work his Salvation, ought
not to satisfy himself with the Penance enjoined him in the Sacrament, but he
ought to perform others, and how.
IT is a great error and very common amongst Penitents to satisfy themselves
if they comply with the Penance that is enjoined them, and to believe that they
have done enough, when they have performed the Penance such as it was, though
frequently far inferior to what it ought to be. This abuse is the cause of
many evils, and particularly above the rest of the small progress one makes in
virtue, of loose living, and relapses into Sin; it being certain that if we did
Penance as we ought, for our past offenses, we should not so easily fall into
other sins.

Mistake not then Theotime, but be persuaded that you ought to do other
Penances besides those that are enjoined you in your Confessions, and this for
several Reasons.

First the better to satisfy the Divine Justice for your past Sins, and by
little and little to diminish the punishment, which yet remains due from you to
be paid. 2ly, to make you more grateful and acceptable in the sight of God
after your Sins, and to merit at his hands those graces, which by your former
crimes you had justly lost. 3ly. To restrain you from offending God, and
relapsing into those Sins, for which you see your self obliged to suffer. 4ly.
To cure the vicious and wicked inclinations of your Soul, by exercising the
acts of contrary virtues.

All these are the reasons of the Council of Trent cited above in the 5th
Chapter; to which I refer my self.

This is the cause why the same Council has said, Ses. 6. c. 13. That the Life
of a Christian ought to be a perpetual Penance: and that the just ought to work
their Salvation with fear and trembling, by Labor, by Watchings, Almsdeeds,
Prayers, Fastings, and by Chastity. And these maxims are drawn from the
Gospel, and the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and his Apostles so that there is
not the least ground to doubt of the truth thereof.

Wherefore, dear Theotime, I exhort you to reflect seriously upon this truth,
and convince your self, that it is necessary for you to do Penance in
whatsoever state you are, if you intend to live like a Christian. It is a great
error to believe that Penance belongs only to Religious, it is the duty of all
Christians, and of all those that hope to save their Souls. But you will ask me
how it is to be done? Behold the most easy means can be imagined.

Penance consists in two things, in a detestation of Sin, and in suffering in
order to satisfy for the injury it has done to God. One of these is in the
heart, the other in action; Comply with them both, and you will perform a very
profitable Penance.

First, conserve always in your heart a true regret or sorrowful sense for
having offended God. And to conserve it better accustom your self daily to
renew it, and elicit acts of sorrow in your prayers, as at Morning and Night,
demanding of him pardon for your Sins, and detesting them from the bottom of
your heart.

Secondly, suffer for your Sins, and that two ways: first, by imposing upon
your self some action of Penance to perform every day. One while a recital of
some prayers, otherwhile a distribution of alms, sometimes mortification, as
abstinence, or retrenchment of some lawful pleasures, as divertisements, or
the like. But all this must be done upon the motive of making satisfaction for
injurys done to God, which is the Spirit of Penance. 2ly. accepting willingly
and with the same spirit of Penance, and satisfaction all the pains and evils
which daily befall you; As the inconveniences of Life, the disorders of Body,
the troubles of mind, disgusts, loss of goods, poverty, necessities,
afflictions either private, or public; and generally all the evils which
occur, and whereof this life is so fertile, and abounding: But especially the
particular pains and hardships, which you are forced to suffer in the state and
vocation where God has placed you, there not being any where one is not
obliged to labor and take pains.

All these afflictions and troubles we may make use of to do penance and
satisfy for our Sins, upon condition we suffer them with patience, (as the
Council of Trent has declared, sess. 14. c. 8 and. 9.) and with sorrow for our
offenses. Whereas on the contrary when we undergo them without patience, and
without offering them up to God, for the remission of our Sins, and for
satisfaction of the punishment which we have deserved, our sufferings are not
only not mitigated, but also rendered unprofitable, without bringing either any
benefit for the future, or any Comfort for the present; which is a thing which
we ought to observe well in this place.

CHAP. IX. Of Sacramental Absolution. What it is. Wherein it consists, and
what are its Effects.
Although Absolution be a part of the Priests office, yet it is very fitting that
the Penitents should be instructed in it, to the end they may receive it with
respect and suitable dispositions.

First, he must know, that as in every Sacrament there are two parts, whereof
one is called the matter, the other the form. Absolution is the form of the
Sacrament of penance, and without it there is neither a Sacrament, nor
remission of Sins by virtue of it.

This Absolution is a juridicall sentence pronounced by the Priest upon the
Penitent, by which, after that he has taken cognizance of the Sins which the
Penitent has confessed, and of his good disposition to receive the remission
of them; and after that he has enjoined him a convenient Penance, he remits
his Sins on the behalf of God and by the authority which he has given him.

It consists but in these three words, which are essential to it. I absolve
thee from thy Sins, all the other which the Priests says before and after them,
are Prayers which the Holy Church has instituted to implore the Grace and
Mercy of God upon the Penitent; and which may be omitted in case of necessity.

The effects of the Absolution are to remit the Sin as far as concerns the
fault or offense of God, and the Eternal punishment: and blot out the stains
which Sin had caused in the Soul; and recover the favor and freindship of God
by the means of sanctifying Grace, which it bestows upon him; and revive in him
all the precedent merits, which were mortifyed and lost by sin.

It produces all these effects in the moment that it is pronounced. And in
that happy moment is wrought this wonderful change of a Soul, which is
translated from the state of Sin to that of Grace, and from the slavery of the
Devil, to the Blessed liberty of the Children of God.

O Blessed moment! Theotime, O Fortunate change! If we knew how to conceive it
right, how should we bless God, qui dedit talem potestatem hominibus: who has
given such power to men? and what high esteem should we have of this Divine
Sacrament?

CHAP X. Of the dispositions necessary to receive Absolution, and of the cases
where it ought to be denied or deferred.
THis is a point in which it is truly necessary that Penitents be well
instructed. For the greatest part of them imagine, that when they have confessed
their Sins, there remains nothing more then to receive absolution, and that the
Confessor without further difficulty is obliged to give it them; which is a
very great error, because the Confessor ought to know the dispositions of the
Penitent, and judge whether or no he be in a fit state to receive it: without
which he would commit a Sacrilege, absolving one unworthy, in stead of
conferring a Sacrament; of which he ought to be very careful.

He must then know and judge whether the Penitent be sufficiently disposed to
receive the absolution. And being these dispositions consist in two things, to
be well Confessed, and to be truly Contrite for his Sins, he must judge of them
both, and if he know him to be deficient in either of these two, or justly
doubt that he is, he ought to deny the Absolution, or defer it till another
time.

First as to the Confession, He must judge whether it be entire and true, and
made with requisite preparation. If he perceive that the Penitent has not
examined his Conscience, he must oblige him to take more time to call to mind
his sins. If he judge that he does not declare all his sins and conceals any
one, he ought discreetly to dismiss him, provided he have a just ground to form
that judgment. For example, if he see that the Penitent confesses himself with
trouble, and that he is very much ashamed to confess his Sins. If he know by
some other way, that he has committed some Sin, whereof he does not accuse
himself, provided that he know it not by another Confession, which is a
knowledge whereof he can make no use.

As to Contrition. The Confessor ought to understand whether the Penitent have
that which is sufficient; and if he judge that he has not, he cannot absolve
him.

This judgment may be made one of these two ways, certainly, or under a doubt
only, but that well grounded. In the first case he ought to deny absolution, in
the second it is his duty to defer it. The Confessor judges with certainty,
that Contrition is wanting in these three following cases.

First, when the Penitent gives not the least exterior sign of it, but is dull
and insensible to all that the Confessor tells him. In that case, says the
Catechism of the Council, the Confessor seeing that the Penitent is not at
all moved with compunction of his Sins, must mildly and with sweetness dismiss
him.

Secondly, when either the Penitent does not seriously promise amendment, or
when he does promise it, but will not perform what is necessary to effect it,
such as are to quit the immediate occasion of Sin, the company of one who makes
him offend God, naughty, depraved, or mischevious books, play or games that
make him swear.

Thirdly, when he will not perform these things to which he is obliged, as to
restore illgotten goods, pardon his enemies, and be reconciled to them.

In these three cases the Confessor ought to deny absolution, because the
Penitent is not at all in a state fit to receive it.

He must also deny it, when the Penitent is guilty of any sin, reserved to a
Superior. because in this case, he has not power to absolve him.

There are other cases where he cannot so certainly judge of the want of true
Contrition; but where however he may reasonably doubt it. And this frequently
is the cause of much trouble to the Confessor, who considers on the one side
that he is obliged in conscience to deny absolution to him that is unworthy of
it, as he has reason to judge that such a Penitent is; on the other side
finds himself pressed by the Penitent to give it, who judges always in his own
favor, and ordinarily believes himself better disposed then in reality he is.

This difficulty and this doubt happens upon several occasions, which it would
be hard and too long to recount here in particular, but one above the rest is
very ordinary; that is, when the Penitent after his Confessions relapses
frequently into his mortal Sins, without any amendment of his Life. For although
every time he confesses, he testifies his sorrowful sense for his sins, and
promises to amend; yet nevertheless having already failed so often in his
promise, one may reasonably doubt, whether this last resolution of amendment be
real and sincere, or no.

CHAP XI. Of the choice of a Confessor.
COuld I but see Penitents with the same care and Solicitude, endeavoring to
cure the present and obviate the future diseases of their Soul, that divine
particle; as I see them curious in repairing and occurring to the infirmities
of the Body, that frail piece of Mortality; how unexcusable, O God, should I
think any advice upon the Subject of the election of a Confessor.

But, alas, when the body is concerned there is not any one, who is satisfied
with the Physician who is next at hand; much less does rely upon him whom he
thinks unskillfull. None was ever heard to say in a grievous sickness; any one
so he be a Physician is good enough for me; It is not then the sole Character
can satisfy the curiosity of the Patient; it is not the bare profession (with
let his arrogance be punished; if he know no better) which puts a stop to his
inquisitive concern in point of health.

No no, Theotime, in the urgent necessity of a dangerous sickness, the
Illiterate, Unskilful, or unexperienc't Physician is not sought for; neither
would he be thought less then mad, who should prefer the judgment of the
unlearned, when his malady required the most knowing artist.

Whereas this is the preposterous method Penitents ordinarily take in choosing
a Confessor the Physician of their Souls: when they ly languishing in that
fatal disease of Mortal Sin; when upon the recovery depends eternal health or
misery: that Doctor is thought to have skill enough, who dares profess his
function, for if, say they, he did not know his duty, he would not expose
himself. And then it is that the first may be perhaps most welcome.

And thus it is with many, who seem fond to delude themselves with such
specious pretentions, and appear even to be convinced with a gloss of reason in
things of the greatest moment, whilst the best of arguments are all too little
in matters of less concern; as in the sickness of the Soul they seek no furthet
then barely the profession; but when the Body is afflicted you shall have nice
distinctions betwixt Physicians and Physicians, Sickness and Sickness; all
indeed may be Physicians, but they are not all equally endowed with natural
parts, Learning, and Experience; and there are some Sicknesses more dangerous
then others, that require the most eminent Doctors; many frequently die in the
hands of the unskillfull, and how do I know, what my infirmity may be? I grant
they proceed upon good grounds; in this their care of the Body; and desire no
more but that they will do the same in the distempers of the Soul, and the
choice of a Confessor.

But there are some, which is lamentable to think on, so far from this and so
blindly foolish, as to reject the better, and apply themselves to those whom
they know less able either to discern their malidies or to correct the vicious
humors, or to let them see the number, greatness, and enormity of their past
Sins, to create in their Souls an horror of them, or make them sensible of what
the malignity may grow to, if not prevented by timely repentance. They choose
those who are less prudent in their prescriptions, and less capable to give
suitable admonitions, necessary advices, and other remedies against the
maladies of the Soul; the most indulgent in their Penances, the most facile in
resolution of cases of conscience, those in fine who dive least into their
consciences, who pass slieghtly over all things, are least troublesome in
questions, give little or no advice, and that which they give only in a
general without descending to particulars, who satisfy themselves with what is
told them and from a slight Penance pass over to absolution. And these are the
Confessors not only most followed, but most sought after.

Now is not this a deplorable blindness? Is not this willingly to extinguish
the light of reason, that they may more freely and without remorse of
Conscience fall into the pit of Hell.

Are not Christians miserably unfortunate in verifying by their practices that
grievous complaint which God once made against the Jews. Isay. 30.9. This
people said he, continually provokes my Wrath, these are deceitful Children
that will not hearken to the Law of God, who say unto the Seers, see not, and
to the wise, search not good things for us; but speak pleasing things unto us;
entertain us with errors and falsities?

But what disorders accrue to poor penitents by the remissness of such
Confessors. Their Confessions become purely customary, not prompted by the
spirit of Penance. The reiteration takes off the shame and confusion due to
their Sins; want of reprehension continues them in their tepidity, and by their
frequent relapses at last they deserve to be thrown headlong down the eternal
precipice of Damnation.

And whence all this? But from negligent, ignorant, loose, or obsequious
Confessors; who resemble those Prophets of the Jewish people to whom Jeremy
does attribute the cause of the desolation of Jerusalem, Thren. 2.14. Your
Prophets have declared unto them Falsities and fooleries, neither have they
made you know your iniquities, to move you to do Penance.

But if by this plea such like Confessors are found guity of the damnation of
Christians; by the same certainly such Penitents will be Condemned, who please
themselves in the choice of such Confessors.

Therefore O Theotime, be not so far guilty of your own eternal ruin, as
blindly to seek a director by whom you may be blindly led; sooth not your self
into your own destruction: But as you aim by your Confession to set your self
in the right way to Heaven; so also let the choice of your guide be such, that
you may reasonably expect by his means to obtain what you design; to be
withdrawn from Vice, encouraged in Virtue; and securely conducted in your way
to everlasting life. We have told you in the Instruction of Youth, what you are
to do in the choice of a Director in the Second Part, Chap. 5. which you will
do well to read attentively.

The Fifth Part. Of the preservation of Grace after Confession against relapse
into Sin.
CHAP. I. Of the Importance of this Subject.
I Treat here of this Subject because I find it of great importance, and yet
seldom expressly handled in other Treatises of Penance.

The Importance is sufficiently evinc't in that the very Fruit and end of the
Sacrament depends upon it, the Conversion of Sinners, and the Salvation of
Souls.

Is it not in reality an unexpressible benefit for a Sinner to be restored to
the grace of God, to be rankt anew in the number of the Elect, and resetled in
the Inheritance of the Kingdom of Heaven, after he had wilfully prescribed his
Title and Right, and justly deserved to be for ever rejected?

But if this happy restoration, that was gained with trouble, be not preserved
with care, but easily lost for want of compliance with our duty, what will it
avail us? or rather what dire effects may we not expect from thence, from the
wounds on the one side of a guilty Conscience, and on the other from the
vengeance of an offended God.

Where is there a Malefactor to be found, who, having been once pardoned of a
Capital Crime purely by the Clemency of his Prince, dare by a repetition of his
offense provoke the Justice of an injured bounty?

Or where a Person, but even now freed from a dangerous Sickness, that does
wilfully renew the declining Malady, or rather who does not with all the
Solicitude imaginable prevent the fatality of a worse relapse?

But, alas! it is only where the greatest concern is, that there the least care
is found. When Eternal Life in the next depends upon the good State of the Soul
in this; it is then only that the danger of a relapse, which is always worse
then the Original Disease, is not regarded; it is only in this case that the
Patient stands obstinately deaf to the advice of his Physician.

Christians attempt that against God the Creator of Heaven and Earth, which
either the fear of a Temporal Power would deter them from, or the Sacred name
of Friend make them ashamed of. For who is there that after reconciliation is
not afraid to repeat continually the injuries of his Friend? and who is there
that would not reasonably judge that man a Cheat and Impostor, who should
pretend to the name of Friendship, and yet by a repetition of new offenses
continue to urge the good nature of his Friend; and by frequent relapses make
his patience the only Subject of their mutual amity, and his Facility in
pardoning matter of ridiculing him to all the world.

Yet thus it is that Sinners treat with God. They confess their Sins, ask
pardon, and time after time make their reconciliation with him by the Sacrament
of Penance; and for some few days they curb their evil inclinations; but alas!
they count not many from the time they returned unto his favor, before they
return to the offenses by which they lost it.

Thus they pass all their Life Confessing from time to time, and continually
returning to Mortal Sin after Confession; So that their whole life seems to be
but one, as it were, continued Series or Succession of Confession and Relapses
into Mortal Sin: Now and then to Confess, to give their Conscience a little
ease and free it from some heinous Crime, by this way of proceeding seems to be
only a disposition to enslave it in some other yet more enormous Sin; As if the
Sacrament were instituted only for the remission of past Sins, and not at all
to give us strength to avoid them for the future,

Good God, Theotime, Is it possible that Christians, believing Christians,
should be guilty of this disorder? That men endued with the light of Faith
should treat God after this unreasonable and unworthy manner? Is this to
understand the nature of the Sacrament of Penance, what it is? Is this to
believe that it is a Sacrament of reconciliation with God, not only by way of
truce or for a time, but after the manner of a perpetual or eternal peace? is
this to form a right judgment of his unlimited power, not to value his favor
and Friendship? or do they (as indeed their repeated and customary offenses
speak it) believe him only infinite in his attribute of Mercy, but not of
Justice, so easily to withdraw themselves from that Grace, to which by his only
Mercy they have been admitted?

Did God only seldom and with much difficulty receive us again into his favor
after we had offended him, every one would stand upon his guard; one would be
afraid to fall again into his dis-favour, and to hazard his Eternal Salvation
by an unfortunate relapse. But being we think we shall be readmitted into his
favor when we please, and that there is no more to be done than to present our
selves to him in the Sacrament of Penance to receive remission of our Sins, we
take the freedom to offend him on all occasions. Thus we treat our God; and
thus we take a motive from his goodness to continue to offend him; and to
neglect that Sacred tie of his Friendship to that degree, as every moment to
break its bonds. An affront one would not offer to the most contemptible Person
living.

See then, Theotime, and consider well of what great consequence this Subject
is; and how it deserves to be solidly treated, and requires also your serious
reflection.

CHAP. II. How the relapse into Sin is a very great evil.
ALL what I have said does sufficiently evince the greatness and enormity of
this evil; yet that you may be the more fully persuaded of it, it is necessary
that you learn it from the Holy Ghost himself, and by those lights he has
vouchsafed to show us in Holy Writ.

First, the Wise Man in the 26th Chapter, verse 25 of Ecclesiasticus
considering the greatness of this evil, declares, that he cannot behold it
without a just indignation. He says then, that there are two things, which
when they happen grieve him very much; the one to see a great Warrior, after
he has served a long time in the Campaign, reduced to Poverty: the other to
see a Wise Man despised, instead of being esteemed, according to his merit: But
he adds, that the third he is not able to endure; and that it causes in him a
transport of the highest wrath; that is to see a man who falls from the State
of Justice and Sanctity, to that of Sin, and who abandons Virtue to follow
Vice; and he assures us that God will make that Person feel one day the effects
of his Justice.

In another place he exclaims against those who forsake the path of Virtue, and
give themselves over to Vice. Eccle. 2.16. Woe be to you who have forsaken the
right; and have declined into perverse ways; what will you do when God shall
examine your ways and all the actions of your Life?

The Apostle St Peter, 2. Ep. 2.20. inveighs with much zeal against those who
return to sin after they have renounced it by the Profession of Christianity,
and declares that they fall back into a far worse State or Condition than the
former, from whence they were delivered by their Conversion, which was a State
of darkness and Sin. That it had been better for them they had never known the
Truth, than to have forsaken it, after they had known it. That their relapse
into Sin makes them resemble the Dog, which returns to his vomit, and the Hog.
which, after he has been washed, wallows in the mire. What could be more
emphatically said against the relapse into Sin? yet it is the Holy Ghost
himself who speaks it.

Add also that which he has spoken upon this Subject by the Council of Trent
in those excellent words, which we cited above in the Fourth Part, the third
Chapter, in which he describes with much energy the enormity of their fault,
who relapse into Sin after Baptism. He remarks four notorious circumstances,
which aggravate their first relapse. The first is that they sin after that they
have been once delivered from the Slavery of Sin and the Devil. Mark this word
Once. 2. That they sin after they have received the Grace of the Holy Ghost. 3.
That they sin with knowledge, or knowingly. 4. That in sinning they violate the
Temple of God, and contristate his Holy Spirit.

CHAP. III. Of three great indignities which are found in the Sin of relapse;
The Ingratitude; The Perfidiousness, and the Contempt of God.
THis is to show you yet more clearly the grievousness of the Sin of relapse
from three circumstances which it includes, and which render it most enormous.

The first is a prodigious Ingratitude which it discovers toward God in
offending him over and over, after innumerable benefits received from his hand;
and above the rest after he has been by God's pure Mercy delivered not only
once or twice, but many times, from Sin and eternal death.

Ponder well upon this ingratitude, Theotime, and judge what it is for a Slave
to be ungrateful to his Lord, his Redeemer, to him to whom he owes all he
has, in fine to God himself: If the Council of Trent exaggerate with such
vigor the first sin, which one commits after Baptism, upon this only account
that it offends God after one has been once delivered from the captivity of
Sin and the Devil; Semel a peccati and Daemonis Servitute liberate. What would
they say of those, who fall back into sin after they have been delivered from
it, not once, but many times, only by the Sacrament of Penance? Was there ever
an ingratitude parallel to this? Deuteronomy. 32.6. Haeccine, reddis Domino Popule
stulte, and insipiens? O Christian Souls! is it thus that you treat your God?

Must you not have lost all your judgment and understanding to be thus
forgetful of the infinite favors of your Creator; and who after you have been
admitted into his grace and favor continue to offend your maker?

But mark well, that he never accepted of that reconciliation but upon
condition of a sorrowful sense, which you protested that you had to have
offended him; and upon Promise, which you made to be faithful to him not to
offend him any more. So that you are not only ungrateful in offending anew,
after he had pardoned you; but also a perfidious man and a traitor, which is
the second indignity, which aggravates the Sin of a Relapse. Perfidious,
because you acted contrary to your word, and contrary to the Solemn promise,
which you made to God, that you would serve him for the future. A promise which
you made not to a man, but to God himself Solemnly in the hands of the Church,
and in the presence of Angels. You would blush for shame, if you should fail
in your word to a man; and you make a custom of it to be false to God, to whom
nothing is more displeasing then a promise slightly made, and ill complied
with. Eccles. 5.3. Displicet Deo infidelis, and Stulta promissio.

Moreover you are not only perfidious, but your perfidiousness is a certain
treason which you commit against God; because you rebel and desert him to
yield your self over to his Enemy the Devil, and serve him anew against God
himself. This is that Sin, which Tertullian exaggerates so strongly in the Book
of Penance; where he says, that he who after he has renounced the Devil by
Penance, returns again to Sin, gives occasion to the Enemy to rejoice upon his
return, and triumph against God, saying, I have regained the prey, which I had
lost. He subjoyns, that this is manifestly to prefer the Devil before God
himself, when it being in his choice whether he will be for the one, or for the
other, he so easily deserts the Service of God, to deliver himself up to that
of his Enemy: and that by relapse into Sin, he who before had a design to
appease God, by his Penance, as if he repented himself of that good action,
becomes willing to make full satisfaction to the Devil by revoking his Penance,
and doing Penance for that he has done Penance for his Sins: rendering himself
by this fatal change as hateful in the sight of God, as he will be welcome to
his enemy the Devil.

Weigh well these reflections, Theotime, and you will find they are all
absolutely true, not only for the ingratitude, and persidious treachery, which
one is guilty of in regard of God, when after Penance he returns again to Sin;
but also for the enormous contempt, which one shows, of his graces, and of God
himself. For what greater affront can a person offer to God, to make less
esteem of his friendship, then of all those trifling things for which one so
easily relapses into Sin? Is not this to esteem and make greater account of
those things, then of the grace of God: or as Tertullian has it, to prefer the
Devil who presents them, before God who forbids them. Nonne diabolum Domino
praeponit?

And that I may make you truly sensible of the greatness of this contempt; I
ask whether there can be a greater affront offered to a person, then not only
continually to neglect his correspondence, and all signs of amity, after he
has been honored with his friendship; but daily to offend him anew after his
reconciliation; to be almost constantly at distance with him, in hopes to be
restored to his favor when one pleases? Would not every one say, that he who
should deal thus with his friend, would take him for a stupid, and a senseless
man, who had not the least sense to see himself so slighted; and his friendship
set at naught; his favor, or displeasure equally regarded? never was there
seen an affront or contempt comparable to this. And yet this is that with which
one treats Almighty God, when he repeats his relapses into Sin after
confession; a contempt which ought to make those who are guilty of it tremble,
at the just judgments of God. And this is what we are about to speak of.

CHAP. IV. That those, who relapse frequently into their Sins, ought to dread
their Salvation.
THe generality of Christians, who live habituated to Relapses into Sin, are
wont to say, that God is good and mereifull, and to take occasion from this
hope in his Mercy never to amend their lives. Which is so intolerable an
error, that it can never be sufficiently refelled.

And first, it is in this that the greatness and the excess of the contempt
which is offered to God consists, that one takes occasion from his goodness and
Mercy more heinously to offend him; and never continue long in his favor,
since he believes it so easy to regain his Grace.

But in the next place, those who make use of this pretext, reason and
discourse very ill, and deceive themselves most shamefully; for though it be
very true, that God is infinitely good and his mercies have no bounds; where
did they ever find, that God is good to those who despise him, and who trust so
much to his goodness, as not to apprehend, but slight his displeasure? Holy
writ tells us, that God is good to those that are good: that he is good to
those that hope in him, and seek after him; that he shows mercy to those who
return unto him. But it is not any where said, that he is good to those that
contemn and slight him: On the contrary he threatens them with dreadful
punishments. 1. Reg. 1.30. Qui contemnunt me erunt ignobiles: It is said
indeed, that God shows mercy to Sinners who return unto him by repentance; but
it is no where said, that he has promised mercy to all Sinners that they shall
return. We are assured that God receives all those, who truly converted from
their Sins return unto him; but where is it ever said that he receives those
who return not to him but with this restriction, for a time, upon occasion of
some great Solemnity; and then after a little time willingly fall back into
their Sins?

This is not found in any place of Holy writ: But on the contrary we find there
dreadful and terrible menaces against those, who treat God with such
infidelity, and so great contempt. I shall produce two remarkable passages of
this kind; the one out of the Old, the other from the New Testament.

The first is drawn from the People of Israel newly departed out of Egypt. This
chosen people of God was fallen into Captivity, and under the Tyranny of the
Egyptians; under which they had groaned for a long time overwhelmed with
labors, and miseries. God by a peculiar mercy withdraws them from it, working
many prodigies and great miracles in their favor; and amongst the rest the
death of the firstborn of the Egyptians; the passage through the Red Sea, as
upon dry land, so to free them from the Persecution of their Enemies, who
pursued them with a Powerful Army. He conducted them all that way by means of
a Pillar of Fire, which marched before them: he fed them with Manna, which he
shower'd from Heaven every morning. This dull and ungrateful people in the
midst of all these favors and divine caresses revolt from God, repenting
themselves, that ever they had forsaken Egypt (where they had lived so long
oppressed with so much misery) wishing every moment to return back thither;
murmuring against God upon every the least occasion, and distrusting in his
Providence, and Almighty Power. God is often inconsed against them, and
punishes them so severely, that many times this people taught by afflictions,
returned to the duty, and obedience due to their God, and their Redeemer. But
this their Repentance lasted not long; for upon every first occasion they fell
back to their wonted infidelity.

One there was, the height or chief of all the rest, which was the occasion of
their utter ruin. It was when approaching to the land of Promise they refused
to enter there, giving more credit to the false reports raised by
Malcontents, then to the word of God, and the assurances he had so often
given them of the goodness and Excellency of that agreeable abode: This
provoked Gods wrath to that degree, that he swore that not any of all those,
who had been incredulous to his word, should enter into the place of repose and
rest, the Land of Promise, which he had prepared for them.

The words, in which he expresses himself, are very remarkable upon this
Subject. Number. 14.21. As I live, all the Earth shall be filled with the Majesty
of the Lord: but all those who have seen my Glory, and the worders I have done
in Egypt, and in the Desert, and who have already Tempted me T^^ Times, and
have been Rebellious and Disobedient to my Voice, shall never see the Land,
which I have Promised their Fathers with an Oath; and not one of them, who have
Murmured against my Promises shall ever Enter there.

This Menance was not like the former, with which he had threatened that People:
For it was, accomplished to a Tittle, and not one of them that Murmured entered
there. They all dyed in the Desert, where they continued near Forty years, and
their Children had the Happiness to possess it in their place.

From this passage we discover two things; the first the Method which God used
with those, who relapsed so often into their Former disobedience, and who by
their Faithless promises wearied out his Patience: The Second how he comports
himself toward Christians, who continually do little else, but abuse his
favors, by returning to their Former Sins. For that, which he did to the Jews,
is a Figure and a lively representation of that, which Christians may expect.

This is the remark and Advertisement of Saint Paul upon this same Subject, and
upon this passage; whose words deserve to be related in this place, and
pondered with Attention.

It is in the First Epistle to the Corinthians the 10th Chapter, where he
delivers himself in this manner, I would not that you should be Ignorant
Brethren, that all our Fathers, who are the Israelites, were under the Cloud,
and all passed through the Red Sea, all in Moses were Baptized in the Cloud and
in the Sea, and did all Eat the same Spiritual Meat, and did all drink the same
Spiritual Drink; for they drank of the Spiritual Rock that followed them, and
the Rock was Christ. But all did not receive equal benefit from these
Blessings, for with many of them God was not pleased; for they died in the
Wilderness. Now all these things happened Literally to them, but by way of
Figure in respect of us. This is, to represent unto us, as far as may be, what
will befall us, and admonish or forewarn us, that we do not lust after things,
as they did. Nor Tempt our Savior Jesus Christ with our perfidious infidelity,
as some of them did. And all these things happened to them in Figure and are
Written for our Instruction. Wherefore concludes this Divine Apostle, Let him
who seems to himself to stand, take heed that he do not fall. Which is as much
as to say, that every one take great care to conserve himself in the Grace of
God, when once he has had the blessing to receive it.

All this is more then enough to demonstrate the truth, we have advanced, of
the extreme danger to which our Salvation is exposed by frequent relapses into
mortal sin. But behold yet a more express text of the same Apostle St. Paul in
his Epistle to the Hebrews, chapter 6.7. who speaking to those who fall back into
Sin after they have been once reconciled to God, describes what they may expect
under the metaphor of an ungrateful Soil, which being carefully tilled however
brings forth no fruit.

The Land (says he) which is watered with frequent rains, and which brings
forth to the Husbandman its fruit in due season receives Blessing of God. But
if it bring not forth but only thorns, and briars, it is given over to be
accursed, and at the end to be consumed by fire. Terra enim saepe venientem
super se bibens imbrem, and generans her bam opportunam illis a quibus
colligitur, accipit benedictionem a Deo. Proferens autem spinas ac tribulos,
reproba est, and meledicto proxima, cujus consumatio in combustionem.

These words have no need at all of explication, Theotime, but only of
reflection; putting in stead of the word ungrateful Soil, that of a Soul
unfaithful and perfidious to her God; who by returning to her usual Sins
continually abuses the graces she receives in the Sacraments, without bringing
forth any of the fruits of true repentance; And you will find that this is,
what she ought to fear from the hand of God, and what you your self if you be
such, ought to stand in dread of, viz. lest you be rejected by God, be cursed
by him, and abandoned to eternal fire.

These three miseries, which are the greatest of all those which one can fear,
are those which make up and accomplish the eternal damnation; and they are the
very same expressed in the sentence, which God shall pronounce against the
damned. Go ye Accursed into everlasting fire. See what we have said upon this
subject in the second part, the 11th Chapter, and third Article.

CHAP. V. A further confirmation of this truth from other proofs, and first
from the uncertainty of their Confessions, who relapse frequently into their
Sins.
THere are other authorities we might bring, and a vast number of reasons that
evidently make out the extreme danger to which this frequent relapse into sin
after Confession exposes the Salvation of those, who do not at all amend. I
will allege some few in this place.

The first is, that the Salvation of those who are in Mortal Sin depends upon
true Penance, and a good Confession; Now it is very difficult for those, who
live in this ordinary relapse, to be truly Penitent, when they come to
Confession, and by consequence it is very hard for them not to make frequently
invalid and null Confessions, whereby they receive no Absolution of their Sins.

For first, it is certain that those, who live in this manner, do not
ordinarily confess, but by course and custom upon occasion of some great
Solemnity, or for some other reason of decency, and apparent piety: They seldom
or never do it with a true Spirit of repentance, and a real desire to amend,
and break themselves of their vicious habit. And by this means how many invalid
Confessions do they make?

Secondly, how can it be thought, that those, who relapse ordinarily into the
same Sins after their Confessions, should have true Contrition, when they make
their Confessions? For true Contrition requires a great, and that sorrowful,
sense of what is past, with a firm and constant resolution for the time to
come. Now who can believe, that they detest those Sins from the bottom of their
hearts, which they resume again so easily and so soon? how can it be thought,
that they have a firm resolution to do, what they wellnigh never go about to
do; that is, to amend their Lives? How can it be, that in all their Confessions
they have a firm resolution to leave the Sin, which yet they never forsake? or
never leaving it at all, can it be believed, that they have always a true
resolution to forsake it? This is what cannot be conceived; and which never
happens in Temporal concerns, where a firm resolution never scarcely but takes
effect, and is followed with performance.

Certainly there is not any more infallible sign of false Repentance. For as
St. Augustine says, se poenitens es, poeniteat te; si poenitet te, noli facere;
se adhuc facis, poenitens non es. If you are Penitent, you ought to repent your
self of your Sin; if you be sorry for it, do not commit it; if yet you commit
it, you are not penitent at all. And St. Ambrose says excellently well, that
he, who is ashamed of the evil he has done, will take great care to avoid,
what may make him blush anew.

Some are wont to answer, that this relapse into Sin does not proceed from any
want of resolution, and repentance, but from humane frailty, which inclines to
evil.

This excuse is as false and ill grounded, as it is common amongst men, who
flatter themselves in their Sins, which they will not leave.

For first, can it be said, that this is an effect of Frailty, when one
wilfully returns to Sin, knowing full well the evil he does, and when he has
all the means necessary to preserve himself from it? Is not this, what we call
the Sin of Malice, and not of Frailty? as we have shown above in the Third
Part, Chap. 14. And yet this is the case of the greatest part of all those, who
relapse ordinarily into Sin after Confession.

Secondly, Can it be called an effect of Frailty, when one returns to Sin,
because he will not take pains, or do any thing, which may withdraw him from
it; he will not avoid the occasions; nor remove the causes of it; nor take
counsel; nor use any means to that effect? Is not this clearly to deceive ones
self, to treat in this manner; and yet to attribute his frequent relapse to
Humane Frailty?

Thirdly, However were not this frailty assisted by divine grace, the excuse
might pass: But being strengthened as it is, abundantly by the helps, which God
bestows upon us in our necessities; we cannot lay the fault of our relapses
into Sin upon our own frailty, but we shall accuse our selves, either of not
demanding the grace of God in our prayert, or of not being faithful in
cooperating with his grace.

Wherefore to speak the truth, we ought not here to accuse humane frailty, but
the weakness of our repentance and contrition; the faint regret or sorrow for
Sins past, and the weak and very imperfect resolution we have to avoid them for
the time to come.

I do not say, that the relapse into Sin is always an effect of a false
repentance: for that is not true; and it is certain it may happen, and happens
daily that one falls back into those Sins, of which he was truly penitent. But
I speak of a frequent, and ordinary relapse; and I affirm, that morally
speaking, it is impossible, that those who live in this manner, do not make
very frequently invalid and null Confessions, for want of contrition; and that
they often believe themselves to be, when they are not, truly Penetent for the
reasons abovementioned; which evinces the truth of that excellent saying of
St. Clement of Alexandria, to demand frequently pardon for faults which one
frequently commits, this is not to be a Penitent, but only to have a shadow and
appearance of Penance. Ponder well these words.

CHAP. VI. An excellent Advertisement of St. Gregory upon the false repentance
of those, who return to their Sins.
I Cannot omit in this place an advertisement of main concern, which St.
Gregory the great in his Pastoral 3. p. c. 3. gives to those, who after they
have performed their Penances do not amend their lives; which is, that they
ought to take heed lest their repentance be not very often false and only in
outward show: Of which he gives a considerable reason in these words. We must
admonish those, who do Penance for their past Sins, and who nevertheless
relapse into them, that they carefully consider one thing; which is, that many
times it happens to Sinners, that they find within themselves motions, which
carry them on to Virtue, but unprofitably and without fruit; as it happens many
times to the Just to be tempted and solicited to Sin, but without effect. He
adds, that as the Temptations, to which the Just do not at all consent, serve
to confirm them more in Virtue; so these imperfect motions toward Virtue serve
to detain the Sinners in their Sins, and to give them a presumptuous considence
of their Salvation in the midst of their Sins, which they commit so freely
without remorse: And he observes, that this presumption is a punishment of
their reitersted and repeated Sins.

He produces consequent to this discourse two opposite examples of Balaam and
St. Paul. Balaam, says St. Gregory, seeing from the top of a Mountain the
people of God encamped in the Desert, conceived some pious and strong desires
of his conversion, languishing away in wishes to dye the death of the Just, and
to resemble that holy People in his death. But immediately after he gave
pernicious Counsel to destroy those very People, whom he had so much wished to
resemble in his death. St. Paul on the contrary feels within himself the
motions, which solicit him to Sin, and these Tomptations confirm him more in
Virtue.

Whence comes this St. Gregory asks the question? Balaam is touched with
motions of repentance, and is not justified: St. Paul is incited to Sin, and
the temptation does not defile his Soul: But to convince us, that good works
begun and not perfected, do not conduce at all to the Salvation of the wicked,
no more then the first motions to evil do render good and Virtuous Souls
culpable in the sight of God.

This Animadversion deserves to be well considered, and so much the more for
that it remarks a very particular reason of the false repentance which is
customary to those, who do not at all amend then Lives; viz. that it often
happens they have only a beginning of repentance by some good motions they seel
in their heart, without proceeding further. They conceive indeed some disple
sure against their Sins, but not a perfect hatred and detestation of them; they
feel some faint desires, but they have not at all an entire and true resolution
to forsake them.

There is yet one thing more very remarkable in this Advertisement upon the
example of Balaam and his false repentance: For this wicked Prophet in the
motion he had of repentance, desired indeed to dye the death of the Just; but
he says not one word of living as they did; he demands the blessing to
resemble them in his death; but not to be like unto them in his life. Let my
Soul, says he, Number. 23.10. dye the death of the Just, and let my end be like
unto theirs. Thus his repentance was not true but false; because he did not
desire to forsake his Sins, and amend his life; but only to be saved at the
hour of death. Which is properly to desire to live ill, and yet dye well, and
so not be punished for it. Now this kind of repentance is found but too often
amongst Christians, and peculiarly amongst those who live in this customary
relapse, of which we speak. For there is not one single man of them, who desire
not to dye in the grace of God, and save their Souls. And for this reason they
go to Confession now and then to discharge themselves of their past Sins, that
they may not be troubled with remorse of Conscience at the hour of death: But
they seldom or never desire to live holily; or at least they have not an
effectual and efficacious will to do it, as by their frequent relapses it does
but too evidently appear.

CHAP. VII. That by returning back to Sin we lose great part of the fruit of
our precedent good Confessions.
THis is another efficacious reason to demonstrate the danger to which one
exposes his Salvation by returning back to Sin. That it does not only render
abundance of Confessions invalid and nall; but it also makes us lose the fruit
of those good Confessions we have made.

Two fruits there are of the Sacrament of Penance. The first is the Remission
of Sins. The second the Recovery of the friendship of Almighty God, and many
other Graces and Assistances, which he grants by virtue of the Sacrament to
those, who perform the Penance their Sins deserve. Though these two effects be
produced at the same time, and inseparably the one from the other; yet one may
be lost without the other. For by relapse into Mortal Sin one does not at all
lose the Remission, which he has received of precedent Sins by good
Confessions; it being most certain, that a Sin once pardoned does never revive
again: Forasmuch as the Apostle has it, Romans 11.29. The gifts of God are
without repentance. But as to the Friendship of God, and the special
assistances of his Grace, which one merits by means of the Sacrament, it is
certain they are entirely lost, when one relapses into Mortal Sin: and this
mischievous fall causes a deplorable ruin in his Soul, who yields himself
over to it.

God himself threatens this by his Prophet. Ezech. 3.20. If the Just Man, says
he, withdraws himself from his Justice to return to his former iniquity, I will
forget all the good, he has done.

And the Wise Man says upon this Subject, Eccl. 34.30. What does it avail a
man, who has touched a dead body to have washed himself, if again he defile
himself and touch it?

This is the reason, why God says to Sinners by his Prophet; wash and be
cleansed: he does not only say that they wash themselves from their iniquities,
but that they be also cleansed; forasmuch as Saint Gregory observes, it is to
no purpose to be washed, if one do not conserve himself clean. Without this one
does no more then those unclean Animals, which wash themselves, and presently
return to wallow in the dirt.

This obliged St. Peter and others, when they spoke of Penance to advertise
Penitents, that Penance avails them nothing, who, after they have performed it,
return to Sin; except it be for their greater ruin. 2. Pet. 2.

Those, says St. Gregory above cited, who do Penance, and do not amend their
Lives, are to be admonished, that it is to no purpose to cleanse themselves
from their Sins by tears; if afterward by their evil actions they defile their
Souls: And that they seem only to cleanse themselves, to the end that after
they are washed they may return to their former filth.

CHAP. VIII. That by frequent relapse into Sin one allways falls into a worse
condition, then before.
THis truth our Savior himself has taught us upon occasion of a possessed
person, whom he had delivered from that miserable condition. It happens, says
he, that the wicked Spirit being cast out of a man, uses all his endeavors to
return to his former dwelling, and calling others to his assistance at last he
reenters there, and this second possession is much more prejudicial then the
former. Mat. 12.45. and the last of that man be made worse then the first.

By this example of a person whose body is possessed, we are instructed in what
passes in the Soul, when one unfortunatly relapses into Sin; as the Apostle St.
Peter has explained it in these words, 2. Epistle cited in the second Chapter.
If after they are retired from the disorders of the world they suffer
themselves yet to be entangled and overcome: thereby they fall back into a
worse condition then before.

Now if this be true of the first relpse, what will it be of the Second, of the
Tenth, of the Twentieth, and of all those, which befall them, who do nothing
else all their life time, but rise and fall, repent and then as often return to
the Sins they had repented of? It is evident that they fall at last into a most
deplorable State, even almost into an impossibility ever to save their Souls.

This is certain, and if you doubt it; answer if you can, this proof and
demonstration.

By this ordinary relapse, three things which put his Salvation in the utmost
danger, befall the Sinner. First, ill habits increase, and grow stronger and
stronger. 2ly. The light and graces of God diminish in an high degree. 3ly. The
Devil comes with more strength, and power to destroy him, whom he sees so
deeply engaged in wickedness.

Behold three things, which without doubt when they happen, endanger Salvation
in an high degree: Now it is certain they befall all those, who frequently
return to Sin.

For first as to vicious habits; it cannot be doubted but they are so fortified
by frequent relapse, that they become at length invincible. The reason is
clear, and the experience but too certain; as was evidently shown in the
Instruction of Youth in the first part. Chap. 10.

As to the Graces, or special favors of God, there is not any thing more apt
to diminish them then customary relapses accompanied with such and so many
Ingratitudes, perfidious Infidelities, and contempts, as have been above
declared. But that which most of all impairs them, is the abuse of the
Sacraments, which one is guilty of during these frequent relapses. For of two,
the one, either the Confessions which they make, and the Communions they
frequent, are good or bad: if had; then they are so many Sacriledges; which
provoke Gods wrath against us, which banish his grace from our Souls, and
render us infinitely unworthy in his sight. If good; then they are so many
benefits, and divine favors, which by relapse into Sin, are rendered useless,
nay most miserably trampled under our feet. What? are so many divine favors,
so many illuminations, good thoughts, and pious motions, which one had received
in the Sacrament, slighted and lost by one relapse? No question but they are:
How can it then be, but that those cast away and neglected favors should be
the cause of the loss of many others, according to that Sentence of our
Savior. Mat. 13.12. He that has, to him shall be given, and he shall abound:
but he that has not, from him shall be taken away, that also which he has.

Now if the divine graces and favors be lost and diminished by these ordinary
relapses, the third effect, which is the increase of the strength of our
Ghostly enemy, must follow of necessity. For as God is no sooner departed from
the Soul, but the Devil presently takes possession of it; so also, according to
the measure of his removal, the Devil becomes more powerful to destroy us.
This is a necessary and infallible consequence; and this is the reason, why God
pronounced this Dreadful Sentence, Osea. 9.12. Woe be to them, when I shall
depart from them. Well knowing that nothing but miseries and misfortunes could
attend them, whom he had forsaken. And the greatest of these misfortuues is,
that the Devil becomes master of the Soul, and reduces her to such a slavery,
as to oblige her to do his will, as St. Paul has it 2. Tim. 2.26. by whom they
are kept captives at his will or beck.

CHAP. IX. That frequent relapse into Sin leads to final Impenitence, and an
evil death, or to dye in Mortal Sin.
THis Proposition is the result of all the former, and more immediately follows
from the three last; for if this customary return to Sin be the cause of a
great number of ill confessions, and deprive us of the fruit of those we had
made well: if in the way of Salvation it make a man always fall from bad to
worse; it evidently follows, that it leads to the broad way of Impenitence; and
that it may often come to pass, that those who live in this ordinary relapse,
end their lives in mortal Sin.

And I would to God this Proposition were not so absolutely true, as indeed it
is; but besides the former reasons, behold yet others, which put it out of
doubt.

First, because those, who live in these customary relapses intermingled with
Confessions, believe themselves to be in a good way, whereas in reality they
are far from it. They rely much upon the confessions, which they make from time
to time, and never consider how faulty and deficient their relapses make them
in the sight of God. Hence it befalls them, what S. Gregory abovecited, cap.
31. speaks of. That performing lamely some good works, which they begin, but do
not perfect; they live in a proud presumption, that they shall be saved in the
midst of the evils which they commit, and accomplish, to the full; hence it is,
that not at all mistrusting their wicked state, they dye without repentance of
their Sins.

Secondly, because being often subject to make false Confessions, they are in
great danger lest the last they make be like the former: and that in this last
important occasion, they should suppose themselves to have true Contrition,
when they have but a false one, and what is apparent only, as they had in many
precedent Confessions. This happens very easily, especially if at that last
time they confess themselves to their accustomed Ghostly father, who has
entertained them in their ordinary relapses, and cherished them in their
perpetual impenitences.

Thirdly, by reason that those who live in these relapses, intermixed with
admittance to the Sacraments, become obdurate to all things which might move
them, hardened against all the motives which one can offer them, of Fear, of
Hope, of the love of God. They are accustomed to hear all these things in their
Confessions, and elsewhere, This makes them, that they are not moved at all,
when such motives are offered to them in the most pressing occasions: Because
whatsoever is familiar to us, makes no impression upon us. Ab assuetis non fit
passio.

In fine, the last reason is, that those who live in this manner have great
grounds to fear, that God will forsake them at that last hour, in punishment of
their repeated Infidelities, of the Abuses which they have offered to the
Sacraments, and divine graces which they have therein received; and also in
chastisement of a tacit presumption they have had of themselves, that they were
able to raise themselves from sin, whensoe're they pleased.

A presumption however common, yet highly offensive in the sight of God; and so
much the more for that it is the cause of all the relapses one falls into after
confession. Because they believe they shall always rise again well, as hitherto
they have done, therefore they are so far from being afraid to offend again,
that hence they take occasion to sin more freely; but it frequently falls out
that they find themselves deceived; and that God by a just judgment punishes
them at the hour of their death, by forsaking them and leaving them then to
themselves in their greatest need, who before had continually abused his
graces; and yet were so rash and confident, as to account themselves secure.

the History of Sampson is very remarkable upon this Subject. God had endowed
him with an extraordinary and miraculous strength of body: he employed it many
times against the Philistines his Enemies, whom he had often overthrown and put
to flight; and particularly upon some occasions, wherein his Wife, who was of
that Nation, supposing she had got out of him the secret of his strength, had
attempted to deliver him into their hands; He had dicomfited them with much
ease: and upon this confidence he comes to tell her, that the secret of his
Strength lay in his Hair, not believing perhaps that what he said was true. She
called his Enemies to fall upon him, and after she had cut off his hair, whilst
he was asleep, she delivered him over into their hands. He awakes with the
noise, and the Scripture remarks that awakening he said; Egrediar sicut ante
feci and excutiam me, Jud. 16.20. I will go out, as I have done, and I will
disengage my self as heretofore: but it adds that he was deceived in his hopes;
nesciens quod recessisset ab eo Dominus, not knowing, says the Scripture, that
God had abandoned him. In consequence whereof, he falls into the hands of his
Enemies, who pull out his eyes and send him into their Country, where he, who
but a while before was a terror to his Enemies, is now become their pastime
and the object of their scorn.

Behold a figure and lively representation of what befalls Christian Souls, who
abuse the graces of God, and allways return unto their Sins, in hopes to clear
themselves of them, as they have done heretofore; for God many times gives them
over to an obdurate heart, and to final impenitence; whether it be in denying
them time to do Penance, or in depriving them of the means and grace to perform
it well: since that, as St Augustine says, Although he has promised pardon to
penitent Sinners, he has not promised Penance to any one. Qui poenitenti
veniam promisit, nulli promisit poenitentiam, a truth not to be doubted of, and
which deserves to be well considered, to teach men not to presume or conside
too much in the divine Mercies, and not render themselves unworthy of them at
the hour of death; wherein as he himself has said, he will scorn those, who
have despised his Counsels, and neglected the admonitions he gave them to
return unto him. Because, says he, I called, and you refused, I stretched out
my hand and there was none that regarded: You have despised all my Counsels,
and slighted my reprehensions. I also will laugh at your destruction; and will
scorn when that shall come unto you, which you feared. Prove. 1.24.

CHAP. X. Of the remedies against the relapse into Sin.
I Should not easily make an end, if I should write all which offers it self to
be said upon this Subject. But it is time to speak of the remedies, and after
you have seen the greatness of the evil, to show you the way to cure what is
past, and for the future to avoid the like.

We cannot better find them out then by searching for them in the resemblance
they bear to Corporal Infirmities, and from the proportion they have to those
remedies, which are necessary to avoid relapses, which are oftentimes more
dangerous then the first Disease.

And first, as in Corporal Distempers the Remedies depend upon two Persons, the
Physician, who prescribes them, and the Patient who takes them for his Cure;
the same is to be understood of the Infirmities of the Soul, which depend
partly upon the Confessors, who are the Physicians, and partly upon the
Penitent, who must labor to save his Soul. This is what obliges us to speak
something here of what both the one and the other are bound to contribute on
their part; and to treat in this Chapter of what depends upon the Confessors.

Now as in Corporal Sickness the relapses may spring from the Physicians fault;
either because he has not sufficient Skill to know the proper Remedies of that
Distemper; or prudence enough to apply them in due season; or sufficient
resolution and constancy, notwithstanding his resistance or impatience, to make
them be put in execution by the Patient: So when Penitents easily relapse into
their Sins, one may often truly say, that it proceeds from the Confessor's
fault, who is deficient in one of these three things; either not having
sufficient knowledge of the nature of the disorder, or of the remedies it
requires; or wanting Prudence to apply them right; or at least (which is most
ordinary) not resolution enough to oblige the Penitents thereto when they
appear, as but too often they do, unwilling: A resolution, which is an effect
of Charity, which they ought to have, toward their Penitents, whose Salvation
they should rather seek after, then accommodate themselves to their
inclinations, when they are contrary to their good.

It is most certain that were Confessors sufficiently endowed with these three
qualities, and used them well, as they are obliged to do, they would prevent a
vast number of relapses; and put their Penitents into the way of a truly
Christian Life.

For first, their Skill giving them a perfect insight into the obligation which
Christians have to live in the grace of God, and of the danger to which by
these relapses their Salvation is exposed, they would make a more strict
enquiry into the most proper means to cure their Penitents of their Vices.

Secondly, their Prudence would make them inquisitive to understand the present
State of the Penitent; in which they ought especially to observe two things. 1.
Whether he be in a State capable to receive Absolution; and, 2ly, Whether there
be any hopes of his amendment.

Thirdly, by their resolution they should oblige the Penitent to perform what
they shall judge necessary for these two things, viz. To receive the Sacrament
as he ought; and thereby to improve himself.

The Confessor then, as a good Physician of Souls, is obliged to have these
three qualities; and to employ them for the good of his Penitent, and the
better discharge of his own Conscience.

This good of the Penitent consists in two things. First, that he be restored
to health, that is, to the grace of God. Secondly, that he do not relapse into
his former Sickness, Mortal Sin. For as St. Augustine observes well in Psalm. 8.
there are two parts in Physic; the one to cure the Disease; the other to
conserve the health.

The Confessor is obliged to procure both these goods for the Penitent, and to
employ for that end all what lies in his power, his knowledge, his prudence,
and his charitable Resolution. He must not content himself to have restored his
Penitent to health; but he must labor also to conserve it; if he design to
comply with the duty of a worthy Minister of Jesus Christ, and a true
Cooperatour with the Grace of God; which as the same St. Augustine adds, ibid.
Si ergo Deus medicinam exhibet, qua sanemur infirmi, quanto magis eam, qua
custodiamur sani, does not satisfy himself to remit our Sins by justification,
but moreover grants the assistance of his Grace to conserve us in that happy
state. That he may make him pertaker of the former good, he is obliged to
examine strictly whether the Penitent be capable of Absolution, and to this end
it is necessary to examine two things. The one, whether he have any of the
impediments abovementioned in the 4th Part, Chap. 10. and the other whether it
be usual for him to return to his mortal Sins after confession. For in this
case, there is no reason why you should easily believe the Penitent, though he
tells you that he is truly sorry that he has offended God, and promises to
amend: He often indeed speaks these words, but they come not from his heart. Or
if they proceed from a sense of his Sins, it is but lightly, and by way of
habit, without having seriously thought of his amendment. He believes he has
contrition, but has it not. This is what happens frequently, and then the
Confessor cannot give absolution, without putting himself in danger to commit a
Secrilege. He ought to defer it, and give time to his Penitent, to think as he
ought, of his amendment, and render, himself a subject worthy of Absolution.

This procedure surprises the Penitents, when they find the Confessors treat
them, as they are obliged to do; but these are in name only and not Penitents
in effect; who believe that Confession consists only in a declaration of their
Sins, and that when once they have declared them, they have a right to receive
Absolution, and to oblige the Confessor to it. They will be believed upon their
single word, when they say they are truly sorry for their Sins, and that they
will not commit them any more for the future: although in their former
Confessions they have always said the same, and without effect.

These Penitents most grossly deceive themselves: For they will judge their
judges, and teach their Physicians. It belongs to the Confessor to judge of the
state of the Penitent, and see whether he be sufficiently disposed to receive
absolution, and whether or no he can securely give it. This care is his duty,
as being oliged to give an account of this his function in the presence of
Almighty God. It is the Blood of the Son of God, which he applys in the
Sacrament; and God will require an exact and rigourous account of him, if he
did distribute it to those that are unworthy of it.

Now judge Theotime, whether the Penitent be not very unreasonable, who would
oblige his Confessor to give him Absolution, when he the Confessor either does
not find him at all duly disposed, or has good grounds to doubt whether he be
worthy of it. Is not this to go about to damn himself and his Confessor too?

But if the Penitent be blamable in this occasion; the Confessor is much more
in fault, when he yields so easily to the importunities of his Penitent, as to
give him a doubtful absolution; and which may be rather hurtful then
profitable to him. He ought to remember, that there are some cruel mercies,
hurtful both to those to whom they are shown, and to those, who show them; and
that the good Physician does not desist from applying his remedies, when he
judges them necessary, notwithstanding all the opposition his Patient makes. He
lets him cry out and complain, being assured that what he does is necessary for
the Patient; who when he shall have recovered his health will not only be well
contented to have suffered, but also acknowledge the kindness his Physician did
him.

Saint Augustine says excellently well upon this Subject, Epist. ad Vincent. He
is not always a Friend, who spares or is favorable to us; nor he always an
Enemy, who chastizeth; the Physician, who commands a Lunatic to be bound, and
awakes one in a Lethargy, is troublesome to them both; but it is because he
loves them, and by tormenting them he cures them. The one and the other, as
long as they are sick, are angry with him; but as soon as they are cured, they
hold themselves much obliged to him for that he did not spare them. Ambobus
molestus, ambos amat, ambos sanat. Ambo quamdiu aegri sunt indignantur. sed
ambo sani gratulantur.

It is true, that a Confessor ought so to employ his Resolution, as not to
forget his sweet and obliging mildness, but, that he ought, as much as
possible, to make the Penitent approve of what he ordains, sweetening all
things by the testimony of his affection; and convincing him, that what he
advises is to acquit himself of his obligation, and for the Salvation of his
Soul. This is the Oil of the Gospel, Luc. 34. which he must employ with the
Wine, when he dresses the wounds of others Consciences, endeavoring by Charity
to sweeten the sharpest remedies which he is obliged to use therein.

Behold here the first good, which the Confessor ought to have in view, viz. to
secure the Sacrament, and to restore the Penitent to the grace of God. But yet
there is a second which he is obliged also, as far as he is able, to procure,
viz. the amendment of the Penitent. The Cure is good for nothing, which is
followed by a Relapse, and the Physician who is not concerned to prevent it,
complies but with half his duty; and becomes himself guilty of the harm into
which the sick man falls again, and even of death it self if it befall him.

This is the reason why the Confessor is obliged not only to advertise the
Penitent not to return to his Sins; but also to show him the means how to avoid
them, and to engage him to put them in execution.

These means are Penance, Prayer, satisfactory Works, as Fasting, Alms-deeds,
Mortification, and others which we have handled above in the Fourth Part, and
whereof we shall yet speak in the following Chapter.

To which may be added certain conditional Penances, that is some painful
things to be performed, or suffered by the Penitent in case he return again
unto his Sins; and as often, as he shall relapse therein: as to Fast, to give
Alms, or some other painful work for each relapse. The apprehensions of these
sort of Punishments serve frequently, as a Bridle to withold the Penitents,
when they are tempted to offend God. And lastly, the deferring of Absolution,
when the Penitent does not at all correct himself, is frequently a very good
remedy to make him amend his Life. This makes the Penitent think seriously of
amendment, and labor to reform his Vices, which make him unworthy of so great
a good, and punctually to comply with all that he the Confessor shall ordain
him, to the end he may be worthy.

This means ought to be applied with much Prudence; and especially it behooves
the Confessor to make a vast distinction between Penitents, who relapse into
their Sins through frailty; and those who return through malice, that is to
say, either on set purpose, or through an affected negligence.

He will know the former, when he shall find, that they are extremely troubled
to see themselves subject to those relapses: that they use all their endeavors
to abstain from Sin: that they practice what means their Confessor appoints
them. And toward these he must use a far greater sweetness, support their
weakness, Absolve them more easily, seeing they continue to labor on their
part to amend their Lives.

The latter are those, who not only continue in their wickedness; but do either
nothing at all, or very little to refrain from their Sins. And toward these
one must use more severity: And as they allways promise to endeavor their
amendment, without doing almost any thing, it is often not only profitable, but
necessary to deser their Absolution, until such time as they have given
sufficient signs of their Conversion by abstaining from their Sins, and
practicing faithfully what is appointed them for that end.

CHAP. XI. Of the means which Penitents ought to observe to avoid the relapse
into Sin.
COntinuing the comparison of a Penitent with a sick person, I affirm, that
there are four things which the Penitent ought to observe that he may not
relapse in mortal Sin.

The first is, that he understand perfectly the greatness of his evil, and the
eminent danger to which he exposes his Salvation: For the Sick man who has no
apprehension of the ill consequences of his disease shall never be cured: and
therefore he must be fully convinced of two things: first, that to fall into
mortal Sin, of all misfortunes is the greatest. Secondly, that the relapse into
sin exposes the eternal salvation to an extreme hazard; and that one finds
himself surpised, when he least thinks of it.

The next thing he ought to do in consequence to this knowledge, is to avoid all
those things which have been the causes of this misfortune, or which may make
it return. This is an indispensable obligation; this is also the first mark of
a Penitent Soul and desirous to recover her former health. We laugh at a sick
man, that will not abstain from such meats, or actions, as are apprehended
prejudicial to him: we say, that he loves his pleasures more then his health,
and that he is his own murderer. The like is to be said of a Penitent, when he
does the same. Prove. 1.22. How long will Fools desire, what is hurtful to them?

The third is, the choice of a good Physician: that is, he must always address
himself to the best Confessors, to those whom he believes endowed with the
three abovementioned qualities: and above all to those who are not in the
least neglective of the recovery of their Penitents, but apply themselves
seriously and with much care to that effect. The Penitent who desires his
health, must seek out such Physicians. If he do not it is an infallible proof
that he does not desire to amend. He is afraid lest the Confessor should make
him sensible of his misery, and put a stop to the disorders of his Conscience:
a certain sign that he is not willing to be cured. Do not you do thus Theotime,
remember that excellent sentence of St. Augustine, Non timet reprehensorem, qui
veritatem amat; He that loves truth, that is his Salvation, is not afraid of a
monitor, or to have his defects laid open before his Eyes.

The 4th is, faithfully to apply the remedies, which are necessary to cure the
Soul and preserve it from Sin: whether they be those, which the Physician
prescribes, or those which by other ways one comes to know. None doubts but
that this way is absolutely necessary: yet few practice it so easily, as they
believe it. Many Penitents there are, who could wish to amend their lives, but
would do it at their ease without pain or trouble. The sight of the remedies is
a trouble to them; and when they should put them in execution, their heart
fails them, and they will do nothing at all. Is not this to desire an
impossible thing, to seek the end without the means to obtain it, the cure
without the remedies, and Salvation without trouble? This is to act like the
slothful man who will and yet will not: Prove. 13.4. This is a faint and
imperfect wish to be delivered from their evils, but in reality it is an
effectual desire to continue in them, and never to be cured.

You will do otherwise, Theotime, if you are truly Penitent, and desirous of
your Salvation. You will with much care seek after the remedies against your
Sins, and apply them with no less exactness. Behold here some few.

The First is, that you have a special care to conserve in your Soul the Spirit
of Penance, which you were made partaker of in your Confession, viz. an Hatred
of Sin, a Sorrow to have Committed it, and a Resolution to offend no more. Now
to conserve this spirit it is necessary you renew these acts every day: which
may easily be done.

The Second is to perform with this Spirit the works of Penance, as well those
that are enjoined in the Sacrament, as others which you impose upon your self.
These works as the Council of. Trent declares, conduce very much to divert and
deter us from our Sins.

The Third remedy is Prayer, For as all our strength is from God, it is but
just we make our addresses to him, that he will vouchsafe to assist us
powerfully with his grace. This is a means absolutely necessary, without which
it is impossible to cure the distempers of the Soul. Ask, says our Lord, Luc.
11.9. and you shall receive, which is as much as to say, what you do not
demand, you shall not receive at all. But as this means is necessary, so also
it is most powerful, and never fails of its effect: According to that Sentence
of the wise man, Eccle. 2.11. No one has ever hoped in God, who has been
Confounded, or frustrated of his desires. But this Prayer must be frequent, and
serverous, as we have need every day, so also we must always pray. Luc. 18. And
as we beseech him to vouchsafe his mercies that we may be saved; so it is but
just that we demand them with a great and ardent desire, to the end we may be
worthy of them.

The Fourth remedy is frequent Confession. This also is a necessary means,
without which it is morally impossible to be freed from a vicious habit, when
once one is engaged therein. It is a Sacrament which remits sins past; which
gives grace to avoid them for the future: There one renews his sorrow for
having offended God, and his resolution thence-forward to be faithful to him;
one there receives advices, and means to that effect; one is thereby reduced
into the path, who had lost his way, encouraged when he is remiss, and
fortified against the difficulties which occur. They who neglect this means,
will never be freed from their habitual Sins; but those who thirst after their
Salvation will embrace it with much affection. It is very convenient we make
them often, and ordinarily speaking to the same select Confessor, and who is
endowed with the qualities abovementioned.

The holy Communion is also a very efficacious remedy against relapses. It
gives strength against temptations: It weakens our ill habits: it makes us
avoid many venial Sins, which lead and dispose to mortal. But this is to be
understood, when the Communion is performed with all necessary dispositions;
and it produces all these effects proportionably to the greater or less
devotion with which we approach that holy Table. Be very diligent and careful,
Theotime, in the use and application of this divine remedy; and to that end
read that which hereafter we shall say of it.

The reading also of good Books is a most powerful means to conserve and keep
us in the straight path of virtue. We treated of this in the Instruction of
Youth. 2d. Part. Chap. 16. which I exhort you to read once more upon this
occasion.

All these are general remedies and common to all sort of Sins. There are
others more particular against each Sin considered in its kind, which it would
be too long to declare in this place; as also it would be useless, since we
have treated of them elsewhere: as for example, the remedies against idleness
in the 3d. Part. Chap. 7, and against impurity in the 8th and 9th Chap. and in
all the 4th. Part. Where we have treated of Christian virtues, and the means to
resist contrary vices.

A Table of SINS, Or, An Examen of Conscience upon the Commandments of God's
Law, and of the Church; and upon the Seven Deadly Sins.
Sin being a transgression against the law of God, it follows, that to
understand well in what one has sinned, he must know first what it is that God
Commands, and what that he forbids; and to examine his Conscience rightly, it is
necessary he run over the Commandments of God, as they stand in order, and see
whether and how many ways he has transgressed them; for we offend God diverse
ways.

This is the reason why I shall digest here the ten Commandments of Gods Law,
with all the sins that may be committed against each one of them, that thence
you may take what may concern you. And for the greater facility, I have for my
diversion drawn up into Latin verse the several obligations, which each
Commandment imports, with the transgressions opposed against them. I offer them
to those, who understand, and like them; others may benefit themselves by the
following explication.

The EXAMEN upon the First Commandment.
I am the Lord thy God: thou shall have no other Gods before me.

Exodus 20.
THis Commandment includes the obligations of many virtues. viz. of Faith, of
Hope, of Charity, of Religion, and of the care of our Salvation. It obliges us
to believe in God, to hope in him, to love him above all things, give him the
worship and honor due to him, and to seek after the Salvation of our Soul,
which he has created to his own image and likeness, to enjoy him for all
eternity. All these things are comprised in these three verses.

Credere prima homines, sperare, and amare, Deumque
Condigno cultu venerari, orare, Animaeque
Aeternam curare jubent mandata salutem.
Opposite to these are first, the Sins against Faith; whereof some totally
destroy it; others offend against it in a high degree.

Is It a fidem sanctam laedunt, perimuntque nefanda.
1. Ignorare fidem: 2. dubiis aperire vagantem,
Incertumque animum. 3. graviter qui his fixus adhaeret,
Ille fidem violat. 4. gravius, qui mente superba
Eligit ipse sibi quod credat vel neget. 5. inde
Omnia blasphemo qui pernegat impius ore
Sancta, nil credens nisi quod tangitque videtque
6. Qui favet his: vel facta probat: 7. consortia quaerit.
8. Dicta librosque legens avido bibit ore venena.
9. Alta Dei nimio scrutans temerarius ausu.
Quae penetrare nefas homini mysteria. 10. ridens
Sacratos ritus. 11. divinaque verba retorquens
Ad pravos sensus, miscens and sacra profanis.
12. Quique futurorum vult nosce recondita: servat
Quae Deus ipse sibi: vel facta obscura requirit
Artibus illicitis, observans somnia, vel quae
Caeca superstitio Cacodaemonis art maligna
Reperit, ut noceat, prosit ve, aut clausa recludat.
1. The first sin against Faith is that of Ignorance; when one is ignorant of
what he is obliged to know.

To be ignorant of the four principal Mysteries without the express belief
whereof we cannot be saved. viz. the Unity of one God, the Trinity of Persons,
the Incarnation of the Second Person for the Redemption of mankind, and life
everlasting.

To be ignorant of the Apostles Creed: or not to know the sense and meaning of
it, as far as ones capacity, and the means he has to be instructed will permit.

To be ignorant of the Sacraments, and particularly of those which one either
has, or ought to receive.

Not to know the Comandments of God, and the Church.

All these ignorances ordinarily speaking are mortal Sins: wherefore one ought
carefully to examine himself, and reflect well whether he has sought the means
to be instructed, as Catechisms, Sermons, reading and the like.

2. The Second Sin against Faith is, a doubt of the truth of any of the points
of Faith. It happens sometimes against our will, and then it is either none, or
at least not a Mortal Sin, but perhaps some venial negligence.

But if it be voluntary, it is a Mortal Sin, and this in two cases. 1st. When
one either seeks it, or willingly gives some occasion of it; as by reading ill
Books, by discoursing too freely concerning matters of faith: by examining them
with too much curiosity: by giving himself too much liberty to judge of them
according to humane reason. 2ly. This doubt is voluntary, when one willingly
detains himself in it, and gives his consent unto it.

3. The Third is the Sin of Error, that is when from a doubt one proceeds to
affirm, and positively believe something contrary to the received Doctrine of
the Church, although it be but in one single article: and such a belief is always
a mortal Sin: and if one maintain it obstinately without submitting himself to
the Church it is Heresy, whereof we are going about to speak.

4. The Fourth Sin is Heresy. That is an error in any point of faith;
maintained with obstinacy; wherein one follows his own judgment in opposition
to that of the Church; and chooses in points of Religion the things, which he
is willing to believe or to deny, whence it is called Heresy, that is to say, a
choice.

5. The Fifth is Impiety, which is different from heresy in this, that Heresy
will believe some truths, but not all. But Impiety denis all, and believes
nothing.

You ought, Theotime, to examine your self very strictly, whether you have
fallen into any of these Sins; and if you have, perform yet some more strict
and severer Penance. But above all communicate your thoughts, with some learned
and Pious person; who may restore you to your self, and put you in the right
way.

6. The sixth Sin against Faith, is to favor Heretics, or Impious men, as in
supporting and approving what they do.

7. The Seventh is to be pleased with their Company and discourse: to continue
therein with danger of embracing their opinions.

8. The Eighth is to read their Books, whether with pleasure or danger.

9. The Ninth is the Sin of Curiosity, to examine the Mysteries of Faith, or the
Secrets of divine Providence, by pure humane reason, which leads ordinarily
either to error, or Impiety.

10. The Tenth is to scoff at holy things, the ceremonies of the Church; to
contemn them in his heart, or by any action whatsoever.

11. The Eleventh to abuse the words of the holy Scripture, in applying them to
wicked or profane senses, making them serve for jests, or other ill uses.

12. The Twelfth is, to desire to know such things to come, as appertain to God
alone, or those which are either past or present, but totally hidden from us:
and for this end to employ unlawful means, as Soothsayers, Magicians,
Fortune Tellers, observe Omens, cast Lotts, or make use of other Superstitious
Inventions.

13. The thirteenth is, to give credit to Dreams and Superstitions, to employ
Prayers or Sacred Names to ill uses; to use Charms, or other Inventions to the
end to make ones self beloved, to cure Diseases, or to give a Spell whether to
Men, or Beasts. All these are Mortal Sins; even when the means seem innocent,
as Prayers, or Sacred words; if one believe they will certainly take effect:
For then, as St. Augustine says, De medicin. animae contra sortileg. These are
not remedies given us by Jesus Christ, but rather Poison, which the Devil has
spread amongst holy things. Non est in eis remedium Christi, sed venenum
Diaboli.

Sins against Hope.
Anchora quae nostrae stat pes been fida salutis
Motibus his quatitur, dum Desperatio mentem
Dejicit: aut falsas addit Praesumptio vires.
I. 1. Hinc and qui, scelerum furiis agitantibus, omnem
Desperate veniam: 2. vel ab his cessare, modumque
Ponere posse negans, vitiis dimittit habenas,
Divinae contemptor opis, spem laedit. Et ille
II. 1. Qui male confisus sperat placabile numen,
Dum nova praeteritis adjungens crimina, 2. mores
Mutare extremae differt in tempora vitae.
3. Quique Deum tentans, levis imprudensque periclis
4. Corporis aut animae sese objicit: 5. auxiliique
Non poscit coelestis opem, praesentia cingunt
Dum mala: 6. praesidiis spernit melioribus uti,
Quae Deus ad nostram voluit confer salutem.
7. Rebus in adversis qui frangitur; atque superbis
Vocibus impatiens, hominesque Deumque fatigat.
Hope is a Theological Virtue, whereby we expect from the hand of God Eternal
Salvation and the means, whereby we may obtain it.

Two Sins there are diametrically opposite, both contrary to this Virtue. The
one is hoping too little; the other, confiding too much; the first is called
Despair, the other Presumption.

I. One sins by Despair.

1. When one distrusts in the mercies of God, or despairs to be ever able to
obtain of God the remission of his Sins, as it happened to Cain.

2. When one despairs of amending ones Life, and in this Despair abandons
himself to all wickedness; which is a mistrust or contempt of the grace of God.
This Sin is but too common.

II. One sins by Presumption.

1. When one hopes that God will allways forgive his Sins, whatsoever life he
leads: and living in this hope he does not at all concern himself to mend his
Life.

2. When one defers his conversion 'till the end of his life, or puts off his
Repentance 'till the honr of Death.

3. When one willingly exposes himself to any danger of offending God; as to
Company, Reading, or any other thing by which he runs the hazard to offend.
This is what we call to tempt God.

4. When without necessity one exposes himself to some Corporal danger, as
Sickness, Wounds, or Death.

5. When in these so remarkable dangers of Body or Soul, one neglects his
application and recourse to God by Prayer to implore his assistance.

6. When in these same dangers one neglects the remedies, which God has
instituted and appointed as those of Physic for the Body; and those of Prayer
and Sacraments for the Soul.

One sins also against this Virtue in adversities, when he is discouraged to
that degree that he puts not his trust in God; and more still, when one is
impatient, or murmures against his Providence in Adversity, or is exalted in
his own thoughts in time of Prosperity, attributing the good success or Honor
to himself.

The Sins against Charity.
CHarity is a Theological Virtue, which makes us to love God above all things;
whence it follows, that every Mortal Sin is directly opposite to it and totally
destroys it; Because the Sinner, in every such Sin prefers the affection he
bears to the thing wherein he offends before the love and bounden duty he owes
to God, who forbids the Sin. However there are some Sins more particularly
opposed to this great Virtue, whereof behold some examples.

Caelestem nullum non laedit crimen amorem,
Quod male divinum humano postponit amori.
Praecipue tamen his virtutum maxima damnis
Impetitur 1. Summae si quis bonitatis amarum,
Infandumque furens, scelerata forte recepit
Mente odium: execrans, blasphemans sancta, Deique
Dextram indignatus ferientem, aut Judicis aequi
Iram exhorrescens, infensum quem timet, odit.
2. Praeterea ille nocens, sanctum qui numen amore
Diligit exiguo: bona nec super omnia summum
Prosequitur, redamatque bonum: peccare paratus
Vt serventur opes, vel honos, aut vita: caducis
Postponens aeterna bonis. 3. Hominum quoque amorem
Posthabito quaesisse Deo, quem non piget: and qui
Esse suo gratus Domino nil curat: at omnem
Stultis ut placeat curam admovet, atque laborem.
4. Quem pudor, aut vani revocat formido pericli,
Ne cupiat bona, vel faciat, quae conscius ipse
Sancta jubere sibi novit mandata; malumque
Quod prohibent patrat, humano compulsus amore.
5. Inque Deum raro conversus, segnius illum
Cogitat, aut loquitur: tacito and sub cord monentem
Non andit. Benefacta sui nec mente revolvens
Auctoris, dignas contemnit reddere grates.
The greatest sin against Charity is the hatred of God. This is a Sin the very
thought whereof causes an horror in the Soul, and it is proper to the Devils
and damned Souls. Yet however, sometimes it is found amongst men, when a wicked
Conscience oppressed with misfortunes gives it self over to complaints against
God, as if he were the cause of them: to execrations, to Blasphemys, and in
fine to hate him whom he believes to be the cause of his miseries, or from whom
he fears the punishment of his crimes.

2. The second is, not to bear God the love, which he requires at our hands,
that is, the love above all things, as he is the greatest and most amiable of
all goods. This happens when one is so disposed in mind, that he will rather
choose wilfully to offend God, then loose either some Honor, Riches, or life
it self, if it were necessary. This Sin is but too common, and one does not
take notice of it.

3. The third is, to prefer the love of men before the love of God, to be more
fearful of their displeasure; then of the offense of God; which he is, who
offends God for fear of displeasing men, or for fear lest he be jeered, or
slighted, and yet more when one offends God to please men. Examine your
Conscience well, whether you are free from all these things.

4. The fourth is, to abstain either for shame, or some other temporal respect,
from doing the good, which is commanded us, or committing the evil, which is
forbidden us.

5. The fifth is, to think seldom of God; to be ashamed to speak of him, as
frequently it falls out: not to hearken to his Inspirations: to forget his
benefits; to neglect to give him thanks. Examine your self upon every one of
these particulars one after another; for you will find that you have sinned
oftener, and more greivously, then you imagine.

The Sins against the Virtue of Religion.
IT is a virtue, which teaches us to render to God the Worship and Honor,
which is his due, and which consists principally in three things. Adoration,
Prayer, and Sacrifice.

By Adoration we acknowledge him for the first and Sovereign Author of all
things, and of us our selves.

By Prayer we testify the necessity, we have of him.

And by Sacrifice we acknowledge this Sovereign dominion, which he has over
all creatures, and our absolute dependence. Now there are many sins against
these three actions, which we shall relate in order in the following verses.

Vna Deo dignos venerans quae reddit honores
Religio, variis temeratur sancta nefandis.
1 Ante Deum si quis, (caeli quem numina adorant,)
Rarus adorator prosternitur: 2. atque superbam
Corpore prostratus mentem non subiicit, 3. 4. orans,
5. Auxiliumque petens supremo a numine supplex.
6. Nec levius peccat, veritus qui nec loca sancta,
Actibus, alloquiis, aspectibus omnia complet
Illicitis. 7. Et dum peragit reverenda Sacerdos
Sancta, queis venerans adstat caelum omne tremensque
Pascit inanem animum nugis, quem pascere sacro
Caelestique epulo potuit miser: heu quibus ille
Fraudatur donis! Quae tandem accepta dolebit
Damna? 8. Sed o immane nefas, nullisque piandum
Ignibus, oblectat sacro si tempore mentem
Flagitiis; and faeda Deo praesente volutat.
9. Aut sanctum immundo recipit si pectore panem.
10. Vel sacra commaculat, crimen quibus omne piatur.
1. The first, is not to adore God, or but seldom. This Sin is greater then
one thinks, and deserves to be particularly examined.

2. The second is, not to adore him right, that is to worship him with the
body, and not with the heart, which is indeed no adoration at all: for
adoration is an acknowledgment which we make of the greatness of God, and of
our dependence on him.

3. The third is, either not at all, or very seldom to pray. This omission,
when frequent, may be a mortal Sin; because of the command we have to pray,
and of the necessity we have of Prayer.

4. The fourth is, to pray without attention, praying with our lips, and almost
nothing with the heart: which is as much as not to pray at all.

5. In praying though from ones heart; to beg rather temporal advantages, then
the Salvation of his Soul: to be solicitous to pray for health, for the goods
of the world; and almost never to emplore the graces necessary for our
Salvation.

6. To be wanting in our respect to God; in the time of prayer; or to talk and
discourse in holy places; and not behave ones self there with due modesty and
gravity, either in looks, words, or other actions.

7. These are greater faults, when they are committed during the holy Sacrifice
of the Mass, and where the Angels attend trembling, and with low respect: and
that which makes them so, is the contempt which is show to God by these
irreverences; and the great loss we suffer of the several graces we might
there receive, did we but pray with the attention, and devotion, which is fit.
This deserves to be well examined, for we often fall into these faults.

8. But it is a far greater sin, when during the holy Sacrifice one employs his
mind in evil thoughts, either of impurity, or revenge, or of other crimes.

The 9th. is to Communicate in the state of mortal Sin.

The 10th. To make an ill Confession, either not having all the conditions
which it requires, or concealing some mortal Sin.

One might reduce wicked Oaths, and the breaking of Vows to the Sin against the
virtue of Religion; but this will come more properly the Second Commandment.

They who have Benefices may examen themselves in this place in what concerns
the obligations of their State.

Whether they have omitted to say their Office, and how often, having no
lawful impediment.

Whether they have performed it with the attention or devotion which is
necessary: or rather with extreme negligence; as it very often happens.

Whether they have neglected or refused to wear the Eclesiasticall habit;
whether they have clothed themselves like Laymen, in habit, colors, or dress.

Whether they have been immodest in their comportment, and negligent in giving
good example.

Whether they have misapplyed the income of their Benefices; as in play, in
good cheer, or other idle and unnecessary expenses.

Whether they have omitted to give the alms, they are obliged to give, out of
what remains of their Ecclesiastical revennes after they have allowed
themselves a just and moderate maintenance.

Whether they retain their benefice without any design of becoming Churchmen.

The Sins against the care one ought to have of his Salvation.
THe same Commandment, which ordains that we shall love God above all things,
obliges us also to love our selves for Gods sake; and to render our selves
worthy of his grace, and of the end for which he has created us; which is the
enjoyment of himself.

The Sin contrary to this obligation, is that which we call idleness,
indevotion, and the neglect of our Salvation, or in one word Sloth, which the
Grecians, and after them the Latins more properly name acedia, that is a
wretched negligence, or want of care. This Sin has many degrees expressed in
the following verses.

1. Otia lenta piger sequitur, refugitque laborem
Cui lex aequa Dei nunquam revocabilis omnes
Addixit, 2. foedaeque petens solatia carni
Partis divinae spernit curare salutem.
3. Hinc pulchrae virtutis opus fastidit, and odit.
4. Hinc mores mutare malos procrastinat: aut si
Corrigere aggreditur, coeptum mox deserit. 5. Inde
Sacramenta Dei, quaeque ille salubria laesae
Esse animae voluit, lachrymas, pia vota, precesque
Abiicit: aut tepidis haec reddit inania coeptis.
6. Desperansque modum perversae imponere vitae,
Aut male praesumens veniam, ruit in mala praeceps:
Et nova praeteritis addens peccata, tremendam
Se super accumulat divini numinis iram.
The first Sin is the love of idleness, which makes one fly from labor, and
choose rather to continue doing nothing, then employ himself in any lawful and
commendable exercise, which is a Sin that never comes alone, but carries after
it a large train of many others. And in this point it is necessary to examen
ones self seriously and distinctly.

The 2d. is to be more careful and Solicitous to labor in the concerns of our
bodies or temporal advantages, then for the Salvation of our Souls. It is a
very Common Sin, of which however one seldom or never examens himself.
Consider then, whether you have not often totally neglected and abandoned the
care of your Soul, being so far from taking any care to labor in this great
concern, as that you have not admitted even of a thought thereof. How long time
have you past in this negligence?

The 3d. is to slight in his heart piety and good works, having a distaste or an
aversion for them; as it happens but too often to those, who continue in the
negligence we have just now spoke of.

The 4th. is to defer from day to day and from time to time the amendment of
ones life; or immediately to desist after one has begun it.

The 5th. is to forsake those means, which God has vouchsaf't us for our
amendment: Such as are the Sacraments, Penance, Prayer, good works. Or else to
perform indeed these duties, but so ill, and with so little devotion, that they
do one no good. Thus you must here examen your self, whether, when you were
conscious to your self that you were in danger to commit some mortal Sin, you
have employed these means, to the end you might avoid it.

The 6th. is when either despairing ever to be able to amend, or presuming that
God will pardon us at the last hour, we give our selves over totally to vice
without ever concerning our selves at all to amend our lives. Which is properly
what St. Paul calls Romans 2.5. to heap up a treasure of the Wrath of God,
against our selves: All these Sins deserve to be well examined.

The EXAMEN upon the Second Commandment.
Thou shall not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain.
THere are four sorts of Sins which are forbidden in this Commandment, or which
may have relation to it, viz. an unlawful Oath, Blasphemy, Cursing, the Sins
against Vows, which the following verses will explain.

Terribile and sanctum nomen violare secunda
Lex prohibet, tantoque reum se crimine reddit
I. In vanum jurans, falsi testem, vel iniqui
Qui vocat ore Deum: nulla aut ratione coactus.
II. In caelum erectus numen blasphemat, eique
Nomina sancta adimens male sanus, veraque falsis
Commutans, Sanctum scelerata voce lacessit
III. Tum furiis ipsum se devovet, atque precatur
Dira sibi (horrendum dictu?) sociisque, Deoque.
IV. Stultaque vota vovens, 1. quae vel praestare nequibit,
2. Aut non sunt placitura Deo. 3. Qui vota, fidemque
Rite datam revocat levis, 4. aut dissolvere differt.
To form a right judgment of this Commandment; You must observe, that we do not
here take this word Oath as it is vulgarly understood: for so Blasphemy as well
as Cursing is called an Oath; but we take it precisely and properly for the use
which is made of the name of God, to affirm or deny a thing: such an use of its
own nature is not bad: but on the contrary it is an act of Religion, when it is
accompanied with the three circumstances, which holy writ, Heirem. 4.2.
requires an Oath should have Truth, Justice, and Necessity. Hence the
Commandment does not at all forbid to Swear; but to Swear in vain, that is
without these three conditions.

Wherefore the first Sin against this Commandment is the taking a wicked Oath,
that is, 1. When one Swears an untruth, which one knows to be so. 2. When one
Swears an unjust thing to the prejudice of our neighbor. 3. When one Swears
without any necessity, although the thing be both true and just.


Now there is no necessity of an oath, except the thing for which one swears be
of great importance.

One Sins moreover by an evil Oath, when one either Swears to do what he never
designs to do; or when one swears to do an evil thing; in which case, the Oath
does not at all oblige; but it was a mortal Sin to Swear, and it would be
another to fulfill his Oath.

These kind of Oaths are Sworn, when one says that he takes God to witness of a
thing; or that he Swears upon his Salvation, upon the damnation of his Soul, by
the oath he owes to God, that he may perish in that instant, or such like.
Wherein it is necessary that they examen themselves particularly well, who are
accustomed to Swear, and declare the number of these sins, as near as they can.

The 2. Sin is that of Blasphemy, that is to revile and villify Almighty God;
whether it be by denying him some perfection which is proper to him, as in
saying that he is not Just, Good, Wise, etc. or in attributing to him,
something unworthy of him; as to say that he is the author of evil, or the
like. Renouncing him either by word, or thought,: Cursing him; which never
happens but to such Souls as are transported with rage and fury, as in losses,
in Gaming, or upon occasion of such other Crosses.

It is also a kind of Blasphemy, to swear by the name of God, by his Death, by
his Blood; as often as all or any of these things shall be spoken in anger, or
through contempt, and reproach, and always in abusing Gods holy name, and the
adorable Mysteries of our Redemption.

Those who are subject to these Sins ought strictly to examen themselves in all
these points.

The 3. Sin is Cursing, that is when to affirm a thing, either moved by anger
against any one, or through impatience of his crosses and contradictions, one
flies out into a passion so far as to wish harm to himself or others; as death
or some misfortune: to wish at the Devil, or the like. Which choler but too
often suggests to those, who do not curb their passions.

The 4. concerns the abuse of Vows; which are promises one makes to God. This
abuse is offered many ways.

1. In making a vow to do that which is impossible for him to fulfill. 2. In
vowing to do that which is evil and displeasing to Almighty God. 3. In
breaking vows which one has made. 4. In deferring too long to fulfill them,
without any lawful cause of that delay.
The EXAMEN upon the Third Commandment.
Remember thou keep holy the Sabbath Day.
THat we may rightly understand the obligations of this Commandment, it is
necessary that we know the intention with which it was given, which was that we
might Honor God upon that day; which for this end he has reserved to himself.
Wherefore he forbids us servile works, which might divert or hinder us from
applying our selves unto him. Whence it follows that this Commandment does not
only oblige us to abstain from these sort of actions, but also to honor God by
good and profitable works. We shall set them forth in the following verses.

Sanctificare diem post sex qui septimus orbs
Volvitur, and sanctam menti indulgere quietem;
Auctorem ut proprium agnoscat veneretur, ametque
Tertia lex jubet, a primis jam lata diebus.
1. Hinc procul esse jubet manuum, quo vita paratur,
Omne opus: 2. humanis animumque avertere curis,
3. Vt sancto vacet obsequio; propriaeque saluti.
4. Abstergatque dolens incauto quas sibi sordes
Aspersit vesanus amor mundique suique:
Inde sacri quaerens caelestia pabula verbi
Mentem avidam pascat, sanctoque incendat amore.
5. Quam male, proh dolor! haec servat mandata, diebus
Qui sacris ludos, epulas and vana secutus
Gaudia, criminibus foedat pia tempora: festum
Non mentis sed carnis agens, male sanus Averno
Consecrat, omnipotens sibi quos sacravit honores.
1. The first Sin against this Commandment is to do on the Sunday any servile
works, that is to say handy-works, which have some temporal gain for their
end. Consider whether you have done any, or whether you were the cause that
others did, either by making them labor in your service, or for your
divertisement, without a considerable necessity.

2. It is also a sin against this Commandment to be employed any considerable
time upon holy days in laboring about temporal affairs: as Merchants,
Advocates, Solicitors, and other Officers of Justice do, who spend one part of
the Sunday in business, and the other in recreation.

3. Is the Sin of omission, as not to employ ones selfon these holy days in
pious exercises; and especially not to hear Mass as the Church expressly
Commands, under pain of Mortal sin, or not to hear it well, but without
attention or reverence. For although in this case one complys with the precepts
of the Church, yet he does not satisfy that of God, who commands us to perform
well and piously all holy duties.

4. Those cannot easily be exempt from Sin, who on these holy days, neither
think at all of God, nor their Salvation, who are neither present at divine
service nor at Sermons; but especially those who make a custom and an habit of
it: for this is to neglect the Sanctification of the Sunday, and the end for
which it was ordained; which cannot be done without a great Sin.

5. The greatest and most grievous profanation of the Sunday and festivall-days
is committed by those, who spend these holy days in idleness, in gaming, in
dances, in feasting, and other recreations, which instead of sanctifying the
feasts, are a dishonor to them; and by this means God, who ought on those days
to be more particularly honored, is much offended. These profanations of
Sundays and holy days are very common and yet great Sins. And therefore every
one is to examine himself strictly in this point.

The EXAMEN upon the Fourth Commandment.
Honor thy Father and thy Mother.
THis Commandment regulates the duty of Children toward their Father and
Mother, and by consequence, or according to a necessary proportion, that of
other inferiors toward their Superiors. viz.

Of Scholars toward those that teach them.

Of Servants toward their Masters.

Of Subjects toward their Princes and Magistrates.

Of all the Faithful toward their Ecclesiastical Prelates.

And reciprocally of all sorts of Superiors toward those who are Subject to
them; as you may see in the following Verses.

Quod Nati patribus debent, quod jure magistris
Discipuli, servi Dominis, quod subditus omnis
His quibus aut populis dare jura: aut pascere verbo
Coelesti dedit omnipotens coeloque parare;
I. Lex quarta edicit: statuitque reciproca cunctis
Officia. Hinc natos. 1. venerari and 2. amare parents:
3. Jussa sequi docet: ac monitis parere, 5. vereri
Et dum corripiunt, poenisque salubribus instant:
6. Placare offensos, and verbis mollibus iras
Mulcere: aversis actu meliore placere:
II. 7. Confectos annis, aegros inopesque levare,
Qua licet, auxilio Patres: eademque magistris
III. Reddere discipulos; servos parere, fidemque
IV. Praestare illaesam. Reges ut subditi honorent:
V. Pastoresque suae quibus est data cura salutis
Auscultent, venerentur, ament and dicta sequantur.
VI. At patribus contra atque aliis lex aequa vicissim
Praecipit 1. ut recto chara amplectantur amore
Pignora: 2. provideant naturae commoda primum:
3. Praecipuam tamen aeternae, veraeque salutis
Curam habeant; nec nata sibi, sed debita coelo
Dona Dei, natos reputent: 4. quos nosce supremum
Auctorem rerum doceant, pariterque vereri,
Coelestem redamare patrem. 5. tum mente sagaci
Explorent puerorum animos, and mollia fingant
Ingenia: and sanctum verae pietatis amorem
Alta mente bibant, seros quae crescat in annos.
6. Emendent peccata, ruat ne labilis aetas
In vitium, nullis posthac cohibenda catenis.
7. Corripiant just; stulta indulgentia natos
Ne perimat, paenasque timens adhibere salubres
Aeternae addicat paenae puerosque patresque
Ista docet lex sancta patres, eademque magistris
Praescribit, dominisque and quos neglecta suorum
Reddere cura potest alieno crimine sontes.
The Sins which Children commit against their Fathers and Mothers, are:

1. To deny them their due respect, as when they despise them interiourly in
their heart, or exteriourly by words, scornful gestures, or actions.

2. To be deficient in the love they owe them; as when they hate them, or wish
their death, or any other misfortune, or forsake them in their necessity.

3. To fail in their obedience, if it be in a matter of Consequence, it is a
mortal Sin, or else to obey them, but not readily, as with repugnance,
impatience, or despite. Or what is worse, to obey them in things unlawful.

4. To slight, to scoff at their reprehensions, to take no notice of them, or
not to benefit themselves by them.

5. To resist their corrections, and wish them harm.

6. To put them into passion, and take no care to pacify them again by
submissive words, by obeying and complying with their desires.

7. Not to assist them in their old age, in their sickness, and in what other
necessities.

To these Sins may be added the not executing their last Will and Testament
after their death, or not to procure Prayers for them.

II. Disciples and Scholars owe to their masters and to all those who instruct
them a great part of the same dutys; as respect, obedience, and the like, in
which they should examen themselves.

III. Servants ought to examen themselves concerning the obedience they owe to
their Masters; whether they have failed either in their trust, or in the
diligence which is required at their hands; whether through their fault they
have displeased them: whether they have neglected their reasonable and just
interest; whether they have obeyed them in things unlawful, in lying,
Swearing, Stealing, beating, etc.

IV. The Subjects, whether they have failed to obey the King and the
Magistrates, to observe their Laws and their Commands, and to bear a respect to
their Persons.

V. Toward their Ecclesiastical Superiors, as Bishops, Curates, Confessors;
whether one has not failed to give ear to their Admonitions, to show them
respect, to love them, and obey them; whether on the contrary one has
contemned them, spoken ill of them, or murmured against them.

Fathers and Mothers reciprocally ought to examen, whether they have performed
their duty toward their Children; whether they love them as they ought;
whether they have care to maintain them, and to supply them in their other
Corporal necessities; whether they have been careful of their Salvation, and
to provide them all things necessary for that end, viz. to teach them to know
God and fear him; to love him as their Heavenly Father; to instill into them
the Sentiments of true Piety; to redress their faults by opportune and
convenient reprehensions; to correct them when they stand in need; not to
flatter them in their vicious Inclinations; as also not to be too severe
toward them; to give them good, but never any bad Example: Never to force them
in the choice of their State of Life; nor to love one more then another without
a very good reason: not to take from one to give to another, except it be
according to the exact rules of Justice.

The Sins of other Superiors may be examened upon all the Points here
mentioned, proportionably to what may appertain to every one in his proper Post.

Masters should consider, how they have behaved themselves toward their
Servants: whether they have had a care of their Life and Conversation, and of
their Salvation: whether they have been watchful over their Actions,
reprehended their faults, made them say their Prayers, go to Mass on Sundays,
and Holy Days, frequent the Sacraments. Whether they have not commanded them to
do some evil thing, treated them too rudely either by words, injuries or
strokes; whether they have not paid their Wages, and so of others.

The EXAMEN upon the Fifth Commandment.
Thou shall not Kill.
THis Commandment forbids Murder, and all that which comes near it or inclines
that way; that is, either actually to hurt our Neighbor in his Body, or to
desire it. This may happen in many ways, which are ranked, as it were, in order
in these following Verses.

Caedem hominis lex quinta vetat mentemque nocendi.
Hinc. 2. iram. 2. rixas. 3. convicia, probra. 4. minasque
5. Vindictam. 6. pugnas, and 7. verberae, vulnera, 8. mortes
9. Proditiones, insidiasque venena, furores;
10. Invidiamque odiumque and quodcunque improba menti
Suggerit iratae rabies, mitissima damnat
Lex, and ab humanis long congressibus arcet.
One must then examen himself. 1. Whether he has been enraged or angry against
his Neighbor. 2. Or has Quarrelled with him. 3. Whether in the quarrel he
used any injurious or vilifying Language, or reproachful actions. 4. Whether
he has threatened any one, and how. 5. Whether the effect, that is the Revenge
followed. 6. Whether he has fought against him, or challenged him to the
field, or beaten him in effect. 7. Or stricken, or provoked, or wounded him. 8.
If he have been the cause of his death. 9. If he have made use of treachery to
entrap him; of Ambushes to hurt him; of Poison, or other inventions of humane
wrath. 10. If one have kept a grudge, or born malice against him; how long it
has lasted; and what evil effects have proceeded from it.

The EXAMEN upon the Sixth Commandment.
Thou shall not Commit Adultery.
THis Commandment forbidding Adultery, prohibits likewise all sorts of Sins of
impurity, and all whatsoever is opposite to Chastity, as well of mind, as body;
whereof these Verses will give an account.

Casta pudicitiam sexto Lex Ordine servat:
Et Vetat auditu, aspectu, sermon, pudorem
Laedere, vel sactu: tum nequis mente revolvat
Turpe aliquid. 2. Vel cord optet. 3. Statuatue pudenda
Perficere: heu miserum si fecerit! atque pudorem
Nec vitae aequandum turpi violaverit actu,
1. Ipse suum corpus male faedans: 2. aut alienae
Corruptor carnis: 3. stuprans: 4. incestus: 5. adulter.
5. Aut si naturae calcato jure peregit,
In quae caelestes arserunt crimina flammae.
There are three degrees in the sin of Impurity.

The First contains the sins of the exterior Senses, which serve as an
entrance and dispositions to this Vice.

The Second comprehends the interior sins, which are committed against purity
in the mind.

The Third contains the different kinds of impure actions, by which one
actually commits that sin.

I. It is convenient then in the first place, that we examen the acts of the
exterior senses.

1. Of Hearing, by which bad, as well as good enters into the mind. Whether one
has given Ear either to immodest words, discourses, or Songs; wherein one may
sin four ways, 1. If one interiourly takes pleasure therein. 2. If one shows
that he willingly gives Ear unto them. 3. If one does not hinder them when he
may. 4. If one do not avoid the company of those, who speak them, when it is
not in his power to divert the discourse.

2. Of the Sight, and that in diverse manners. Whether one has cast his eyes
with pleasure, or design upon immodest objects, or such as are capable to raise
ill thoughts: as nakedness, dishonest Pictures or Figures, Women, or Maids;
either entertaining at the same time Lascivious thoughts, or being in danger to
admit them; which ordinarily is a Mortal Sin.

Whether one has read dishonest books treating of Love, immodest Stories, or
other unchaste things; Whether one has taken pleasure in reading them: And
although one took no delight therein, yet the danger to which one exposes himself
to admit it, is the reason why one can ever scarce read such Books without a
Mortal fin: Whether one has kept such books by him, for he is obliged to rid
himself of them. Whether he has imparted them to others. Whether one has
neglected to suppress them, when he might, either by himself, or by another.

3. Of the Tongue, one must examine, whether he has uttered immodest words, or
used expressions bearing a double sense, or apt to create in the Soul impure
thoughts.

Whether he has held discourse, or entertainments of this nature, recounted
wanton Stories, reported his own or others wicked actions.

Whether one has solicited others to the sin of impurity. Sung unchaste Songs,
or recited immodest Verses.

4. Of the Touch, whether one has touched himself immodestly, that is, having
no necessity, but only pleasure, or with danger of impurity; and yet more,
whether one has touched another with either of these two circumstances, of
pleasure, or danger.

II. The Second rank of immodest sins contains those which are committed in the
mind: and under this head we must examine three things.

1. Whether one has willingly taken pleasure, in entertaining his mind in
impure thoughts or imaginations; although one had not a desire to put them in
execution. For these thoughts, when one willingly continues in them, are Mortal
sins.

2. When one has a desire to Commit the sins he thinks on.

3. When one not only desires it, but resolves with himself to commit it, when
he has an occasion, and for that end, seeks the means to compass his design.

III. The third degree of this same sin comprehends the different kinds of
immodest actions.

Whereof the first is, when one provokes himself to Lust, corrupting himself
either by his touch or other means, which is a sin concerning which Penitents,
and especially young people ought to examen themselves well; because they
easily fall into it, and sometimes either do not confess it, or else declare
but one half, having a shame to discover, what they were not ashamed to commit.

2. When one sollicites others to that sin: When one makes them fall into it,
or when one teaches it to tho^^ that do not know it.

3. When one commits the sin of dishonesty, with persons of diverse Sexes and
Unmarried; in which case he must first tell, whether she were a Maid or Virgin,
for that is a remarkable circumstance, which aggravates the sin. 2. Whether he
solicited her, and how long. 3. Whether he seduced her by promises. Much more,
whether he forced her; he ought also to declare here whether he has been in
evil houses; whether he has led, or been willing to lead others thither.

4. Whether one has committed this sin with a Married woman, which is
Adultery: or with a relation, which is Incest, for these are different species,
or kinds of Sin.

And lastly, whether one has been so unfortunate, as to fall into the Sins
against nature, which God has sometimes visibly punished with fire from
Heaven, and with St. Paul calls ignominious passions, all which nevertheless
one must not be ashamed to confess.

The EXAMEN upon the Seventh Commandment.
Thou shall not Steal.
THis Commandment forbids us to wrong our neighbor, in his Goods: which may
happen many ways.

1. Septima lex furtum prohibet, redditque nocentem
Qui raepit alterius bona: 2. cum crimine servat,
Quae forsan male non rapuit. 3. Qui debita justa
Denegat, aut sero solvit: 4. Qui foenore duro
Cogit opes: 5. pactisque aurum coacervat iniquis.
6. Qui damno illato nocuit, vel causa nocendi
Extitit: and propriis non sarcit damna periclis.
7. Fraternis inhians opibus, 8. propriasque recondens,
Omnibus immitis, nec se, nec pascit egentes.
9. Debita qui sacris non solvit jura ministris.
10. Aut simoniacae affectans exempla rapinae
Terrenis redimit coelestia munera donis.
Haec lex aequa vetat; quaecumque and crimina suadet
Nullius non causa mali vesana cupido.
One must examen himself in this place.

First, whether he has taken another goods, with a design to keep them, and
declare the quantity of the goods, and how often he did so. 2ly. Whether
notwithstanding that he has not taken them himself, yet he has retained what
he found in his hands, howsoever he came by them; which is called an unjust
detaining of another goods: for one is obliged in Conscience to restore them.
3ly. Whether one has denied his debts, with intention never to pay them; or
else delayed too long the payment of them; that his neighbor suffered from
thence some considerable damage. 4ly. Whether one has lent out money or other
goods to use. That is drawing profit from the sole lending, without suffering
any real loss or damage from it. 5ly. Whether one has made any unjust
bargains or contracts, whereby his neighbor has been considerably prejudiced.
6ly. Whether either himself he has done, or by others caused to be done, any
damage to his neighbors goods. In which case he is obliged to repair the loss
if he have wherewith. And except, supposing he is able, he make satisfaction,
his Sins cannot be forgiven. 7. Whether one has a desire to get another
goods, and seeks unjust ways to procure them. 8. Whether the affection one has
to his own goods hinders him from giving alms when occasion of necessity
requires it. 9. Whether he has not paid the Tithes, due to the Church. 10.
Whether one has committed Simony by buying some benefice or benefices.
The EXAMEN upon the Eighth Commandment.
Thou shall not bear False Witness against thy Neighbor.
THis Commandment under the prohibition of false witness comprehends generally
all lies, and also whatsoever may prejudice our neighbor in his reputation.

Alterius famam levare and reddere raptam
Lex octava jubet, prohiberque offendere verbis
Factis-ve. Et simili reddit se crimine sontem
I. 1. Qui falso accusat. 2. test atur, 3. protegit, 4. and qui
Insontem damnat Judex, solvitque nocentem.
II. Alterius qui vitam animo scrutatus iniquo
1. Quod male conjectat, 2. temere asserit, 3. ambiguumque
Rumorem in vulgus spargens subvertit honorem,
Crimina mentitus falsa, aut occulta revelans,
III. Inde vetat falsis mendacia promere verbis
Lex very rectique tenax, and fallere dictis,
Sit licet innocuum quidquid mentiris: at ullum
Si tibi vel socio sint allatura periclum
Corporis aut animi, vel famae and honoris, opumve,
Ipse reus graviter laesae damnabere legis.
IV. Nec melius proprium velabit hypocrita crimen,
Qui sanctum falsa mentitus imagine, multo:
Decipit, atque lupum sub ovina pelle recondit.
These Verses contain four sorts of Sin forbidden by this Commandment.

I. Whereof the first is false witness, and all that relates unto it.

1. To accuse one falsely whether in judgment, or elsewhere.

2. To bear false witness against him, and the heinousness of this Sin is
proportionable to the Crime, which is laid to his charge: and to the danger his
neighbor incurs, whether in point of Estate, Honor, or Life. If the Testimony
be confirmed with an oath the Sin becomes yet much more heinous.

3. To take upon him the defense of a false accusation. Whether in law, which
happens to Lawyers and Sollicitors, or elsewhere, in what manner soever it be.

4. To condemn the innocent, or absolve the guilty. A Sin incident to judges,
and other Superiors.

II. The Second Species, or kind, is detraction, wherein one Sins by these
degrees.

1. By ill suspicions of his neighbor upon small grounds, sometimes out of
lightness, sometimes by reason of an aversion one has conceived against him.

2. By rash judgments, where one believes or affirms some evil which one has
suspected of him.

3. By detraction, spreading reports prejudicial to his honor: which is done
two ways: either by laying crimes to his charge, which he has not committed,
which is called Calumny, or by revealing the evil, which he has done, when it
was yet secret, and few or none knew of it, which is properly called defamation.

This is ordinarily a mortal Sin; and (...) it obliges to a restitution of the
honor (...) thereby he has taken from his neighbor; and when one confesses
himself of it, he ought to declare the quality of the crime, which he either
imposed upon him, or revealed: that also of the person whom he spoke ill of:
whether it were in presence of many persons; and how often; the intention with
which he spoke it, whether it were out of lightness and indiscretion: or out of
aversion, or envy; in which case the Sin is much greater.

III. The 3. Species is Lying; which is (not to tell a thing that is false, as
the vulgar think but) to speak a thing, which we judge to be otherwise then we
say: It is always a Sin, either mortal, or venial.

It is a venial Sin, when it brings no considerable damage neither to him that
tells it, nor to others. Yet it is to be observed, that it is a very dangerous
thing to accustom ones self unto it, and to get a habit of it, for the reasons
we alleged in the Instruction of Youth. part 4. capt. 11. But we must have a
care not to confess by custom only, without a resolution to amend, as it often
happens.

A Lie is a mortal Sin, when it is told in things of great moment, when it
either prejudices our neighbor in an high degree or him that tells it. Whether
in Soul or Body, whether in honor, or goods, is a point, which deserves a
strict examen.

IV. The 4th Species is Hypocrisy, which is a continual lie, and dissembling
to the end to appear otherwise then one is. Concerning, (...) he must examen
the actions he has (...) the words he has spoken with that intent. Whether
one has endeavored to be esteemed good and virtuous; whether one has
performed acts of piety with a design to appear so and be so esteemed; whether
one has discoursed upon matters of devotion, moved with that consideration,
and such like things.

The EXAMEN upon the Nineth and Tenth Commandment.
Thou shall not desire thy Neighbors Wife. Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors
Goods.
THese two Commandments prohibit us to covet any of those things, which are
forbidden by the 6. and 7. to teach us, that it is not sufficient to abstain
from the evil action, but we must also put a curb on our desires to do it. One
ought to examine ones self diligently in this point; But being we have already
placed such Sins as occur against these in the examen upon those two
Commandments; we shall say no more of them in this place.

Fraternis inhiare bonis, thalamisque pudicis,
Bina vetant sacram claudentia jussa tabellam.
The EXAMEN upon the Precepts of the Church.
1. TO keep certain appointed days holy; which obligation chiefly consists in
hearing of Mass, and resting from all servill work.

2. To observe the commanded days of Fast, and Abstinence.

3. To pay Tithes to your Pastor.

4. To confess your Sins to your Pastor at least once a year.

5. To receive the Blessed Sacrament; and that at Easter, or thereabout.

One is obliged to all these Commandments under the pain of mortal sin. Except
necessity, or some great reason excuse it. It is easy to make an examen upon
them: wherefore we shall proceed.

Has quoque divinis placitis Ecclesia leges
Subjunxit. 1. Sancte ut celebrent pia festa Fideles.
Adsint and sacris dum mystica sistitur uris
Victima: praesentemque Deum venerentur, and orent.
2. Carnibus abstineant vetitis; 3. jejunia servent
Temporibus praescripta suis, sanctisque diebus
Quadraginta, quibus Matter been provida culpas
Emendare, Deumque jubet placare precando.
4. Inde sacerdoti pandentes crimina, sordes
Abstergant mentis, fletu sanctoque labor.
5. Et cum mactandi Paschae veneranda recurrunt
Tempora, coelestis mundato pectore carnes
Excipiant agni, sacrasque epulentur ad aras:
Dum mundis animo and mortali carne solutis
Aeternum dabitur caelesti accumbere mensae.
The EXAMEN upon the Seven Deadly Sins.
THey are called so, because they are the head or source from whence all other
Sins do spring. They are seven in all; viz. Pride, Covetousness, Luxury,
Gluttony, Envy, Sloth and Anger. We shall explain them in this order, as they
lie.

Ambitione tumens: auri quem dira cupido
Exagitat: Veneri vel ventri deditus: Inde
Segnities quem frangit iners: vel livor adurit,
Iraque praecipitat. Septem capitalibus ille
Vrgetur vitiis, scelus hinc ruiturus in omne.
Of the Sin of Pride.
IT is a Sin which we little reflect on in our selves, yet very common. Many
fall into it, and often, but few perceive it, and fewer yet Confess it. Behold
them here in their different ranks, in vast numbers, and which deserve to be
well examined.

Effigiem mentis veram dant ista superbae.
Sum vanus; jactans; tumidusque; mihi arrogo multa;
Ambio; praesumo; sperno; nec pareo jussis;
Errata agnosco nunquam; Dehinc corripientem
Contemnens, mores durata front recuso
Emendare malos: Tumidus measensa tenaci
Mente sequor: semper discors; and hypocrita mendax
Noxia scire volo; nulli benefacta rependo.
Hanc gignit, viciis foecunda, superbia prolem.
Pride is an esteem which one has of himself, and a desire to be esteemed by
others.

The goods which one either has, or believes he has, are the groundwork and
Foundation of this Esteem; as the goods of Fortune, Riches, Honors, Dignities:
or the goods of the Body; as Strength, Beauty, a good Grace, good Clothes: or
the goods of the Mind, as Knowledge, Prudence, and Virtue.

This esteem together with proper love produces a vast number of ill effects,
which are so many Sins of Pride.

The First is Vain Glory, which values it self and desires to be esteemed by
others, for the goods one either has not, or those he has, but do not at all
deserve to be esteemed; as Beauty, Clothes, Riches: whence it derives its name
vain or Vanity.

The Second is Boasting; when one seeks to publish, or as it were proclaim the
goods he is endowed with, to the end he may be the more esteemed.

The Third is the Pride which is called the swelling, or puffing up of the
Mind, when one prizes himself excessively for the goods, which he believes
himself Possessor of, and wherein he thinks he considerably surpasses others.

The 4th is Arrogance: when one attributes to himself the goods he has not; or
those which he has, but do not spring from us, but from God, or even from
another, who has bestowed them on us; when one requires the Honor and Respect
which is not due to him; when one believes himself to be the Author of a favor
which one has done him, or which one has received from him, and does not give
the Glory of all to God.

The 5th is Presumption: when one has too good a conceit of himself, and
believes himself capable of the things which are beyond his reach, or which one
is not able to perform without the grace of God. And in a word when one
confides in his own strength in all the good things he undertakes, and not in
the assistance of the Divine Grace.

The 6th is Ambition: when moved by the good conceit of himself, he seeks
difficult Employments; because they are honorable, or profitable, presuming
always upon himself that he is sufficiently capable.

The 7th is a contempt which one has of others: when by reason of the good
opinion one has of himself he sets a greater value on his own, than on
another Goods, Nobility, Science, or Virtue: and when one shows this contempt
by gestures, words, or actions. When one would be preferred before others, and
always have the chiefest Honor: when one abuses his Inferiors, with affronts,
and severity, exacting from them more Service than they owe; punishing their
faults with too much rigor.

The 8th is want of Submission toward Superiors: when one refuses to obey
them, and follow their Orders: when one blames their Conduct, when one murmurs,
or causes others to murmr against them.

The 9th is not to acknowledge his faults, which may happen four manner of
ways. 1. When one totally denies it, and does not at all believe he has done
amiss. 2. When acknowledging it in his heart, he will not however Confess it,
but denies to have done it. 3. When Confessing the Fact one maintains he has
done well, or that he has not done amiss. 4. When one alleges false excuses
and unjust reasons.

The 10th is a contempt of Admonitions and Corrections; when one bears them
imp^^^ntly; when one is never the better by being corrected for his faults.

The 11th is Obstinacy in his own opinions: when one resolves to follow his own
judgment in things of importance against the advice of others to whom he ows
respect.

The 12th is Discord: when one is of a troublesome humor toward others, not
willing to yield in any thing; but to be above them in all things.

The 13th is Hypocrisy when one would appear better then he is: or be esteemed
Virtuous, and perform some good actions with that design. We have already
spoken of this in the Eighth Commandment.

The 14th is Curiosity, which inclines us to know things prejudicial to our
Salvation: as to read such books, as contain dangerous Sciences, and hurtful
curiosities.

The 15th is Ingratitude, for the favors one has received from another, in
which there are four degrees; 1. Not to return the acknowledgment one ought. 2.
To forget. 3. To deny. 4. (Which is yet worse) to repay Good with Evil. These
actions actions are the effects of a secret Pride, which would not seem to have
received any favor from another.

Of Covetousness, Luxury, and Sloth.
THese three sins have been examined in the First, Sixth, and Seventh
Commandments. Wherefore we shall say nothing of them in this place.

Septi^^^ avaritiae fontes mandata recludunt;
Sextaque Luxuriae faetus and monstra revelant.
Pigritiam Lex prima tibi descripsit inertem.
Of Gluttony.
THe species or several kinds of this sin are contained in these Verses.

1. Qui nimium Comedit. 2. qui lautius. 3. atque frequenter.
4. Quique avido vorat ore dapes: jejunia solvit:
5. Illicitisque cibis qui vescitur, aut nocituris:
6. Qui multo vires vino opprimit, aut rationem
Obruit, ille gulae reddit se labe nocentem;
Hunc gula interimit nullo non saevior ense.
One sins by Gluttony.

1. In Eating with excess, and if this excess be great, it becomes a Mortal
sin. 2. In seeking good cheer and delicious viands: the affection to these
things are in an high degree prejudicial to ones Salvation. 3. In Eating often,
and without order. 4. In Eating greedily and gormandising, and seeking rather
pleasure then nourishment in his meat, breaking Fasts of Obligation. 5. In
eating forbidden meats. In eating that which one knows will prejudice ones
health, which is also frequently a Mortal sin.

Of the Sin of Envy.
THis is a Sin opposite to the love of our Neighbor, and consists in this,
that as by Charity we rejoice at our Neighbors good, and are sorry for his
evil; so on the contrary by Envy one is troubled at the good, and rejoices at
the evil, which befalls him: a Sin but too common, and from whence spring great
numbers of others; which here you may see.

1. Alterius gaudere malis. 2. moerere secundis
Invidus assuetus, mentem sibi daemonis esse
Ostendit, ne quicquam hominum quem prospera torquent
Aut mala solantur. 3. Cur as hinc volvit inanes
Vt noceat: si posse datur. 4. delusaque si spes
Eventu fuerit, sequitur delebile nunquam
Occultumque odium; 5. murmur, maledicta, susurri
Queis famam alterius, mores, dotes, bona cuncta
Elevat: ut proprium minuat laedendo dolorem:
Infoelix, quem non facient aliena beatum
Damna: sed unius super omnia numinis aequi.
Consimilisque sui, dilecto sancta beabit.
It is then the Sin of Envy.

1. When one is troubled within himself at the good Success of his Neighbor;
as when he sees him honored, or esteemed, prosper in his affairs, to advance
himself in his fortunes, Science or Virtue.

2. When one rejoices at his harm, when any thing happens to him contrary to
one or more of the abovementioned goods.

3. When by the sorrow one conceives at the prosperity of another, he seeks to
do him a diskindness; and when in effect, he does him a prejudice in any one of
the abovementioned goods.

4. When not being able to hurt him in reality, he has at least a will to do
it: in keeping hatred in his heart, and desiring to do him harm, when it lies
in his power.

5. When through occasion of this Spirit of Hatred and envy one murmurs against
his neighbor: speaks often against him, to diminish the esteem, which others
may have, and instead of it Create an ill opinion, of him: in fine, when one
goes about to please himself by another harm.

This Sin should be only proper to the Devil, who rejoices at the loss of Men:
And Christians ought to blush with shame to seek their happiness in the
misfortune of their Brethren; A felicity which can no where be found, but in
the love of their common Father, and the brotherly affection which they ought
to have one for another.

Of the Sin of Anger.
ANger is an impatience to suffer any thing that is contrary to our
inclinations; from whence also proceed a vast number of Sins; the most
considerable are, which follow.

1. Adversum nil far valens ignescit ubique
Impatiens animus. 2. Rixae hinc, 3. convicia, probra,
4. Linguaque blasphemans, diraeque, minacia verba,
5. Vloascens manus, 6. aut intus men's dira volutans
Quae faciat, vel cord optet si infer nequibit.
Haec sunt ira nocens in quae nos crimina pellit,
Ipsa sibi immitis, sociisque invisa, Deoque.
The Sins of Anger are:

1. Not to be able to endure any thing that troubles us, or is contrary to our
Inclinations; or to be easily impatient upon this account.

2. To suffer ones solf to be carried away by the motions of Wrath and
Indignation against those, who give us any disgust or trouble; to please ones
self in these Passions and entertain them.

3. To proceed to Quarrels, injurious language, and reproaches.

4. To break out into Oaths, Blasphemies, Curses, and grievous threats.

5. To execute our anger, and revenge our selves of the injury which we believe
was offered us.

6. When one cannot effectually revenge himself, to be willing to do it, by
wishing him harm, and seeking the means to do it.

Not to pardon Injuries, nor be reconciled to his enemies.

Concerning this last Article, one ought to examen himself diligently; because,
he who keeps Anger in his heart, or who refuses to be truly reconciled is not
in a State capable of Absolution.

The EXAMEN Of the Sins which one commits by another.
BEsides all the Sins, whereof we have spoken, there are yet others, which are
very common, and of which one seldom or never examens ones self; which are the
Sins which we commit by others: That is, which others commit by our fault,
whereof we have already treated in general in a Chapter above: we shall declare
here the Species, or several kinds of them, in particular, which we shall
describe in order in the following Verses.

At que suas ritinam lueret men's noxia culpas
Tantum; nec facerent aliena piacula sontem
Sed tam multiplici non sunt maculata color
Corpora pardorum, quam men's humana frequentes
Contrahit in foelix alieno ex crimine sordes,
Dum factis dictisque nocet; dum voce silenti
Dat sceleri causas, aut nullis artibus arcet.
1. Facta nocent aliis, faciles ostensa sequuntur
Dum mala, sub ducibusque ruunt in crimina caecis,
Crimina perpetuo ducibus simul igne pianda.
Est pariterque reus sceleris. 2. qui provocat, 3. urget.
4. Qui juvat auxilio sontes, opibusque tuetur,
5. Excipit, occultat: 6. fautor, 7. sociasve malorum,
8. Qui mente aut nutu seeleri consentit: 9. cique
Cum prohibere valet, nullis conatibus obstat.
II. At quantis heu! lingua malis dat pessima ^^usas,
Inventrix scelerum, morum teterrima pestis:
1. Dum scelus ipsa docet, 2. dum praecipit, atque nefanda
3. Consilio, 4. hortatu, promissis and prece suadet,
5. Extorquet-ve minis, 6. animumque accendit in iras:
7. Dum malefacta probans auctorem laudibus effert.
8. Vel sua deposito prodit peccata pudore,
9. Aut been quod gestum est spernit, minuitque loquendo,
10. Irridens, and facta bonis veneranda, malorum
Obiicit insanis multurn ridenda cachinnis.
11. Vel fratres inter spargens inimica susurris
Jurgia, dissociat qv^os pax jungebat amica.
III. Verba ream faciunt, sed and ipsa silentia, linguam:
Dum sibi subject os spernit meliora docere;
Vtque bonum peragant jussis urgere; ruentes
In vitium nu llis satagit cohibere catenis.
At fratrem, si forte tibi quem nulla potestas
Subdidit, advertis peccantem, and vulnera siccis
Aspiciens oculis, molli and medicante recusas
Attrect are manu, monitisque salubribus illum
Negli gis emendare; reum auctoremque ruinae
Frat ernae te lingua silens, te muta loquetur.
Se^l quanto graviore oneras te crimine, si quae
Nec fanare vales, nec amica vulnera dextra
Tangere, saltem illis quorum est curare salutem
Fratris, non retegis certis sananda medelis:
Occultumque sinens penetrare in viscera virus
Et fratrem ipse perire vides, aliosque trahentem
Aeternae secum per certa pericula mortis.
Crudelis quem non fraternae cura salutis
Afficit, heu fu so meruit quam sanguine Christus!
One may contribute two manner of ways to another Sin, as we have already said
in the Third Part, Last Chapter. 1. by doing an Action, or speaking any word
which induces our Neighbor to evil. 2. in omitting to do, or say that which
might hinder him from offending God. The first is positive, the other negative,
yet however criminal or offensive.

You must therefore examen your self here, 1. Whether you have contributed to
another Sin by your actions in any of the following ways.

I. In doing an evil action in his presence, as an act of Impurity, or the
like: Or also in doing any action, which though it be not ill in it self, yet is
believed and esteemed to be so by those, who see it: for in this case one ought
to abstain according to the rule of the Apostle, 1. These. 5.22. From all
appearance of evil refrain your selves.

2. In performing any action with a design to stir up others to Sin.

3. By compelling them to it by some force, or violence.

4. In giving aid or assistance to another to do a wicked action, as Revenge,
Thest, Imperity; contributing thereunto by money, or other wise.

5. In harboring bad people, in concealing them, lest they should be
discovered, or be punished.

6. In favoring evil any manner of way.

7. In sharing therein, whether in the action, or the profit arising from
thence.

8. In approving the evil action of another, whether only in Will, or by some
sign or exterior mark of approbation.

9. In not hindering evil when one may.

II. In the Second place you must examen, whether you have been the cause of
the Sins of another by words any of these ways.

1. By teaching him the evil which he did not know before. 2. By commanding
those under your charge to do any evil thing. 3. By counsel or advising them to
it. 4. By pressing them to it by Prayers, Promises, or Presents. 5. By threats,
fear, and terror. 6. Endeavoring to provoke or solicit him to the evil, one
would have another do. 7. By approving of evil actions, and praising those, who
do them, or are the Authors of them. 8. By recounting either the Sins he has
committed, bragging and vaunting that he has done such and such things, which
are known Sins, or even of those he never committed. 9. By slighting others
good deeds either by word or otherwise. 10. By scoffing at them, or exposing
them to the scorn of others; which is a grievous Sin, and concerning which one
ought to examen himself very strictly. 11. By sowing discord and dissension
amongst others either by false reports or otherwise; and endeavoring to keep
them up, instead of procuring Peace and making them friends.
III. In the Third place examen the evils, which you have caused in others by
your filence, when you were obliged to speak.

1. In respect of your Inferiors, as your Servants, or others: whether you
have been wanting to instruct, or cause them to be instructed in things, which
they ought either to know, or do, for the Salvation of their Souls.

Whether you have omitted to forbid the ill, or command them the good, which
they were obliged to do.

Whether you have failed to reprehend their evil actions, and to chastise them
when necessity required.

Whether you have not neglected to concur toward the amendment of their
lives, by permitting them to live, as they pleased.

2. In regard of others, who are not subject to you: whether you have neglected
fraternal correction; that is, whether seeing them offend God, you have yet
been careless to give them charitable admonitions, when you might have done it,
to hinder them, as much as in you lay, from falling back into the same faults.
Or else, whether when your could not, or durst not reprehend your Neighbors
fault, and foreseeing that he would yet fall therein, you neglected either to
give notice, or cause notice to be given to those under whose charge he was,
and who ought to have a care of his Salvation, according to the command of the
Son of God, who requires that one should declare to the Church, that is, to the
Superiors, the Sins of others, when one cannot restrain him ones self: We have
given you an express Chapter of this Subject in the Instruction of Youth, Part
4. Chap. 18.

Moreover it is to be observed that every one ought to examen himself
particularly concerning the Sins of his own State, and condition, which we
shall not put here, because we write now particularly for young people: one may
find them in other Books.

The EXAMEN Of the Sins of Students.
I Shall inform you only that Students ought to examen themselves concerning
the Sins, which they commit in their Studies, by Idleness and loss of time,
which, ordinarily is a very great Sin in the sight of God, though they usually
reflect not on it.

They must therefore examen themselves, whether they have neglected to Employ
their time in their Studies.

Whether they have spent Days, Weeks, Months, Years without Studying: or
Studying but little wherein there may be a Mortal Sin.

Whether they have Studied remisly and loosely, without application, and desire
to learn.

Whether they have omitted frequently the duty of their Class, or have gotten
it made by others.

Whether they have hindered others from Studying: whether they dissuaded them:
whether they mocked at those who applied themselves to Study, and were willing
to learn.

Whether they have neglected to attend and hearken to that, which was taught
them, and to make their advantage of it.

Whether they gave themselves too much to Play and Recreation, spent much time
therein.

Whether upon that Account they have lost their School time, and other Hours
appointed for Study.

Whether they have played away a great deal of Money; or spent in play, in good
cheer, and in foolish Recreations the Moneys, which their Parents allowed them
for their Maintenance, or for other uses. Whether they have sold their Books,
Stolen, or Cheated at Play.

Whether they have contemned their Masters, Scoffed at them, or rendered them
contemptible to their Companions.

Whether they have given them any disgust either in Private or Public;
resisted them; rebelled against them; or stirred up others to disobedience or
Rebellion.

Whether they have loved and Courted the Company of naughty, Knavish, or
Vicious Scholars.

Whether they have diverted others from Piety; or Scoffed at those who are good
and Virtuous; or caused them to be laughed at by others; which is a very great
Sin: whether they have debauched others; or Solicited them to Sin, or
instructed them in wickedness.

Whether they have read bad Authors, or bad places in those that are permitted,
but are not corrected.

Whether in their Studies they have proposed to themselves any other end then
the will of God; and to make themselves capable to serve him in the State he
shall call them to.

Whether in Studying they have endeavored rather to advance themselves in
Science, then in Virtue, and the true knowledge of their Salvation: which is a
sin very ordinary amongst Students, and which carries a large train of evils
after it.

INSTRUCTION Concerning the Holy Communion.
The Preface.
Of the Necessity of this Instruction, and the Order to be observed therein.
THis Instruction is no less necessary then that of of Penance; by reason that
the Holy Communion is the Complement, and perfection of what Penance had begun;
that is to say, it is a perfect restoration, and a certain confirmation of the
Soul in the grace of God. It conserves, it augments, it fortifies the Soul
daily more and more in his holy grace, and contributes very much toward final
Perseverance, supposing it be frequently made use of; and that the receiver
approach unto it with those dispositions, which so holy and so adorable a
Sacrament requires. Whereas on the contrary it heaps upon the head of the
unworthy receiver, dreadful and almost irreparable ruins, changing the
fountain of life into the cause of death; and that, which of it self, and by
its first institution, was a pledge of Salvation, a Sacrament of Love and
Mercy, into a Sentence of Condemnation or Everlasting death.

If one Communicate, though not absolutely unworthy, that is, in the State of
Mortal sin; but however with some irreverence, or considerable defect in
Devotion, he is deprived of the better part of that fruit, which otherwise he
might gather from this Tree of Life. And not only that; he does not only lose
the many favors he might by means of the Sacrament be partaker of: but also he
thereby contracts a great number of infirmities, as tepidity, or coldness in
Charity, indevotion, insensibility in the concerns of our Soul, the diminution
of our Spiritual strength and Divine Graces, frequent relapses into Venial, and
sometimes into Mortal sin.

Thus you see, Theotime, of what importance it is to perform this great action
well. No less then your Salvation depends upon the right performance of it, Now
to do this worthily, as the thing deserves, it is necessary we be well
informed; whence it is easy to perceive, 1. How useful Instruction is upon
this Subject, 2. The Obligation you have to apply your serious attention in the
reading of it, so to advantage your self the more thereby.

The Division.
I Shall divide this Treatise into two Parts; whereof the First shall treat of
the Doctrine; The Second of the Practice of Holy Communion. In the First, I
shall declare what it imports us to know concerning this sublime Mystery; and
in the Second what we are to do, to receive it worthily and with fruit.

In the First Part I shall give some General Expositions of Faith it self and
of the Principal Mysteries of our Faith, for the greater Convenience of those,
who are not already so fully instructed in these so necessary concerns; and
Especially of young People, who very seldom have sufficient knowledge of them.

I hope that those, who shall peruse them with Care, and a Desire to Learn,
will find therein such and so solid Instructions in all the Fundamental Points
of our Holy Religion, as by that means their Hearts will become more ample and
Capacious of the singular advantages of Holy Communion; and Effectually be made
Partakers of those Graces which God is ready to bestow by means of this Blessed
Sacrament.

As for the Second Part it is to be perused and Practiced, and for this effect
it will be very proper to peruse it often and with Attention; but particularly
upon the Eve and day of Communion.

PART I. Of the Doctrine, that is to say, of the Truths which it Imports us to
know concerning the Sacrament of the Eucharist.
A Christian Communicant, that he may receive worthily (if as yet he know them
not distinctly) ought to be well instructed in three things; of which two are
general, the third is particular to this Sacrament.

First, he must be instructed in Faith in General, without which it is
impossible to attain to the knowledge of this great Mystery of the Eucharist.
He must understand perfectly well, what God has revealed concerning this
Virtue, which is the Basis and groundwork of Salvation. As Saint Paul says,
Heb. 11.1. The Substance of the things to be hoped for.

Secondly, He must have a true Notion of the Principal Mysteries of Faith in
Particular; as of the Blessed Trinity, the Incarnation, the Redemption, the
Catholic Chuch: for except he believe these Truths, it is impossible ever to
come either to the knowledge or belief of that of the Holy Eucharist.

Thirdly, He must be thoroughly informed in what concerns this Sacrament in
particular; viz. in the principal truths which appertain unto it: as the real
presence of the Son of God in the Cousecrated Host: The change of the substance
of the Bread and Wine, into that of his Body and Blood: The great wonders,
which meet in this Mystery: The effects, which it produces in the Soul of the
worthy receiver. The dispositions, with which it ought to be received.

Following this order, I shall divide this First Part into three Chapters,
whereof the First shall treat of Faith; the Second of the Principal Mysteries
of our Faith; the Third of what concerns this Sacrament in particular: And we
shall divide the Chapters into Articles, or Questions, as necessity shall
require.

CHAP. I. Of Faith.
FOR your greater ease, we shall treat of this Subject by way of Question, and
Answers immediately subjoined.

Question I. What is it we are obliged to know concerning Faith in general?
SEven things; viz. What Faith is; who is the Author of it; what its action;
its object; its motive; its rule; and what the conditions it requires, that it
may be perfect.

Quest. II. What is Faith?
IT is a gift of God, or a light from above by which man being illuminated does
firmly believe all those things, which God has revealed, and proposed to his
Church to be believed; whether written, or unwritten.

In this definition is comprised all whatsoever, as is abovesaid, we are
obliged to know concerning Faith.

And first it teaches us, that Faith is a Supernatural light proceeding not
from us, but from God; and which makes us assent to those truths, the belief
whereof is necessary for Salvation.

It teaches us also, who is the Author of Faith, what its action, and the
rest, as we shall see by the Replies to the following Questions.

Quest. III. Who is the Author of Faith?
I Answer, God alone. Faith is a gift of God, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 2.8.
and there is none but he can give it. He bestows it upon us by enlightening our
understanding in a supernatural way, and inclining the will to follow by her
consent the light which is proposed unto her. The will indeed concurrs, and
does well in accepting and agreeing with the truth, which is proposed unto her:
but it is God alone, who is the first and principal cause; wherefore it is very
necessary that we beg and require it at his hands.

Quest. IV. What is the Action, Object, and Motive of Faith?
TO believe, that is to hold a truth for certain and assured, without the least
doubt thereof, is the proper act of Faith.

The object, that is, the things which we are obliged to believe, are all the
truths which God has revealed, and which are therefore proposed that we may
assent unto them.

The motive or reason why we ought to believe, is the divine revelation: For
one believes a truth, because God, who neither can deceive us, nor be deceived
in what he reveals unto us, has revealed it. And this revelation for this
reason is always infallible.

Quest. V. By what ways has God revealed the Truth unto us?
BY two: By the Holy Scripture, and by Tradition. These are the two ways,
whereby God has been pleased to manifest his holy truths; and both of them are
equally infallible, because both are equal, the one written, the other the
unwritten word of God.

Quest. VI. Which is the Rule of Faith?
WE call that the Rule of Faith, whereby we discern the revelations which come,
from those which do not come, from God; for it is certain that there are some
false revelations, and which the Devil, the Author of Lies, proposes by his
Ministers; and therefore, that we may not be be deceived, we have a certain
rule.

This rule is the judgment, or the interpretation of the Holy Church, to which
God has given that Power, and promised the assistance of his Holy Spirit, that
it also may never be deceived.

The Proofs are manifest in the Scripture; Behold, Mat. 28.20. (says he) I am
with you even until the end of the World. He also said, Mat. 16.18. Upon this
Rock will I build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against
it. And the Apostle says afterward, 1. Tim. 3.15. that the Church is the
House of God, and that it is the Pillar and Ground of Truth. The Son of God
commands us to hearken to it even as to himself. Luc. 10.16. He, that hears
you hears me, and he that despises you despises me. And he says, Mat.
18.17. he who will not hear the Church, let him be accounted as a heathen or
Publican.

Without this Rule we can have no Faith, because without it we can neither be
assured of the Divine Revelation, nor of the true Scriptures, nor of their true
Sense; wherefore Heretics, who refuse to follow the Judgment of the Church,
have neither Faith, not even any certainty of any thing they believe.

They say indeed that they follow the Scripture, but they deceive themselves.

For first, How do they know, that there is such a thing as Scripture, but by
the Testimony of the Catholic Church, which assures us of it, and has
conserved it from time to time, even until their times. Did not St. Augustine,
contra Epist. fundam. c. 5. say, and with good reason, that he would not
believe the Gospel, except he were moved unto it by the authority of the
Catholic Church: and that if we believe the Church, when it tells us that we
must believe the Gospel, why should we not believe it, when it forbids us to
believe Manicheus or Heretics.

Secondly, It is not enough to follow the Scripture, except also they follow
and be assured of the true Sense of Scripture; for as St. Augustine, in tract.
18. in Jo. says, Heresy springs from no other source, but from good Scripture
ill understood, and boldly maintained: And St. Hilary, l. 2. ad Constant.
August. says excellently well, That there is no Heretic but maintains his
Blasphemies by the Scripture.

If they fay that the Holy Ghost inspires them with the true Sense of the
Scriptures, and the right understanding of the Mysteries therein contained.

The Answer is impertinent; for there was never any Heretic, who had not this
same Plea.

Secondly, If it be so, why are there so many different Sentiments amongst
them, and that in Points of Faith? Can the Holy Ghost be contrary to, or
contradict himself? Is it possible that he should inspire both truth and
falsehood?

3ly. who is it that does not perceive that this answer, were it good, would
authorize as many religions, as there are men? for every one will easily say
that he has the Holy Ghost.

Lastly, why do they desire, that others should believe them, whilst they
affirm that they have the H. Ghost, having nothing besides there own assertion
to justify what they say; since they themselves refuse to believe the Church,
which requires their assent by so just a title, as is the promise made her by
the Son of God of the continual assistance of his H. Spirit, even to the end
of the world.

We must then conclude, and hold for a certain truth, that it is neither our
private judgment, nor our interior persuasion, however we may, believe it
comes from the Holy Ghost, which is capable to serve us as a rule in points of
Faith, or can make us see which is a true, and which a false revelation: but it
is the sole Testimony of the Catholic Church, and the judgment which she forms
of the divine truths, which is and ought to be the rule of our belief. For
whilst we submit our selves to her judgment we cannot fall. As we cannot but
mistake and err, when though never so little we depart from the doctrine of the
Church.

We find in the Church four conditions required for the rule of says: To be a
rule, it must at one and the same time be One, Certain, Manifest, and Visible.

The Church is One, for as there can be but one Faith, so there can be no more
then one true Church, as it is said in the Nicene Creed, Et unam Sanctam
Catholicam, and Apostolicam Ecclesiam.

The judgment of the Church is Certain in points of faith, since she can never
fail being, as the Apostle says, the Pillar and ground of truth.

It is Manifest, because clearly proposed, and by word of mouth explained upon
occasion of any Emergent difficulty in matters of faith.

The Church for this reason was Established by the Son of God: his will is,
that we have recourse unto her in these occasions, according as it was also
practiced in the Old Testament, where it is said Mal. 2.7. that the lips of the
Priest do conserve knowledge, and one must seek the Law from his mouth.

And the Apostle assures us, that the same method is to be observed in the New
Testament, when he says, Ephesians. 4.11. that the Son of God has established
some Apostles, some Pastors, and other some Doctors for the administration of
his word, and for the building up of the body of Jesus Christ, that is his
Church. That we may not be like Children wavering in uncertainty, and carried
away with every wind of Doctrine. And for this reason also St. Augustine
affirms, that in all difficulties which occurr concerning any questions or
matters of Faith, we must make our addresses to the Church. If any one, says
he, cont. Crescon. fear to be deceived in the obscurity of this question, let
him consult the Church. Si quis falli metuit hujus obscuritate questionis,
Ecclesiam. de illa consulat.

Lastly, the Church is Visible, as consisting of Pastors, who have succeeded
one another ever since the Apostles, even unto this present time; and as in all
ages one might, so at this very time one may easily address himself unto them
to be instructed in all what concerns our faith. This is the City, whereof the
Son of God speaks Mat. 5.14. which is built upon a Mountain to which all the
World may have access, as it was foretold by Isaias. Chap. 2.3. Come and ascend
to the mountain of our Lord, to the House of the God of Jacob. It will teach us
his ways, and we shall walk in his paths, for the Law will come forth of Sion,
and the word of our Lord from Jerusalem. It was to this City that St. Augustine,
de Vnitat. Eecles. c. 14. sent the Donatists, when he said to them, you have
the City whereof he himself, who built it, said, that it was a City built upon
a Mountain, and could not be hidden.

I have staid and dilated my self on set purpose upon this Subject of the Rule
of Faith, because it is of great concern in this affair, and upon which all the
rest, as far as concerns us, depends; it is a Principle and Fundamental Maxim
in matters of Faith, That we must hearken to, and obey the Church; we must
receive the Divine Revelations from her alone, and the Interpretation she gives
of the Holy Scripture and Tradition; which are the two ways by which as is
abovesaid, God has been pleased to convey his Divine Truths, the Mysteries of
our Holy Faith, unto us.

Quest. VII. What Qualities or Conditions ought our Faith to have?
IT follows from what we have already said, that Faith to be perfect must have
three qualities or Conditions; it must be Humble, Universal, and Firm or fixed
and steady.

Humble, that is, in matters of Faith we are to submit our selves to the
judgment of the Church, and not to be wedded to our proper sense, nor to our
interior persuasion, nor to the judgment of any particular Person, as we have
showed above. Thus God ordained it in the Old Testament, Deuteronomy. 17.8. where he
commanded, that in the difficulties which should occurr concerning the
performance of the Law, every one should have recourse to the Priests, and
follow exactly their decision: and that under pain of Death, in case one should
be refractory or disobedient. And in the New Testament he has decreed, that he
who will not hear the Church, shall be accounted as an Infidel.

Universal, that is, it ought to comprehend, and believe generally all the
truths which are proposed by the Church to be believed without excepting any;
and the reason is evident; because the Church, which proposes them, by reason
of the assistance of the Holy Ghost, which is promised her without restriction,
is equally infallible in all her Judgments, and can be no more deceived in the
least, then in the greatest Mystery of our Faith: and as St. Augustine, contra
Epist. fundam. speaking of the Books of the Sacred Scripture, says excellently
well, If I believe the Gospel, I must also necessarily believe the Acts of the
Apostles, because the same Authority of the Catholic Church obliges to believe
them both. We may say the same of all the other truths, which are proposed by
the Church; for if we believe one, we ought also to believe the others; because
it is the same Authority and the same Church, which proposes, and gives us
assurance of them both. And the same St. Augustine l. 16. cont. Faust: c. 3.
speaking of Heretics, and those, who would give credit to nothing, but their
own will. You (says he) who in the Gospel believe, what you please, and what
you like not, reject. You rather give credit to your selves, then to the
Gospel; because when led by your private Spirit you approve, what pleases,
and disapprove what displeases you in Scripture; you do not at all submit your
selves to the authority of holy writ there to find out your faith; but rather
you subject the Scripture to your selves, to judge of it according to your will.

In fine, Faith ought to be firm, that is fixed, steady and free from any at
least voluntary doubt. And this also for the same reason; the infallible
authority of the Church, which proposes unto us the divine truths the objects
of our Faith, and cannot be deceived in what she proposes to us. So that there
is no more reason to doubt of any one truth, then of all the rest. And there is
not a better way to dispell with ease the doubts which arise against any one
article of our faith, then to reflect upon the others which one believes with
all the certainty imaginable; which yet are no otherwise grounded then upon the
same authority of the Church: for if we do not doubt of those, neither ought we
to question these. In all the doubts, which may occur, concerning any point or
points of faith, whether they arise from our own imaginations, or spring from
occasion of Heresy, new doctrins, or scandal given in the Church, we ought to
have recourse to this authority as to a secure refuge. A refuge where we shall
find the divine Protection against the contradiction of evil tongues; as the
Psalmist has it and after him St. Augustine in those excellent words, which he
delivers upon that passage of Psa. 30. exposi. 2. Sermon. 3. Preteges eos in
tabernaculo tuo a condictione linguarum. If you find tongues which
contratradict you, heresies raised up against you, and divisions, which oppose
you, have recourse to the Tabernacle of God; adhere and stick fast, to the
Catholic Church: do not depart from this rule of Truth, and you shall be
protected, and guarded from the contradiction of tongues in the Tabernacle of
God.

Behold not only a wholesome but also a necessary advice, which ought to be
practiced upon occasion of any doubts in faith, and especially in the beginning
of any heresy. And had the heretics of our time followed this good council,
they would never so unfortunately have continued obstinate in their error, or
drawn others into the same ruin, as they have done.

CHAP. II. Of the things we are obliged to believe.
WE shall reduce them to four heads. 1. The Divinity or what we are obliged to
believe of God. 2. The Incarnation, or the Humanity of the Son of God, which
shall comprehend what we are to be believe of Jesus Christ. 3. The Church. 4.
The Sacraments. These four things are all contained in the Apostles Creed.

ARTICLE. I. What are we obliged to believe of God?
FOur things.

The First, I believe in God, that God is: that is, that there is one only true
God, who is an uncreated Being, Eternal, Independent, Infinite in perfections,
in Knowledge, in Power, in Wisdom, in Goodness, in Justice, and in all other
things.

Secondly, The Father Almighty, and in his only Son, I believe in the Holy
Ghost, that in God there are three Persons, The Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost. That all these three are but one true God, having the self same divine
Essence, the self same Wisdom, the self same Goodness, the self same Power, and
so of the other divine perfections. That the Son the Eternal Word proceeds from
the understanding of the Father by a perfect Knowledge, which the Father
conceives of himself; by which he expresses his Image in the Son. And the Holy
Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son by a Mutual love, which they bear
one another. That these Processions do not cause any inequality, or dependence
or priority amongst the Divine Persons, who are all Equal and Eternal; as
being all but one only true God; One in Nature, and three in Persons.

Thirdly, Creator of Heaven and Earth. That God is the author and creator of
all things, that he has made both Heaven and Earth and all the creatures
therein, whether visible or invisible, of nothing by his only word. That he
conserves them by his power, and governs them by his wisdom.

Fourthly, Life Everlasting. That as he is the beginning and first cause, so
also he is the end of all things, and particularly of Men and Angels: whom he
created to adore and serve him; and for whom he has prepared eternal
happiness, which will consist in this, that the blessed shall see him
perfectly, and enjoy him as he is in himself, and this enjoyment shall endure
for all eternity: it shall never, no never end.

ARTICLE II. What are we obliged to believe of Jesus Christ?
FOR the greater facility, and distinctions sake, we shall divide this Article
into Questions.

Quest. I. What is Jesus Christ? And in Jesus Christ his only Son.
HE is the Son of God, the Second Person of the Blessed Trinity, who was
Incarnate, that is made Man for us men and for our Salvation. But

Quest. II. Why was he made Man?
TO redeem man from the Sentence of everlasting death, which we had all
incurred by disobedience of the first man; and to give full satisfaction to the
Divine Justice, as well for that first, or Original Sin, as for all the rest,
which have been committed ever since by other men.

Quest. III. This Incarnation in what does it consist? Who was conceived of the
Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary.
IT consists in the strict and personal union of the Eternal word with human
nature: that is, with a mortal body and an immortal Soul, such as we have;
from which union there results a compound, whom we call Jesus Christ, true God,
and at the same time true man.

Whence it plainly follows that in Jesus Christ there are two Natures, and one
only Person, viz. the one divine, the other humane nature, both united in one
and the same Person of the Son of God, or the eternal word: whereas on the
contrary in the divinity there is but one Nature, and three Persons.

By this Union the Divinity was neither changed into the Humanity, nor the
Humanity into the Divinity of our Lord; for that is impossible: But both
natures enjoying either of them their own perfections, were strictly united in
the person of the Son of God. So that continuing what he was, that is God, he
became what he was not, viz. Man, as St. Leo, Sermon, de Nativ. Dom. expresses
himself, Manens quod erat, assumpserat quod non erat.

Quest. IV. How was this Divine Union accomplished?
WHen the fullness of time was come that God had decreed to send his Son for the
redemption of Mankind, he dismis'd from Heaven an Angel Messenger to the
Blessed Virgin (whom above all others he had chosen, and in whom he had
ordained, this adorable mystery should be performed) to declare unto her it was
his will, that she should be the temporal Mother of the Son of God.

She had no sooner yielded, and concurred with her consent to the accomplishing
of the will of God thus manifested unto her, but the Almighty power frames in
her Virginal womb an humane body out of her purest blood, creating in the same
instant a rational Soul to animate and inform it; and in that same moment the
Word, who from all eternity terminates the Divinity, began in time to terminate
the Humanity of our Lord, Uniting in his Person the two, divine and humane,
Natures. And thus was fulfilled that divine truth recorded by St. John, Verbum
caro factum est. The word was made Flesh.

The Blessed Virgin having thus conceived the Son of God, by the special work
of the Holy Ghost, at the end of nine months she brings him forth into the
world, nourishes, maintains and breeds him up as other mothers use to do their
Children: and the Son of God lived with her thus unknown to the world until
the age of thirty years; thenceforward only he began to manifest himself, and
to commence the work of our redemption for which he came.

Quest. V. What is it that the Son of God has done for our Redemption.?
HE did four principal things, first he preached publicly his Gospel during
the space of three years and some months, confirming the truth of his Doctrine,
his Mission, and his Divinity by an infinite number of miracles.

Secondly, he Suffered under Pontius Pilate a most bitter Passion and death
upon the Cross; upon which he offered himself a Sacrifice in satisfaction to
the divine Justice for the Sins of all mankind, and recompensation for the
infinite injury, which thereby was done to the divine Majesty and Goodness; and
by this means to open the gates of Everlasting life for man to enter, which
till that time were shut against both Adam and all his Posterity: Having
performed this duty, the third day he rose again from the dead; and after that
by frequent apparitions he had proved the truth of his Resurrection for the
space of forty days, he Ascended glorious and triumphant into Heaven, from
whence at the end of the World he shall come to judge both the quick and the
dead, all men according to their merits; who for that end shall be raised from
death to life and appear before him, never more to die, but receive either an
Eternal Reward for their good, or everlasting Punishment for their evil works.

Thirdly, he established and confirmed his Church consisting of almost
innumerable men, Pastors and their Flock, who should believe in him, and
continue in an uninterrupted Succession to the end of the world; which Church,
Act. 20.28. he purchased with his blood.

Fourthly, he instituted the Sacraments as the means to convey unto us the
merits of his Passion; and as so many precious Vessels, wherein is preserved
the price of that adorable blood, which he has so abundantly shed for us; to
the end it might be applied unto us, according as the necessity of our
Salvation should require.

And for as much as these two last heads require a larger Explication; we shall
treat of them here in two distinct Articles.

ARTICLE III. What are we obliged to believe concerning the Church?
I Believe the Holy Catholic Church, the Communion of Saints.

We must first believe that it is the Mystical Body of which Jesus Christ is
the Head; or a Congregation of the Faithful holding the same Doctrine or Faith,
which he taught, using the same Sacraments, which he instituted, living under
the conduct of the Apostles and succeeding Pastors, and acknowledging the same
visible Head, the Vicar of Jesus Christ, the Chief Bishop and true Successor of
St. Peter.

Secondly, that there is but one Church, as there is but one God, one Faith,
one Baptism, as St. Paul, Ephesians. 4.4. says, unum corpus, and unus Spiritus,
unus Dominus, una Fides, unum Baptisma, unus Deus and Pater omnium. He that
does not conserve this Union, says St. Cyprian, de unitat. Eccles. how can he
believe that he has Faith? he who opposes and resists the Church; who abandons
the Chair of St. Peter, upon which the Church is built, how can he hope that he
is in the Church? since the blessed Apostle teaches this same thing, and
showing the sacred tie of Unity, affirming, that there is but one body, (that
is the Church) as there is but one Spirit, who governs it.

Thirdly, that this is that only Church, which acknowledges the Pope for her
visible head, whom Jesus Christ has appointed to govern her, and to be the
source and Center of her Unity here on Earth: which made St. Cyprian say, ibid.
that Heresies and Schisms spring from hence, that some will not acknowledge in
the Church one whom Jesus Christ constituted head over the rest in those words,
which he spoke to St. Peter, Thou art Peter and upon this Rock I will build my
Church: and I will give to thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; and in
another place, feed my Sheep: Upon one man, continues St. Cyprian, Ibid. he
builds his Church, and gives him charge to feed his Flock. And although he
bestowed an equal authority upon the Apostles as far as concerns the remission
of Sins: Yet that the Unity of the Church might more clearly appear, he has
ordained one Chair; and it was his will that the Unity take its Original and
beginning from one man: and a little after he says, that the Primacy was given
to St. Peter, to show that the Church of Christ, and the Chair was one. St.
Hierome L. 1. in Jovinian, says the same thing, viz. That St. Peter was
preferred before the other Apostles, to be the head of the Church; to the end
that the head being one, all occasion of division in the Church might be
removed.

Fourthly, we are obliged to believe that there is no Salvation for any one out
of this one true Church. It is an Article of Faith, which has been held
constantly in the Church; this having always been an unquestioned and current
Maxim; that he who will not have the Church for his Mother shall not have God
for his Father. Which was the reason why St. Hierome finding himself in the
East, where there was some division upon this Subject, the names of the three
Persons of the Blessed Trinity, writ to Pope Damasus, Epi. 57. that he was
resolved never to depart from him, but inseparably to unite himself unto him,
as to one, who held the Chair of St. Peter, upon which says he, I know that the
Church is built. Adding that the Church thus built is the only house, where it
is lawful to Eat the Paschal Lamb, the Ark of Noah out of which during the
Flood none were saved, he, that does not gather with the Pope, scatters that
is, he who is not united to Jesus Christ, does associate himself with
Antichrist.

Fifthly, we are also obliged to believe that this true Church is Infallible in
her judgments in matters of Faith and Doctrine concerning manners: whether she
be or be not assembled in the persons of her Pastors and Head: viz. the Pope,
and Bishops, she holds universally one and the same Doctrine. This is also an
Article of Faith grounded upon the word of the Son of God, who has promised
that the gates of Hell shall never prevail against her, his Church: from whence
it follows that she never either fell, or ever shall fall into the least error
in points of faith: she being as the Apostle affirms the Pillar and ground of
truth. But we have already proved this truth above in the first Article.

Now from all what we have said, both in the first Article, and in the present
question, it follows that we must conclude and hold this for a certain and
infallible truth, that all saithfull Christians, whosoever desire to be assured
in points of faith, and sound Doctrine concerning Manners, and to avoid error
in a matter of so great concern, must of necessity adhere and stick close
solely and inseperably to the Holy Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church, and
hear and follow her Judgment and Doctrine in all things.

ARTICLE IV. What are we obliged to believe concerning the Sacraments?
I Believe the Remission of Sins. We are obliged to believe what the Church
has always taught concerning the Sacraments, viz. First, that they are the
means instituted by God, thereby either to confer his Grace upon us, or to
augment, what we have already received, or to restore what we had lost, as it
is expressed in the Council of Trent, Sess. 7. Proaem.

Secondly, that a Sacrament may be rightly defined in this manner; a Visible
sign of invisible grace instituted by God for our sanctification.

3. That this Visible sign consists, and is, as it were composed of two parts,
viz. the sensible thing, which is applied in the Sacrament, as water in
Baptism: and the words which are pronounced, as in the same Beptism these
words. I baptize thee etc. according to that received doctrine delivered by St.
Augustine, Accedit verbum ad Elementum and fit Sacramentum. By the joining of
the words with the Element, or Material thing, the Sacrament becomes complete.
One of these two parts is called the matter, the other the form of the
Sacrament.

4. That the Sacrament being applied by a lawful Minister, either gives or
augments Sanctifying Grace in the Soul of the worthy receiver.

5. That there are Seven Sacraments: viz. Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharist,
Penance, Extreme Unction, Order, Matrimony.

Baptism makes us the Children of Jesus Christ, Washing us from the Stains of
Original sin, and enlivening our Soul with the Life of Grace, whence St. Paul
calls Baptism, Tit. 3.5. the laver of regeneration, and the renovation of the
Holy Ghost.

Confirmation strengthens us, and conserves, and confirms us in the faith we
received in Baptism.

The Holy Eucharist is the nourishment of the Soul, for as by Meat and Drink
our decayed Spirits are revived; so by the use of the Blessed Sacrament those
damages, which Charity daily suffers from humane frailty are repaired.

Penance restores us to the Grace of God, which we had lost by sin.

Extreme Unction gives us strength at the hour of death, that we may be the
better able to fight against our Ghostly Enemy in that last Moment, upon which
Eternily depends; it is a remedy against Spiritual weakness contracted by our
former Sins.

Order consecrates the Ministers of Christ, and gives them power to conferr the
Sacraments.

Matrimony sanctifies the contract betwixt man and woman, and gives them grace
to comply with the obligations which they draw upon themselves by that
indissoluble Bond instituted by God for the propagation of Mankind; and raised
to the dignity of a Sacrament by our Savior Christ.

Although all or every one of the Sacraments do cause sanctifying grace, yet they
do not every one produce it in the same manner; for there are two, viz. Baptism
and Penance, instituted for the remission of Sins, which conferr it upon those,
whom they find void of grace; from whence it is that they are called the
Sacraments of the dead; that is to say of those, who are dead in the sight of
God in the state of Mortal Sin, whom they raise up from that death to the life
of grace; whereas all the rest are called the Sacraments of the living, in as
much, as they increase the grace they find precedently in the Soul; and to
receive any one of these worthily it is necessary that we be in the state of
grace.

The Soul by each Sacrament is not only sanctified by habitual, but also
endowed with actual grace, that is, with a vigor and strength toward the
compassing of those particular effects, for which it was first instituted and
ordained.

Moreover there are three, which imprint a character in the Soul; Baptism,
Confirmation, and Order: this Character is a Spiritual Mark or Seal which God
makes in his Soul, who receives any of these three Sacraments; which
impression, because it can never be rased out, none of these three Sacraments
can be reiterated, or received the second time by the same Person without a
Sacrilege.

CHAP. III. Of the Holy Eucharist.
ALL what we have said hitherto, whether of Faith in general, or in particular
of the Divinity it self, of the Incarnation of the Son of God, of the Holy
Church, and of the Sacraments, serve only as so many steps or dispositions to
the belief of the Blessed Sacrament of the Altar, and to render the
understanding of this adorable Mystery more easy to us; which therefore we
shall here endeavor to explain as brief and short, as possibly we may.

I shall reduce all whatsoever we are obliged to know concerning it into four
heads. 1. The real prefence of the Son of God in the Sacrament. 2. The Wonders
inseparably annexed unto it. 3. The effects, which it is capable to produce. 4.
The dispositions necessary to receive it.

ARTICLE I. Of the real presence of the Son of God in the Holy Eucharist, and
of what we are to believe concerning this Sacrament.
WE are obliged to believe, that it is a Sacrament instituted by Jesus Christ,
wherein he gives us really and truly his Body and Blood under the species or
exterior appearance of Bread and Wine for our Spiritual nourishment and
refection.

There is not any one particle of this general Assertion or Tenet of our Faith,
which does not require to be well and distinctly understood; and for this
reason I shall explain every one of them in order, as they lie.

First then, we believe that it is a Sacrament; that is, a visible sign of
invisible grace instituted by God for our sanctification.

Secondly, we believe that this Sacrament contains really Jesus Christ all
whole and entire, that is, his Body and Blood, his Soul, and Divinity.

Thirdly, that under the Species, in the Sacrament, there remains nothing of
the substance, but only the appearance of Bread and Wine; both substances being
truly changed into the Body and Blood of the Son of God: so that what we see of
Bread and Wine, as bigness, figure, color, smell, taste, etc. are only the
accidents and the outward and sensible appearance of Bread and Wine.

Fourthly, that it is He, God by his Almighty Power, who works this wonderful
change by virtue of the words of Consecration, This is my Body, this is my
Blood, in that very moment, in which the Priest in the Person of Jesus Christ
makes an end of the pronunciation of them.

Fifthly, That in virtue of these Divine words the Body of the Son of God
becomes really present under the species of Bread, not by it self, or all
alone, but together with his Blood, his Soul, and Divinity: and his Blood also
under the species of Wine, not singly by it self, but accompanied with his
Body, his Soul, and his Divinity; with this difference that the Body becomes
present there under the species of Bread precisely and directly by the virtue
and signification of the words, and the rest, that is to say, the Blood, Soul,
and Divinity, are there by concomitance only, and by a necessary consequence:
because the Son of God being alive, and the Divinity always inseparably united
to his Humanity, wheresoever his Body is, there also is his Blood, his Soul,
and his Divinity.

The same is to be said of his Blood, which becomes present under the species
of Wine directly by the signification of the words; and his Body, his Soul, and
his Divinity are also there by a necessary sequel and concomitance.

Sixthly, That Jesus Christ continues whole and entire under the species of
Bread and Wine, in a Spiritual manner, that is, without his Quantity and
natural extension, after the manner of a Spirit, that is, whole in the whole
Host, and whole in every part of the Host; so that he is there invisible,
indivisible, and impassible.

And therefore when the Host is divided, the Son of God is not divided, nor
broken; but he continues entire in each small particle of the Host, as he was
before the division in the whole; and he who receives any though the least part
of the Host, receives Jesus Christ whole and entire, as much as if he had
received the whole.

ARTICLE II. Of the Wonders which occurr in this Sacrament.
MAny and almost innumerable are the Wonders, and Miracles, which God works by
his Almighty Power in this great Mystery, whereof seven are more remarkable.

The First is, that the Son of God in that very moment the words are pronounced
becomes really present in the Eucharist: and without departing from Heaven
where he still remains, his Body becomes truly present in the Sacred Host,
where before the Consecration it never was.

The Second which follows from the First, is, that the Body of the Son of God
is at one and the same time truly in many places; and in as many, as there are
Consecrated Hosts.

The Third is, this admirable change of the substance of Bread and Wine into
the substance of the Body and Blood of the Son of God; so that at the moment of
Consecration the Bread is no more Bread, and the Wine is no more Wine. Before
Consecration, says St. Ambrose, l. 4. de Sacram. c. 4. the Bread is Bread,
after Consecration, of Bread it becomes the Body of Christ.

The Fourth Miracle is, that the accidents of Bread and Wine after the
Consecration subsist separate from their proper substance, which 'till then
sustained them, God by his Omnipotence preserving them thus in being.

The Fifth is, that the Body of the Son of God is all whole, entire and perfect
in the Host, yet without taking up any place as other Bodies do, but after a
Spiritual manner; so that it is whole and totally entire in the whole Host, and
also whole and totally entire in each part of every Host, after the manner of
Spiritual things; as for example, the Soul, which is all whole and entire in
the whole, and all whole and entire in every part of the Body: from whence it
follows of necessity that the body of the Son of God, is as entire under the
least, as under the greatest part of the Host, and he, who receives but one
part of the Host, receives as much, as he who receives the whole.

The Sixth which follows from the former, that though the Host be divided or
broken into many Parts, the Body of the Son of God is neither divided nor
broken, because being Indivisible he continues in each part, as he was before.

The Seventh is, when the Host is consummated, the Body of the Son of God is
not consummated nor corrupted; that altogether divine Body being incapable of
any alteration: what happens to it in that moment is only this; it leaves or
cease to be in the Sacrament, when the accidents of Bread or Wine are
Corrupted and cease to be any longer the Accidents of Bread and Wine.

All these and innumerable other wonders with which this Sacrament abounds, and
which it is impossible to relate, much more to comprehend, oblige us to look
upon it, as an Abridgment of all the wonderful effects of the Almighty Power,
according to that of David. Psalm. 110.4. (where so long before by a Prophetic
Spirit he foretold, that God, as a special token of his Mercy, had made an
abridgment of his Marvells in giving Meat to them that fear him) and to behold
it as the most endearing pledge, which our Redeemer, as the Council of Trent
has it, Sess. 13. c. 2. being ready to depart from this World to his Father,
summing up, as we may say, all the riches of his divine love to men, most
liberally bestowed upon us.

ARTICLE III. Of the Effects of the Holy Eucharist.
FRom what has been said, it is easy to judge of the great effects this
Sacrament is capable and ordained to produce in the Soul of every receiver. For
as God has wrought all these so immense, and so incomprehensible wonders for
our sakes; it must needs be that they were designed to work in us most
powerful effects of his Grace.

The Son of God by his infinite wisdom has comprised them all in one word,
saying Jo. 6.56. that his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is drink indeed,
and that he who eats his body and drinks his blood remains in him, and he,
Jesus, interchangeably remains in him who eats him.

From these divine words it follows that the flesh of the Son of God, as a
Divine nourishment works in the Soul of the worthy receiver, the same effects
Spiritually, which the best Corporal nourishment produces corporally in the
body of those, who take it. Now the effects of corporal nourishment are four or
five. 1. It conserves life. 2. It makes one grow or increase. 3. It fortifies
us. 4. It preserves us against distempers. Infine, it gives us strength to be
able to labor, and to comply with all our respective duties.

By these we may judge of the effects of the Holy Eucharist.

The first is to conserve Grace, which is the life of the Soul, and therefore
it is called the Bread of Life, the Bread which gives Life unto the World.

The Second, is to augment the same grace, and increase the Christian Virtues,
Faith, Hope, and Charity. This effect however it be common to all the
Sacraments; yet it is more peculiar to this, as being more particularly
instituted for the nourishment of the Soul, and to make us increase and proceed
from Virtue to Virtue till we come to the house of God.

The third, is to strengthen us against sin, and the temptations, which incline
that way, hence the Council of Trent affirmed, Sess. 13. c. 2. that this
Sacrament is a preservative against Mortal, and a remedy against Venial Sin.

The fourth effect is, that it heals the distempers, that is, the passions, and
disorderly affections of the Soul. It weakens concupiscence, or gives new
strength to overcome it. It diminishes Choler, Envy, Pride, and other Vices, as
St. Bernard, Sermon. de Coena Domini, excellently well observes: If any one, says
he, does not find so frequent, or so violent motions of Anger, Envy, Impurity,
or of other like passions, let him give thanks to the body and blood of our
Lord; for it is the virtue of the Sacrament, which produces in him these
effects: and let him rejoice, that the worst of Ulcers begin to heal.

Lastly, the Holy Eucharist gives perseverance in the grace of God, and in the
way of Salvation, in the midst of the various and imminent dangers, which we
encounter in this Life, and particularly when we draw near death; whence it was
given sometimes to Martyrs when they were ready to suffer for the name of Jesus
Christ: and the Church always takes care to Communicate the sick, when they are
in danger of Death, that so they may be Strengthened in that dangerous passage,
and happily arrive at the haven of Salvation by means of this divine
nourishment, then called the Viaticum, which is as much as to say, the
Provision for that voyage.

All these admirable effects evidently prove the greatness and excellence of
this divine Sacrament, and ought effectually to move us frequently to approach
unto it, and not neglect so many and so signal favors, as God there presents
unto us. Yet we are to take notice, that it does not produce these Effects,
except in such persons, as are rightly disposed to receive it, as it deserves.

Of these dispositions we will now discourse.

ARTICLE IV. Of the dispositions required to Communicate well and as we ought.
WE shall infer the dispositions from the same principle, from which we
gathered the effects, viz. from the nature of the nourishment and Spiritual
food we receive in the Holy Euchrist: and as it produces the same effects in
the Soul, that food does into the Body, so also it requives proportionable
dispositions in the Soul, that nourishment does to be beneficial to the Body.

Now Corporal nourishment, we know requires three dispositions, Life, Health,
and Action; for a dead body is incapable to be nourished, an infirm Stomach can
never make a good digestion, nor is it possible to convert the food into our
substance except that health be accompanied with our action; which is the
reason, that the body to be nourished requires to be alive, to be sound and
well, and to have an action of its own.

Thus the Eucharist, that Celestial food requires three dispositions in the
Soul, and without them it does no good, but harm.

The first is Sanctifying Grace, which is the life of the Soul, as mortal Sin
is the death incompatible with it, depriving us of this Supernatural life of
the Soul: Without this life the Soul not only receives no benefit from
Communion, but suffers also much detriment from this holy Table; inofmuch as
she becomes guilty of a new mortal Sin, a Sacrilege, which she commits by
inviting the Author of Life into the habitation of Death, the author of Light
into the place of Darkness; and Jesus Christ into the company of the Devil.
This made St. Paul 1 Cor. 21.28. advertise all Communicants to examen
themselves well, when they approach to this holy table; because, says the
Apostle, he who eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to
himself.

The Second disposition is the interior Health of the Soul, which requires
1st, that she be free from any affection to venial Sin. 2ly. that she be not
actually moved either with Passions or Affections, which may hinder her in her
application, and address to Jesus Christ. And although these defects do not
render the Communicant absolutely unworthy, or the Communion Sacrilegious, yet
they cause very ill effects and considerably diminish the fruits, which
otherwise it would produce. They hinder the Soul from digesting this sacred
food by good thoughts and holy affections. And as nutriment, which lies
indigested upon the Stomach, begets crudities, and causes Sickness in the body;
so this divine sustenance by means of these indispositions becomes prejudicial
to the Soul. Thereby we contract tepidity and coldness in devotion, Charity and
other Virtues are considerably diminished, our good actions weak and feeble,
our selves by degrees insensible of all good things which conduce to Piety. And
thus by degrees at last we are often brought into mortal Sin.

The Third disposition is Action, that is actual devotion. To receive the
fruits of this Sacrament, it is not sufficient that we be not indisposed, or
that we do not put any obstacle to its effects; it is necessary also that in
this so religious an action, wherein we receive the Holy of Holys, and the
Author of Holiness it self, we concur with dispositions of our own; which
consist in the practice of Christian Virtues. Of which we shall speak below in
the Second Part of this Instruction.

ARTICLE V. Of an Unworthy Communion.
AN ancient Lawgiver being asked why he had made no Laws against Paricides,
made answer, because he esteemed that crime impossible; that there could not be
found Children, so degenerate and unnatural, as to attempt the life of their
own Parents.

I would to God we could say the same with truth in the point of Instruction
concerning unworthy Communion, or that we could truly say that it is not
necessary to advertise Christians to avoid that so horrid Sacrilege, because
it is impossible for a man professing himself a Christian ever to be guilty of
so enormous a crime against our Savior Jesus Christ.

But Alas! the contrary is too true: and this crime though a thousand times
greater, yet is much more common amongst Christians then that of Paricide: They
have an horror (and with good reason) to deprive those of breath, from whom
they received their life; yet they are not apprehensive to Murder and Crucify
again, as much as in them lies, our Savior Christ, by receiving him into an
impure and perfidious Breast. Nature has imprinted in them a profound and
lasting respect for those from whom they have received only a Mortal and fading
life; But they easily forget the Reverence they owe to Jesus Christ,
notwithstanding he nourishes them with his own substance, his precious Blood,
and offers them by his presence a Spiritual and immortal, and a pledge of
everlasting life.

O God, Theotime, is it possible then that there should be found Souls capable
of so black a deed, so horrible a Crime? Surely they are only those, who either
have no Faith; or such as have never considered the enormity of the Sin, who
can commit it; for he must surpass the very Devils in malice, who falls into
such a Sin, if he have but the least knowledge, how grievous and great it is;
and what dreadful consequences do follow from it. Two points I therefore
design to discourse of in this place.

I will set forth the enormity of this Sin from three heads.

1. From that remarkable saying of our Lord himself, Mat. 7.6. Do not give that
which is Holy unto Dogs. If it be a great Sacrilege to give to Dogs things
consecrated to God; what Crime must it needs be to give the Holy of Holies unto
a Soul an enemy of God, more impure and filthy then the very Dogs? and what Sin
must it be in those to receive the Body of our Lord, who being no better then
Dogs, as it is said in the Apocalypse, and under this notion excluded from the
Sanctuary: Foris canes and impudici, yet have the impudence to eat the Bread of
Children, the Bread of the very Angels themselves. Ecce panis Angelorum, vere
panis filioram non mittendus canibus.

2. From that so famed Doctrine and signal admonition of St. Paul, 1. Cor.
11.27. Whosoever ones the Bread, and drinks the Chalice of our Lord unworthily,
shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of our Lord. This Sentence is a Thunder,
which ought to terrify all those who are so miserably unfortumate as to
Communicate in Mortal Sin: For he says they are guilty of the Body and Blood
of the Son of God: that is, they despise and treat in juriously this adorable
Body and Blood, whilst they receive it in a profane place, in the Temple of
Satan, in a Soul polluted with Mortal Sin.

It is particularly verified in this occasion what St. Paul relates elsewhere,
Heb. 6.6. this is to Crucisy Jesus Christ again; to scoff at him, to trample
him under ones feet, and contemn his Blood in that very action by which one
ought to sanctify his holy name. Can we think of these things without trembling
and horror? We never call to mind without a certain horror and eversion the
inhumane methods the Jews and Soldiets a sed against our Savior Jesus Christ
in the time of his bitter Passion; and can we be so insensible in our own case,
as not to detest those affronts we offer him even worse then the Jews did
whilst we unworthily receive him? For besides, that they Luo. 23.34. knew not
what they did; we know and confess him to be the Son of God, whom we offend.

St. Chrysostom explaining these words of St. Paul. 1. Cor. 11. Whosoever
shall eat the Bread or drink the Cup of our Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of
the Body and Blood of our Lord. Why so? suith this Holy Father, hom. 27. and
his answer is, because he has spilt the Blood, and by that action he has not
offered a Sacrifice, but committed a Murder; for he who approaches unworthily
to this Divine Table and receives no Fruit from thence, resembles them, who
formerly pierced the Body of our Lord, not to drink but to shed his Blood. And,
hom. 60. Consider, says he, what just Indignation you conceive against him who
betrayed Jesus Christ, and against those who Crucified him: therefore consider
lest you also be equally culpable and guilty of the Body and Blood of the Son
of God. It is true, they killed his most Sacred Body, but you after so many and
so often repeated benefits bestowed upon you, receive him into an unclean and
polluted Soul.

St. Cyprian before him had said that unworthy Communicants offer Violence to
the Body of Jesus Christ, and that this sin is a more grievous offense in the
sight of God, then it is for a Christian to abjure him in the presence of
Infidels.

The Third from hence, which you ought never to forget, that the sin of an
unworthy Communion is the sin of Judas. It was he who first committed it, and
those who fall into it since imitate his Example and become his Disciples. They
receive him, as he did, in a Criminal and guilty Soul: They betray him not
indeed to the Jews, but which is worse to the Devil, who inhabits in them. What
punishment ought they not to dread from such an Enormous Crime? Ought they not
to remember how that perfidious Apostle was immediately possessed by the Devil
in the moment, that be received Jesus Christ? for since they imitate him in his
Sin, they cannot avoid being partaker of his punishment, as we are about to
show you.

The damages which follow from an unworthy Communion.
SUch a mischievous cause cannot but produce most fatal effects.

The death of the Soul, which infallibly it brings with it, is the first evil
which follows from it: Mors est malis, vita bonis. This death is an increase or
extension of that other, wherein the Soul lay buried before by the Sin in which
he received the Sacrament: It is a further banishment from the grace of God,
and a further disheartning and exposing her to the Power of Satan.

From this Death follow other most dismal and lamentable effects: as the fall
into new Sins; the blindness of Spirit; the increase of vices and passions,
which makes a Soul to groan under the Yoke of her Captivity, and hinder her
from returning again to God by true Repentance.

The Prophet has comprised these effects in few words, Psalm. 68.23. when
speaking against the enemies of Jesus Christ, he prays to God, that their Table
may prove a snare to them, and an occasion of scandal: That they may become
blind, so that they may not see their own good: That they may always stoop
under the Yoke of a miserable Servitude.

If those, who persecuted Jesus Christ without knowing him, are punished so
severely, what ought not Christians to expect, when they treat him so ill in
his own Person whom they know?

Histories are full of examples of diverse punishments which God has laid upon
this so detestabie a Sin.

Saint Paul the first of all 1. Cor. 11.30. attributes, as the effects of
unworthy Communions, the great number of distempers, Sicknesses, and Deaths
with which the Corinthians were afflicted.

Saint Cyprian delapsis, affirms that in his time there were many, whose bodies
were delivered over to be possessed by the Devil, for that they had
Communicated unworthily; and also that many had lost their judgment, and become
distracted and mad upon the same account.

And Saint Chrysostom also assures us that the same thing happened in his time.

The same St. Cyprian reports that a Christian woman having partaken in private
of the Sacrifices of the Idols, and coming not long after to Communicate with
the Christians, she had no sooner received the Son of God, but she found her
self tormented, as if she had taken poison, and dyed in the presence of all
there.

He speaks of another who being willing to receive the precious body of the Son
of God, her self being in an evil state, as she opened the vessel in which it
was enclosed, there issued out a flame of fire, which hindered her, so that she
was not able to receive it. And another Christian going about to do the same,
instead of the Consecrated host, which he expected to have found in the place,
where he had reserved it, he found nothing else but ashes.

He himself also recounts this Passage, how that a little Child, to whom his
Pagan nurse had caused a little wine consecrated to the Idols to be given,
being afterward carried by his mother unto the Church at the time of the holy
Sacrifice of the Mass, was not able to swallow one drop of the consecrated
wine, which the Deacon had put into his mouth. The Sacred Eucharist, says this
holy Father, ibid. could not endure to stay in a body and mouth defiled and
profaned, by the only touch of a forbidden drink. But if it could not stay in
this body, whose Soul was altogether innocent; what may we say of those, whose
Souls are altogether guilty and polluted.

I could relate a vast number of other examples; but it would be too long and
tedious, and these are sufficient to make every one reflect, as the same St.
Cyprian considers, that if he have not as yet received the same punishment for
his unworthy Communion (if he have been guilty of it) he has nevertheless
deserved it, as much as they. Let every one consider, says this Holy Father,
not so much the punishment, which another has received, as what he himself
has deserved; and that he do not believe he has avoided the chastisement,
because as yet it is something delayed; since he ought rather to be much more
afraid, to whom God in his just judgment has deferred the punishment of his
Sins to a longer time.

ARTICLE VI. Of the end we ought to propose to our selves in the Holy Communion.
BEsides the purity of Conscience, it is necessary, that we have that of
rectitude of Intention to Communicate well: for it is most certain that an
action how good soever it may be in it self, loses its worth and value by the
default of a good Intention: and it becomes evil and vicious, if the Intention
be such, and if it be done for an evil end.

This being true in all good actions, whatsoever, it is still much more in this
of Communion; forasmuch as it is certain, that nothing, but what is pure and
holy, ought to draw near and receive purity and holiness it self: and that it
is a contempt of the greatness and sanctity of God, to approach unto him upon
any other motive, then that of pleasing him and meriting his grace and favor.

For this reason in the Old Testament it was his will that none should serve
himself upon his Altar of any other then Holy Fire, which he had ordained for
the use of the Sacrifices: And he punished with sudden death the two Sons of
Aaron, who were so rash as there to make use of Profane Fire; by this figure
we learn, that for one to approach unto him, it is not sufficient to be holy,
but it is also necessary that one bring with him an Intention altogether pure
and holy, and that an evil and Profane Intention does grievously offend him
upon this occasion.

We must then approach unto the Holy Communion with an Intention totally pure,
and propose to our selves an end altogether holy in this so great and so august
an action: Now that we may perform this duty, two things are necessary.

The first is, that one propose to himself no evil thing, as the motive and
cause of his Communion; as Hypocrisy, to dissemble and conceal some fault with
an appearance of Piety; Vanity, to be esteemed virtuous; Humane respect, lest
he should displease any one, or to please men rather then God. These three
motives are but too frequent amongst those, who are not sufficiently instructed
concerning the Intention, which we ought to have in our Communion, and
particularly among young People. Wherefore they ought to have special care to
avoid them. The first is the greatest fault, and ordinarily speaking renders
the Communion Sacrilegious, the other two deprives one of the best part of the
fruit, it otherwise would produce.

Secondly, This intention must be directed to the Service of God, and our
Salvation. to God, to please him the more, and to unite our selves thereby more
strictly to him; to our Salvation, to promote it by obtaining by means of the
Holy Communion the Graces, which we stand most in need of, as to amend our
faults, to resist temptations; to fix and confirm us more in the practice of
Virtues.

The two ends we find in our Lords prayer; where the three first Petitions
contain what we can wish, for the greater honor and glory of God; and the
other four comprehend, what is necessary for our Salvation. And it is a very
profitable exercise to propose to our selves for the end of our Communion, the
obtaining of the grace of God, for the accomplishment of the Seven demands,
which make up, and compose it, or of which this divine Prayer consists.

It is also good to add to this general intention, some particular end,
according to our present necessities; as to obtain some particular grace we
stand in need of, to correct in our selves some fault, and to advance in some
particular Virtue.

Lastly, The right and Religious intention, which we ought to have in
Communion, is the very same, which Christ proposed to himself, when he first
instituted this divine Sacrament. Now his intention was, as he himself
declared, that he might remain in us, and we in him. He dwells in us by his
Grace, and the assistance of his holy Inspirations; and we remain in him by
love, and the obedience we render to him: propose to your self this end, and
you shall Communicate according to the Intention and Will of Jesus Christ.

PART II. Of the Practice of Communion, Or, What we must do to Communicate
well, and as we ought.
NExt to the purity of Conscience, and the sincerity of Intention, both which
are necessary to Communicate worthily, as we have already said; there remains a
third disposition, that we may Communicate with more Fruit, and get a larger
portion of his grace; and it is actual Devotion, which we ought to have when we
Communicate.

There are almost infinite ways to practice this devotion, which several Books
teach in several manners: But I am persuaded, there is none more profitable,
and at the same time more solid, then that which is reduced to the practice of
the three Theological Virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity.

These three comprehend the practice of all other Christian Virtues: And as it
is necessary that our Souls be possessors of them to be in a condition to
Communicate worthily and as we ought, that is in the State of Grace: One cannot
better receive Jesus Christ, nor afford him a more grateful entertainment,
then if, when he actually Communicates, he practice the acts of these three
great and Divine Virtues, as we shall show in the three following Chapters.

CHAP. I. Of Faith inasmuch as it serves for Communion.
ARTICLE I. How necessary it is, and in what manner.
WE have already declared in the first part, that Faith is a gift of God, by
which we believe the truth, which he has revealed unto us. And this makes us
to remark a distinction, which we must observe, as well in this virtue, as in
the other two, viz. betwixt Faith, as it is a Virtue, and the same as it is an
Action.

The Virtue of faith is that interior light, which is given us by God, that we
may know and believe the truth.

The Action or act, is the actual credit or belief, which we give to the truth
revealed, when we say, I believe this truth.

The One and the Other are necessary for Communion, whosoever is not endowed
with faith as it is a Virtue, is an unworthy Communicant, and he that
approaches to the Communion without an Act of faith, shall not receive the
fruits thereof.

The greatest difficulty we find in this place is not in having the Virtue of
faith; for all those, who are baptized, have received this in Baptism; and
they conserve it still, except they have lost it either by misbelief or any
wilful doubt. In which case it must be repaired by believing, and doing
penance.

But as to what concerns the acts of faith, they require an application of the
mind and heart, to practice them as we ought, that is to say, with necessary
knowledge and the constancy, which is fit: Whereof we are about to treat.

ARTICLE II. That to Communicate well it is not sufficient to have Faith, but
we must practice the Acts thereof, and how profitable they are in Communion.
WHosoever then is without Faith, is an unworthy Communicant, since without
faith it is impossible to please God, as the Apostle affirms Heb. 11.6. and he
that does not please God, cannot be worthy to receive.

It is also necessary to have faith not only of all the mysteries of our
Religion, but we must have it in particular of this here, and it is required
that we have made acts of faith, which we have never revoked, nor changed.

But I say moreover that to receive the benefit of Communion, we must practice
the Acts of this Faith before, at the time, and after Communion; and that the
chiefest fruit of this grand and important action depends upon the punctual
performance of the acts of these three virtues, of Faith, of Hope, and of
Charity.

The reason is very obvious; for it is certain that the Sacraments work their
effects proportionably to the measure of the disposition of the receiver; and
that they give a far greater plenty of graces to those, who are interiourly
better disposed, and render themselves more worthy of them: Now this perfecter
preparation of the heart is made by the acts of Christian virtues, and
particularly by those of Faith, Hope, and Charity, which are the first in
dignity, and contain all the rest. That which St. Cyprian Epist. ad Don.
affirms of the Sacrament of Baptism is verified in all the others, but more
especially in that of the Holy Eucharist: That we draw from thence more grace
according to the greatness and capacity of the Faith we bring with us to
receive: One needs no more then ardently to desire it, and open his heart to
God, and give him room to fill it. Quantum illic fidei capacis afferimus,
tantum gratiae inundantis haurimus; nostrum tantum sitiat pectus and pateat.

Where it is to be observed, that this Holy Father in these excellent words
points at the three Virtues, we have already spoke of. He says, that with this
strong Faith it is necessary that we desire the grace of God, and open our
hearts to receive it. Now we desire by Hope; and we open our hearts by Charity
and the love of God.

Moreover let us add as the proper and peculiar reason in the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, that it is a Celestial Banquet wherein we receive the nourishment of
our Souls. Now who is there, but he knows, that Meat, except it be eaten with a
good appetite, and with a stomach well disposed to digest the food by its
natural heat, and change it into its own substance, does little good? This is
yet more certain in Spiritual nutriment, which requires not either less action
or cooperation and concurrence of our Soul on our side, to benefit it as we
ought. And without question we need not seek for any other causes of the small
advantage we draw from our Communions, although otherwise we receive in the State
of Grace, then the coldness and indevotion with which we perform this duty;
which stops the hands of Jesus Christ, and hinders him from imparting his
favors to those, who receive him with so much indifference, and so unconcerned.

If this reason were not sufficiently efficacious, I should add also, (without
leaving the comparison of a Feast) that we ought indeed to come clothed with
the Nuptial Garment (that is with Sanctifying Grace) to this Sacred Banquet of
Holy Communion; but this ought not to satisfy or be enough for those, who
desire to Communicate with the advantage, they are capable to receive from
thence: for to let this suffice, would be, as if a man being invited to a Feast
by a Person of Quality, should content himself to go thither well clothed, and
in his best Apparel; but when he comes, should refuse to discourse with him, or
speak one word.

What should we say of such an action as this? Had we not just cause to judge
that this Person had but little regard or esteem for him whose invited Guest he
was? and that he contemned or at least slighted his friendship, and the
particular favors, which he might receive at his hands? and yet this is what
you your self are guilty of, Theotime, in respect of Jesus Christ, when you
Communicate unconcerned, carelessly, with tepidity and indevotion.

Remember, I beseech you, that it is not enough to please our Lord to receive
him in this manner, and that you loose innumerable favors by this your so
signally cold reception of him.

Consider how ill this corresponds with that pressing and ardent love, with
which he invites you to this Feast, and with that earnest desire he has to
receive you there, saying to you now, what formerly he did to his Disciples.
Luc. 22.15. I have most earnestly desired to eat this Passover with you.

Thus when he invites a Soul unto him, he does not only require, that she
appear in his presence, but he expects, that she should make him to hear and
understand her voice. Come, says he, Cant. 2.14. my dear and well beloved Soul,
show me thy face, let me hear thy voice; for thy voice is sweet and charming,
as thy countenance is beautiful and comely. By the face, he gives us to
understand the beauty of the Soul, which consists in Sanctifying grace, and the
Ornaments of the Virtues; and by the Voice he points at the acts of these same
Virtues, which make a confort and harmony most pleasing and agreeable in the
sight of God.

ARTICLE III. The practice of the Act of Faith for the Communion.
LEt us now come to the practice of these excellent Virtues, and see, how they
must be employed in the Holy Communion.

To perform them right, we must be well instructed, and fully convinced of the
truths of this divine Mystery, which we have explained above.

Amongst these verities there are three, upon which one may practice with much
benefit the acts of Faith, viz.

1. The real presence of the Son of the God in the Eucharist. 2. The Wonders
which God works in this Holy Mystery. 3. The effects which he produces in his
Soul who worthily receives.
Exercise your Faith upon these three points, when you communicate; but see
that they be acts of a steadfast and fervent faith; and for the easier
performance of them, ponder and detain your self upon the two first, before
Communion; and entertain your thoughts upon the third, which are the effects
after Communion, in the following manner.

An Act of Faith upon the real presence of Jesus Christ, in the Blessed
Sacrament.
MY Savior Jesus Christ, I firmly believe, and from the bottom of my heart I
hold, that thou art truly present in the Sacred Host: I believe that it
contains thy Body and thy precious Blood, accompanied with thy Soul, and thy
Divinity.

I believe that by virtue of the words of Consecration, and in the moment they
are pronounced, the Bread is changed into thy Body, and the Wine into thy Blood.

I believe this truth upon the assurance of thy holy words, and upon the
authority of thy holy Church, which thus teaches me to believe.

I believe it firmly, and freely without any hesitation, renouncing with all my
heart all doubts, which may ever come into my mind concerning this Subject.
Mar. 9.23. Credo Domine, adjuva incredulitatem meam. Yes my God I believe it:
assist my incredulity by thy grace, and augment in my heart thy faith. Luc.
17.5. Domine adauge nobis fidem, believing thus, I adore thee in this blessed
Sacrament, from the bottom of my Soul, and I acknowledge thee for my Lord, and
for my God, as St. Thomas did, Jo. 20.28. Dominus meus, and Deus meus.

Upon the Wonders which occur in the Blessed Sacrament.
MY Lord and my God, I acknowledge all the mighty things, which thou have
wrought in this Holy Mystery, grant me, I beseech thee, grace to understand
them, for they far exceed the capacity of my Soul. Psalm. 105.2. Quis loquitur
potentias Domini, auditas fafiet omnes lauds ejus? Who is he, O my God, who
can recount thy wonders, and duly proclaim thy praises?

I know by faith, and I acknowledge, that thou art really in the Sacred Host,
without departing from Heaven, where thou art seated on the right hand of thy
Eternal Father.

That thou art in innumerable places in the same instant, and in as many, as
there are Consecrated Hosts.

That the substance of Bread and Wine is changed into that of thy body and thy
blood.

That of Bread and Wine there remains only the accidents, which subsist without
their substance, which supported them before; and that now thou do
miraculously conserve them, as before.

That thy Body is in that Host without taking up any place; and that it is
whole in the whole Host, and whole in every part thereof.

That it is as whole and entire under the least part, as under the greatest
Host.

That when the Host is broken, thy body is not divided, but that it remains
entire in each part of the Consecrated Host.

That when the Host is consummated, thy Body is not consumed, but only ceases
to be where it was before.

That the good and bad equally receive thee as to the reality; but unequally
only as to the effect, the one finding life therein, the other death.

O my Savior, I acknowledge all these great truths: I firmly believe all these
wonders; I adore thy power, which has wrought them: I praise thy infinite
goodness, that was pleased to prepare them for me; and I say from the bottom of
my heart with David. Psalm. 9. Confitebor tibi Domini in toto Cord meo: Narrabo
omnia mirabilia tua. Latabor and exultabo in te: psallam nomini tuo, altissime.
My God I will praise thee with my whole Heart, and I will recount all thy
admirable works: I will rejoice in thee, and I will bless thy holy name.

I acknowledge that thou have really fullfilled in this mystery the Prophecy of
David, Psa. 110.4. wherein he said, that as an especial effect of thy mercy,
thou have made an abridgment and memorial of thy wonders in bestowing food
upon those, who fear thee.

In this faith, and with this acknowledgment, I make bold to approach at
present to this adorable banquet, where thou bestowest upon me this divine
food, of thy Body and Blood, that thou may fill me with thy self and thy
divine Spirit. O Jesus! grant that I may approach unto thee with the sense of
the respect and humility which is due to thy infinite Majesty: who am I, O my
God, that thou should work such great wonders for my sake? vouchsafe at least
that I be not unworthy of them; and that at present I may receive thee with a
pure heart, with a clear conscience, and with a sincere and true faith. Pardon
me my Sins which have rendered me most unworthy to approach unto thee. I detest
them from the bottom of my heart, because, O my God, they are displeasing to
thee: I here renounce them for the future, and I promise to be faithful to
thee. Proceed then, my soul, raise thy self up to go and receive thy God: and
to receive at his hands all the favors, which he has prepared for thee in
this divine Sacrament.

Convertere anima mea Psa. 114.7. in requiem tuam, quia Dominus been fecit tibi.

Upon the Effects which the Holy Eucharist is capable to produce in the Soul.
IF you have yet time before Communion, acknowledge in the presence of God the
admirable effects which it produces: desire earnestly to be partaker of them;
and say from the bottom of your heart as follows.

I acknowledge, O Savior of Souls, the wonderful effects which thou workest
in those who worthyly receive thee. The many and singular tokens of thy love
thou bestowest upon them, and the favors thou communicatest unto them.

I acknowledge that thou have made thy self my meat to fill my Soul with so
divine repast: thou conservest in us the life of thy grace; thou make us
increase more and more therein; thou strengthenest us in our weakness: thou
curest our infirmities; thou preservest us from Sin; thou give us strength to
persevere in thy grace, and to walk so far and so secure amidst the dangers of
this mortal, till we come to immortal and everlasting life. O my God! Blessed
be thy holy name for these so many favors thou have bestowed upon us. Make me
worthy to partake of all thy mercies in this holy Communion.

Approach to the Communion with this faith, saying with the infirm woman in the
Gospel. Mat. 9.21. If I shall but touch the hem of his Garment I shall be
cured.

After Communion, withdrawing your self from the Holy Table into some
convenient place, adore profoundly our Lord, who has vouchsafed to come and
dwell within you; and considering attentively the great favors, which he has
bestowed upon you by his divine presence, pronounce from your heart those
excellent words of S. David, Psalm. 106.8.9. Confiteantur Domino misericordiae
ejus, and mirabilia ejus filiis hominum; quia satiavit animam inanem, and
animam esurientem satiavit bonis. Let the divine mercy proclaim and praise him
every where, and let his wonders be made known to the whole world, because he
has fully satisfied a dry, and filled an empty Soul, and has replenished her
with blessings of all sorts. O my God, be thou blessed for so many favors,
which thou have now bestowed upon me, and for all the blessings with which thou
have enriched me, after the great want and miseries which I endured, when by my
pleasures and my passions I had departed from thee. Was not I most miserable
and blind to seek in these vain pleasures, repose and happiness, which are not
to be found but in thee alone. I removed my self a far distance from thee to
ruin my self for ever; but thy goodness was such, that it withdrew me from the
precipice whether I was running to throw my self headlong down; enlightening me
with thy rays, and calling me back unto thee by thy grace. Thou have pardoned
me all my Sins, and for the accomplishment of all these favors, thou gave
thy self present with me, to the end I may dwell with thee. O my God! be thou
blessed for all these infinite mercies, and let all the Saints supply my
defects, and praise thee in my stead. Confiteantur tibi Domine omnia opera tua;
and Sancti tui benedicant tibi. Ps. 144.10.

Stir up your Soul, that is your self, to praise God for all the benefits
which he has at present conferred upon you, with those grateful sentiments of
the same Prophet, Psalm. 102. Benedic anima mea Domino. Considering them
attentively one after another.

O my Soul bless our Lord, and let all that is within me praise and magnify his
holy name.

Bless our Lord, and never be unmindfull of the favors, which he even now has
done thee.

Our Lord, I say, who has pardoned all thy offenses: and has cured all thy
Infirmities.

Who has preserved thee from death, and who has Crowned thee with the effects
of his bounty.

He has replenished thee with all the blessings which thou could wish:
considering all these favors now thou shall mend thy Life; and renewing thy
forces, grow young like an Eagle in the service of thy God.

After you have Pondered well upon these Sacred words, and have raised up in
your self all the motions of gratitude and acknowledgment to God for the many
and great favors he has done you, you shall conclude with a strong resolution
to renew your self, that is to say, totally to change your life, to amend your
faults, to dedicate your self from henceforth entirely to the Service of God.

You shall demand grace at his hands, and to this effect you shall beg of him,
a steady and constant Faith, whose acts you have endeavored to practice in
this Communion: You shall beseech him that he will vouchsafe to augment it, not
only in respect of this Holy Mystery, but also in regard of all the other
Christian Verities, and Principles of Eternal Life: to the end that by this
Faith you may surmount all the difficulties and impediments you shall meet with
in your Journey thither: for it is most certain that those, who have this great
Virtue strongly imprinted in their Soul overcome all, whatsoever difficulties
occurr in the way of Salvation, as St. Paul has clearly shown in his Epistle
to the Hebrews, Chap. 11.33. Per fidem vicerunt regna, operati sunt justitiam,
adepti sunt repromissiones. By Faith they conquered Kingdoms, they have done
Justice, they have obtained promises. But all this is to be understood of an
ardent faith, enlivened with the flames of Charity: as he himself elsewhere
declares. Gal. 5.6. Faith that works by Charity.

Read, I entreat you, the advice, which hereafter shall be given you in the
Seventh Article of the Third Chapter.

CHAP. II. Of Hope, the second disposition for Communion.
HAving not as yet said any thing of this Virtue, farther then what concerned
the Examen upon the First Commandment, where I related the Sins, which are
opposite unto it, I shall treat of it in this place so far, as may be necessary
to make it well known to all those, who are not yet sufficiently instructed in
it.

ARTICLE I. What is Hope?
IT is the Second of the three Theological Virtues, so called, because they
respect God not only as their motive and their end, (as all other Christian
Virtues do) but also as their first and principal object.

To expect from the hand of God, the things he has promised us, and which he
has prepared for his Servants, is the proper effect of this Virtue; wherefore
it is defined a certain expectation, of Eternal bliss, and of the means to
attain unto it.

This expectation is the proper act of this Virtue, Hope; which is a certain
judgment which we form, that God will be pleased to grant us Everlasting Life,
if we correspond with his mercies and be Faithful in the Dispensations he has
commended to us; for as St. Bernard observes very well; in Psalm. 90. Sermon. 10.
Faith tells us that there are great rewards prepared for Gods Faithful
Servants: Hope says, that these are reserved for me. Charity is the third, and
says, I run that I may reach to them, and enjoy them.

It is of this expectation, which the Prophet speaks, Thren. 3.24. Our Lord is
my portion, therefore I will expect him. And St. Paul, Romans 5.2. when he
assures us, that he glories in the hope of the glory, or happiness of the
Children of God; and when he exhorts all Christians to a good Life, Expecting,
says he, Tit. 2.13. the blessed hope and coming of the glory of our great God,
and Savior Jesus Christ.

This hope is certain and secure, in as much as it is built upon Gods promise,
who can never fail of his word, having both a will and a power to perform,
whatsoever he is pleased to promise; This made the same Apostle affirm, 2. Tim.
1.12. that he knew very well in whom he had put his trust, and that he was
altogether assured of the power he had in effect to fulfill his promise.

But whereas these divine promises are only conditional, and made only to such,
who are his Faithful Servants, our hope ought also always to suppose this
condition of our Fidelity, and thus the certainty ought always to be
accompanied with a holy distrust or disconfidence in our selves, which makes us
work our Salvation with fear and trembling, and as St. Peter has it, 2. Pet.
1.10. Secure our Vocation and Election by good works.

ARTICLE. II. Of the good which we expect by Hope.
TWo goods there are we expect, Grace, and Glory; this is the end, which is
prepared for us, and that is the means, whereby to obtain that end; God
comporting himself, if I may say so, in this our great concern, like a good
equally and a wise Father, whose goodness obliges him to prepare an Inheritance
for his Children, and whose Wisdom finds out means, whereby they may come to
the possession of it.

Glory shall be our supreme and final happiness, wherein our Soul shall see God
as he is in himself face to face, and thence conceive so entire and perfect a
love of him, that every the least vacancy of the Soul shall be filled with an
incomprehensible joy; and an happiness, that shall not receive either the least
alteration or any end.

Even our body shall have its share in this happiness and glory: For after the
Resurrection the glorious splendors of the blessed Soul, united to the body,
shall by the reflection of her rays render it not only immortal, but discharge
it also from all possibility of change, endowing it with the four qualities,
which St. Paul, 1. Cor. 15. (in answer to that question v. 35. how do the dead
rise again? and with what kind of body shall they come?) has discovered to us,
Impassibility v. 42. Clarity 43. Agility ibid. Subtility 44. The first is a
blessed incorruption, which shall exempt us, and render us incapable of all
either pain or grief; The second a Glory, whereby it shall become so bright, as
not only to vye with, but to surpass the Sun; The third is an active Power or
strength by which it shall pass in an Instant at the beck of her will,
wheresoever she pleases, without the least trouble; and by the fourth, as a
Spirit, it shall penetrate and pass through the most solid body without any
impediment or let.

Behold what we expect after this life both for our Soul and bodies.

And as to what concerns this present life, we expect from the hands of God the
means, whereby we may obtain this so happy end: forasmuch as of our selves, and
by all our natural endeavors, though never so great, left to our selves, we
are not able to arrive unto it.

This end inasmuch as it is a supernatural good, requires in our Soul a
disposition of the same nature with it; and this is Sanctifying Grace, the seed
of Glory, and the precious pledge of that Eternal Inheritance, as the Apostle
has it, speaking thus to the Ephesians. c. 1.13. You are signed with the holy
Spirit of promise, which is the pledge of our Inheritance.

This Grace is a Supernatural quality infused by God into our Soul at the
instant he admits us into his freindship; a quality which remits the Sin,
Sanctifies the Soul, embellishes, and renders her acceptable to God, and gives
her a certain right to eternal glory: That Justified by his grace we may be
heirs according to hope of Everlasting Life. Tit. 3.7.

Now since this grace, this disposition to glory, is also Supernatural, it is
necessary we have the assistance of some powerful hand to obtain it, and this
can be no other then the hand of God, as there is none but God alone, who can
endow the Soul with Sanctifying Grace.

This assistance is also called grace, because it is graciously, and out of
Gods pure mercy, bestowed upon us; but it is called actual, as the other is
styled habitual grace, because it is transient only, not permanent as
Sanctifying grace, the habit is; it is that action by which God moves the
powers of our Soul, our understanding and will; disposing her to her
justification; and this by clearing her understanding, and letting her see,
what chiefly concerns her, by good thoughts, which he bestows upon her; and
moving her will to embrace that good she sees so much imports her, by the holy
affections, which he vouchsafes to give her.

These helps have three effects in us. For first, they awake our Soul by
interior illuminations, and religious motions oblige her to look seriously
after her Salvation.

2ly. Once she is thus moved, it assists her in the due performance of that
good, which is proposed unto her, and gives her strength to raise her self up
to God by acts of Faith, Hope, Contrition, and the love of God; all which
dispose her to receive at the same time the remission of her Sins and
justifying Grace.

3ly. As soon as she has received this grace, these helps afford her still more
strength to stand fast and conserve her self amongst the throng of temptations,
and to persever constant even to the end by her flight from evil, and the
frequent exercise of good and pious works.

Hence proceed the different names, by which we call this actual grace: for
the first we call Exciting, Operating or Preventing grace: the 2d. Assisting or
Cooperating grace, the 3d the grace of Perseverance. God has bestowed upon us
all these graces for our Salvation: But we are to observe that they have not
always their full and entire effect upon the will; for she being only moved and
pressed, and not necessitated by the graces, may either resist or not regard
them, according as the Council of Trent, sess. 6. c. 5. remarks: nay very
often does resist; for we are advised in holy writ, Psalm. 94.9. not to harden
our hearts, and yet however we do harden them; for frequently we do not hearken
to the voice of God, but resist his holy spirit, as St. Stephen complains, Act.
7.51. that the Jews did.

This advertisement may serve in this place to teach us an important truth,
that it is not enough to expect from the hands of God the means, whereby we may
compass our Salvation; but that we ought to take great care to be faithful to
his dispensations, and carefully cooperate with his grace, and also that we
ought daily to beg of him, that he will vouchsafe to continue and replenish
our hearts therewith; lest by our Sins we render our selves unworthy of them.

ARTICLE III. That it is necessary to distinguish well betwixt True and False,
Good and Bad Hope.
THis distinction is of the highest importance; for as much as the greatest
part of the world deceive themselves therein, taking false for true, and
embracing an evil and sinful, instead of a good and virtuous Hope; and from
this mistake proceeds the damnation of innumerable Christians. There is no one
but hopes to be saved, but because their hopes are ill grounded, and they hope
other wise then they ought, they lull themselves asleep in this foolish hope,
and approaching to their end, they find themselves upon the brink of a
precipice, when they imagined they were arrived into the port, and stood upon
firm land.

Such is their Hope, who expect Salvation, notwithstanding they do not use the
means to obtain it; and who living ill hope to die well: now how many are there
of these? and what numbers are herein deceived?

Such is their hope, who believe indeed that it is necessary for Salvation to
live a good and virtuous life; but still defer their conversion, thinking that
God will allways expect them, as hitherto he has done, with patience to
repentance, notwithstanding their wicked course of life, and the perpetual
abuses, which they never cease to offer to his graces.

Such is their hope, who Sin upon account of the confidence they have of
Pardon: and who are wont to say, when they have offended, that Gods mercy is
great, and that he will forget their Sins.

Such is their hope, who imagine they shall be converted and return to God,
whensoere they please: or that his grace will be allways in their power; or
that, let them do what they will, it will never forsake them.

Such is their hope, who wilfully and by some signal negligence of theirs
expose themselves to the immediate occasions of Sin, in hopes that God will
preserve them.

Such is the hope of many cold and negligent, though otherwise just people, who
relying upon a certain confidence of working their Salvation without much
trouble, suffer themselves to sleep, frequenting remissly or seldom the means,
which God has been pleased to grant us, as most proper to conserve and
increase in us his Grace; such as are Prayer, the Sacraments, and good Works.

All these hopes are false and deceitful; and like false lights lead them into
a precipice, instead of conducting them into the Port, their Salvation.

A man Endowed with Hope, which is good and true, expects, not only from the
hand of God the performances of his promise, but himself also expects that this
shall be done in the manner God has promised: He hopes to be partaker of the
goods of Glory, but not except he serve him with fidelity, as he has promised
those, who shall serve him, who shall be faithful in complying with the graces
dispensed unto him, and shall persevere therein, unto the end.

He expects in this life the goods of Grace, thereby to obtain that of glory;
but endeavors at the same time not to put any obstacle or let on his side to
the workings of it: He demands them with much fervor and humility, he has a
care to comply sincerely with them. If he be in sin, he does Penance without
delay; but never offends in hopes of doing Penance, and (as St. Gregory
advises) he is fearful to commit a sin, which he does not know whether or no
he shall ever be sufficiently able to deplore.

In a word a man who truly hopes, walks always in the midst between confidence
and fear: he trusts in God, and mistrusts himself. He hopes that God will not
reject him, but he fears lest himself should forsake his God: he hopes that God
will assist him; but fears lest himself prove unfaithful or defective in his
duty. And thus between this confidence and fear humbling himself in the
presence of God, he prays, he labors, endeavoring to secure his Salvation on
the one side by flying from Sin, and all the occasions of it, and on the other
by a due performance of good works.

In short, Hope consists in, or is at least attended with, these four acts.

1. A confidence to obtain from the divine goodness Everlasting life, with all
the graces necessary to acquire it.

2. A vehement desire of Salvation: for the expectation, which we have, of any
great good, is apt to raise in us an ardent and great desire of it.

3. A fear to lose it by our fault, or any infidelity of ours; a fear which
ought not to produce any disquiet in the Soul, but the hatred of sin, which
only can make us lose it.

4. A firm, and that an efficacious resolution to labor for Salvation, a
Resolution, which makes one act, and employ the means necessary to obtain that
end, as is abovesaid.

ARTICLE IV. Of the great blessings which Hope derives upon us.
WHen this great Virtue is well imprinted in a Soul, it there produces
wonderful Effects.

First, It makes her love and desire Heaven, her dear Country, her native Soil:
it makes her sigh after her Eternal happyness; it makes her fear, lest she be
frustrated of it by her fault, and lose her self among the dangers of this
Mortal Life, so full of Rocks whereon Salvation so often suffers Shipwreck.

Secondly, It makes her love the divine goodness, which has prepared so great
blessings for her, and has put into her hands the means to acquire them.

Thirdly, It makes her contemn this present life: it disengageth her from the
love of these goods, and pleasures, making her look upon them, as transitory
things, which pass like a shadow, and yet which are not obtained but with much
trouble, nor possessed without solicitude, nor lost without great grief.

It is for this reason that the just Man accounts himself in this life no
otherwise then as a Pilgrim or Traveller upon his way to his Native soil,
knowing well, as St. Paul, Heb. 13.14. says, that here we have no permanent
City, or abode, but we seek that which is to come, after this life. And as it
would be a folly in a Traveller to set his affections upon an however gallant
or stately Inn, and desire to make it his abode; so he, whose soul is full of
the hopes of Heaven, accounts it madness to apply his mind, to the goods of the
earth, and in these trifles lose his precious time, and let slip the occasion
of aiming at Heaven.

And St. Augustine observes excellently well, that God by his Wisdom has
mingled afflictions and bitterness with all the even most innocent goods of
this life, so to disengage us from the affection to them, in Psalm. 40. Docetur
amare meliora per amaritudinem inferiorum: ne viator tendens ad patriam,
stabulum amet pro domo sua: Lest (says he) Man, who is a Traveller upon his way
to Heaven, taking his pleasure in this Life, should love his Inn better then
his own House.

4. This Hope makes the Just Man labor for his Salvation, and becoming daily
better and better render himself worthy of his heavenly vocation, (as St. John
says, 1 Jo. 3.3.) Every one who has this hope in God does Sanctify himself,
as God is holy. This hope gives him strength to conquer all difficulties; and
wings to fly in the way of Gods commandments, as the Prophet Isay 40.31.
speaks, They who hope in God (says he) shall change their strength, that is,
receive a new force; they shall have wings as an Angel: they shall run with
ease, they shall travel without failing by the way.

5ly. This same Hope encourages us in temptations; it gives us strength to
encounter them. For what greater encouragement can there be in these occasions,
then to know that God is with us: that he assists us in the fight, and gives us
strength to overcome; and that he has prepared an eternal reward for those
that conquer. He whose heart is replenished with Hope, does he not say with
David whenever he is tempted? Ps. 22.4. O my God I will not be afraid of any
harm being thou art with me, Ps. 26.1. Our Lord is my light and my Salvation,
whom should I fear? v. 3. If war shall be raised against me I will hope in him,
Ps. 7.1. O Lord I hope in thee, save me, and deliver me from all my
persecutors. For this reason St. Paul 1. These. 5.8. calls hope the Helmet of
Christians. Take says he, for thy helmet the hope of Salvation: For as a
head-peice, it preserves us from the blows of the enemy, and the mortal wounds
which he endeavors to give us.

In fine Hope guards us excellently well, and is of infinite use in
afflictions, of which this mortal life is full. Herein it is that we find our
refuge, our comfort, and our strength: when we consider with attention that
these miseries cannot last always, they will have an end, and will be followed
with an eternal joy, if we suffer them with patience; as it is but fit and
just we should. And when we ponder well upon those excellent words of St. Paul,
2. Cor 4.17. wherein he assures us, That the momentary and light afflictions,
which we at present endure, work exceedingly above measure a weight of
unconceivable glory and happiness which shall never end.

It is then, when after the example of this glorious Apostle, we shall rejoice
and esteem our selves happy in our afflictions, being assured of this truth
wherein he affirms. Romans 5.3. that Affliction causes Patience, Patience trys
our strength; this trial confirms our Hopes, and Hope will never confound us,
so as to permit our expectations to be frustrate. Wherefore the same Apostle
says Heb. 6.19. That this holy hope is to Christians, that which the anchor is
to a Ship, which keeps it secure and steady amidst the tempestuous waves, and
preserves it against the violence of the winds.

O holy Virtue, what blessings by thy means accrue unto us, did we but fall
into the account and know them! Endeavor, Theotime, to make thy self master in
an happy hour of this great virtue, and to practice it with advantage to thy
Soul; and to this effect peruse carefully and with attention this little we
shall say upon this Subject.

ARTICLE V. That the Blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist is of great use to
fortify and augment Hope, the Virtue in us.
GOD endowed us with this Virtue, when first he justified us in Baptism, where
we received Sanctifying Grace, with the gifts of Faith, Hope, and Charity, and
other Christian Virtues.

It is increased, I confess, together with the other Virtues, by the frequent
acts which we elicite, and by good works, which we perform in the State of
Grace: but it is also certain, that it receives much strength and wonderful
growth by the most Blessed Sacrament of the Eucharist; which may easily be
evinced from the two things, which as is above said are the object of Hope,
viz. Grace in this Life, and in the next the Glory, as well of Body as of Soul.

As for Glory, there is not any thing that confirms us more in the Hope of it
then this Divine Sacrament, wherein we receive the very Person himself, the
possession of whom compleats all our glory and our happiness; for what greater
security can we have, that we shall one day enjoy God himself, then by this
bounty he has showed in communicating himself unto us in this life? Could he
afford us a more secure pledge then he himself is? to which he has also
vouchsafed to add the assurance of his word, saying Jo. 6.58. that he who
eats this bread shall live for ever.

And for the glory of the body, it is no less confirmed unto us by this
Sacrament: being the Son of God has told us, Ibid 56. that he who eats his
body, and drinks his blood, shall have life Everlasting, and that he will
raise him again at the last day. And in effect the Fathers of the Church have
often proved the Resurrection from the holy Eucharist: and they have held that
the life-giving flesh of Jesus Christ, as they have frequently called it, has
a particular virtue to raise from death to life those bodies it shall touch,
and conserve them to immortality, much more efficaciously then the bones of
Elizeus had virtue by their touch to raise a dead man to life.

This truth is no less certain in respect of grace. For if we consider
habitual or Sanctifying grace, this divine Sacrament is a powerful means to
conserve it; as also to increase it in the Soul in an high degree, as often as
we shall worthyly receive it. And as for actual graces, which are, as we said,
so many helps, illuminations, good and pious motions, which the divine goodness
has bestowed upon us for the conservation of his grace, and with which he
inspires us, that we may avoid evil and employ our selves totally in good; so
many protections, which he affords us in the time, when our Salvation is in
danger: it is questionless to this Sacrament that we owe the greatest part
thereof; as we clearly made out, Part 1. Chap. 3. Art. 3.

The reason is evident; because this Sacrament containing, as it really and
truly does, Jesus Christ, who is the Author and source of all Blessings; it
cannot be but that it must needs communicate them in abundance to those, who
worthily receive it. If by the other Sacraments we are enriched with so many
Graces by the only virtue which the Son of God has granted to them; how many
more may we in reason expect from this, where the same Son of God is present
not only by some communication of his virtue, but by himself in Person?

God once gave Manna to the Israelites, and he sustained them therewith for the
full space of forty years, the time which their Pilgrimage toward the land of
Promise endured in the Desert. This Manna fell every day early in the Morning
together, as the Scripture remarks, Numb. 11.9. with the Dew from Heaven, which
bedewed the whole Camp of Israel. And with how much more reason may we affirm,
that none ever received this Celestial Manna, the Holy Eucharist, (of which
that is only a Type or Figure) in the happy morning before the World has
seized his thoughts, but he sinds his Soul replenished with abundance of
Graces, and Divine Blessings.

For certainly if this Heavenly bread is showred upon us for the nourishment of
our needy and hungry Souls; without question it works the same in her, which
wholesome food does in a sound or healthy Body. Now Corporal nutriment has
these four effects: It conserves; it increases; it strengthens; and it repairs
the Body. It is necessary therefore that this Spiritual food have the same
Operations in our Souls, if well disposed; as we have already made out in the
First part of this Treatise, Chap. 3. Art. 3.

It was a Simbole of this truth, that the Prophet Elias, 3. Reg. 19. flying the
Persecution of Achab received from the hand of an Angel a Loaf of Bread, which
maintained him through his whole Journey; and the Scripture affirms v. 8. that
having eaten that bread, he received such strength, that without any further
sustenance he traveled full forty days, even to the Mountain Horeb, which is
interpreted the sight of God.

ARTICLE VI. That the practice of Hope is a good and great disposition to the
Holy Communion.
FRom the precedent we infer this truth: For if the Blessed Sacrament augment
in us the Virtue of Hope, it follows of necessity that to Communicate well we
must beforehand exercise the acts of, and have our hearts replenished with, the
Virtue of Hope: as in the same manner, because heat is natural to Fire, and
Fire dispenses not its effects but to the Subject which is already hot, it is
necessary that the same heat should be introduced into that matter, where one
would have the Fire to act: for it is most certain, that the natural qualities
of any thing whatsoever, serve as dispositions to give both its being and its
action. Since therefore the Holy Eucharist is a Sacrament, which so powerfully
revives our Hope, as we have already proved, it follows of necessity that to
receive this Sacrament with that advantage it is capable to afford, it is
necessarily required that we be full of this Virtue, and stir up our selves
the most we can unto it, when we approach to this Holy Table.

And truly if we consider the particular acts of which this Virtue seems, as it
were, to be composed, we shall find, that they are those, which make up the
most usual dispositions to Communion: we have marked them out above in the
Third Article: An expectation of Eternal Life; a desire to obtain it; a fear to
loose it by any Sin; a resolution effectually to labor for it. All these are
the most usual acts in which we ought to employ our selves before and after
Communion; the practice whereof we are about to instruct you in.

ARTICLE VII. The practice of the acts of Hope for Communion.
THese acts are the four of which we have already spoken, to which it is but
just that we subjoyn sorrow for Sins, which have set us at so great a distance
from the divine grace and from eternal glory: and Prayer by which we beg of
God both the one and the other of these goods, one may reap much fruit from the
practice of them before and after Communion either in the following, or some
better manner.

The practice of Hope before Communion.
ADdressing your Thoughts and the whole intention of your heart to our Lord,
who is present in the Sacred host, acknowledge that he is your only hope, and
that it is from him alone you expect all the goods, both of Grace and Glory.

O Jesus my Savior and my God, I adore thee in this Sacred host, where thou
are present, to the end that thou may be to me a Jesus and a Savior. Thou
art my only hope, it is from thee alone I expect all my happiness whether in
this life or the next, saying with David, ^s. 38.8. after he had considered the
vanities of the world, and what a nothing man himself is without thee; And now
in what, or in whom, can I put my trust, but in thee O Lord? thou art my help
and all I can rely on. and nunc quae est expectatio mea? nonne Dominus? and
Substantia mea apud te est, or Ps. 70.5. O Lord in whom I have placed my
confidence from my youth. Thou art my refuge in this, and my Salvation in the
other Life. I hope that thou will by thy grace, conduct me safe in this, and
replenish me with glory in the next. What blessings may not I expect from thy
hands in this blessed state; since thy bounty has vouchsafed so liberally to
bestow thy self upon me in this unhappy vale of miseries and tears? thou give
me hopes I shall possess thee one day unveiled, and see thee face to face;
since thou have been so good, as ever now to give thy self unto me though veiled
in the blessed Sacrament.

O inestimable pledge of my future felicity; when shall that happy hour arrive
that I shall see thee face to face, and enjoy thee as thou art in thy self,
with all the blessings thou have prepared for those that serve thee? O my God,
how lovely are those Mansions where thou art clearly seen! my Soul longs to
inhabit there, sighs after them, and even faints away in those desires. My
heart and my very flesh leap for joy in the hopes I shall once possess the
living God.

I am fixed and constant in my hope, and I know, that there is not any thing
except my Sins, which can ever frustrate my desires. Wherefore I here detest
them all from the bottom of my heart. Prostrate in thy presence, O my God, with
a contrite and humble heart I beg pardon of them. And for the future I am fully
resolved to fly Sin and the occasions of it, more then from the danger of
death, or death it self.

It is in this pious confidence and hope, that I approach at present to this
holy table of Communion, there to receive thee hidden under the Sacramental
species, and to taste, as by advance, of these in finite goods, which thou have
prepared for me in everlasting life, where I shall be so happy as to see thee
not only as now obscurely either in thy wonderful effects, or in the cloud of
faith, but clearly and distinctly, as thou art in thy self. O my God exclude me
not from this holy table, which thou have prepared for me in this mortal life,
to the end I may deserve to be admitted to that other, which thou have
furnished in everlasting life to feast thy faithful Servants.

It is true, I confess, my Sins have made me unworthy of either of them: yet I
hope in thy Mercy, which has been pleased to pardon them, and which will yet
more confirm that pardon, confirming me in the resolution I have conceived to
be faithful to thee. Come then, O Divine Savior, enter and take possession of
me; speak to my Soul a word of comfort. Psa. 34.3. Dic animae meae salus tua
ego sum, tell her that thou art her strength, her Salvation, and her Sovereign
good. Tell her, as once thou did Abraham, Genesis 15.1. Fear not, I am thy
Protector, amidst the greatest dangers of this Life, I will secure thee: I am
thy exceeding great Reward, an infinite and incomprehensible recompense in the
next; grant I beseech thee, that I may rightly understand these high Mysteries,
these important truths; and that this may be the fruit of the Communion, which
I am about to receive.

When you have pondered well upon these holy thoughts, approach to the Sacred
Table, full with desire to take possession of and enjoy your God; and
replenished with hope to receive in this Communion an abundant plenty of Graces
to conserve him in you, and you in him.

After Communion.
AS soon as you are retired from the Holy Table, prostrate in heart before him,
adore with all humility our Lord, whom you have received: return him
innumerable thanks for the infinite favor he has done in coming to you; and
consequent to this you shall insist upon the practice of these three acts of
the Virtue of Hope.

An earnest desire of Eternal Salvation.

A strong resolution to labor that you may attain unto it.

Prayer to demand at the hands of God grace, and the means to obtain it.

Adoration. First then addressing your thought to our Lord, whom you have
received, represent to your self how you possess him the very same, whose sight
causes all that bliss which makes the Angels and Saints in Heaven blessed,
and all the Celestial Spirits desire and esteem themselves happy to behold him.
1. Pet. 1.12. In quem desiderant Angeli prospicere; in this belief speak to
him, and let your heart pronounce as follows.

I Adore thee O Infinite greatness, O Divine Majesty, who fillest both Heaven
and Earth, and art adored in Heaven by all the Blessed Spirits, Angels, and
Saints, who incessantly praise and cry out before thee, Esai. 6.3. Sanctus,
Sanctus, sanctus, Dominus Deus Sabbath: how is it possible, O my God, that thou
should stoop so low, as to descend unto me, and to enclose thy self within
me? 2. Par. 6.18. Is it credible, O All-mighty God, that thou would vouchsafe
to dwell amongst men upon the Earth? If the Heavens, and Heavens of Heavens do
not contain thee; how much less this habitation, which I have prepared for
thee? But thy goodness, O great God, knows full well how to humble it self,
when it pleases thee. Thou know well how to conceal the amazing splendors of
thy glory, and by condescending to our weak capacity to communicate thy self
more freely to us. This thou did begin to do in thy adorable Incarnation, in
which thou made thy self like unto us, to attract our love: And this method
thou hold on in this Mystery, where thou bestowest thy self upon us for our
food and nourishment, that thou may more closely unite thy self unto us, and
make us aspire to that Celestial Banquet, which thou have made for all the
Blessed in Heaven, who glut themselves without loathing, and are perpetually
satiated with, and yet always desire thy Divine presence.

O my God, grant me grace, that I may daily more and more aspire to, and long
after this eternal banquet, that the desire to enjoy it, may make me slight all
the goods and pleasures of this mortal life, and labor continually to render
my self worthy of it, and happily at last to arrive unto it.

This is my resolution, which at present I make before thee; I resolve to
renounce all whatsoever my irregular affections, and may too much incline me to
the vain and deceitful goods or possessions of this life. I know they are apt
to endanger and make me loose everlasting happyness; and for this reason I will
discharge my heart of them, that I may love nothing but thee alone, and place
my whole trust in thee, as David did Ps. 72.28. It is good for me to cleave to
God, and to put my hope in our Lord.

I firmly resolve to watch over all my actions, and fly from Sin, and avoid
whatsoever may displease thee. And as the same Psalmist expresses himself, Ps.
17.24. I will be by his grace immaculate in his sight, and will observe to keep
my self from all iniquity. I will labor to work my Salvation by keeping thy
holy commandments. And I protest before thee, O my God; and I hope I shall be
faithful to thee, Ps. 118.106. I have Sworn and determined with my self to
keep the Judgments, which thou have formed, and manifested to me of thy justice.

But I am not able to perform this resolution without the assistance of thy
grace, wherefore I most humbly demand it of thee: O Jesus save me, ibid. 35.
Conduct me through all the ways of thy Commandments, which I now enter upon and
Embrace with all my heart, Incline my heart and make me love thy divine truths,
which thou have so abundantly attested, and not to covetousness or the
immoderate desire of the goods of this world. Divert my Eyes that they may not
see, that is, be fixed on Vanity, or the promising, but indeed vain and empty
delights, of this present life: Enliven and strengthen me in thy way, that is,
in the holy path of Virtue and good works. Grant that I may find nothing
amiable, whereon to fix my affection, but thee alone: Assist my weakness that I
may be able to advance toward thee. Cant. 1.4. Draw me to thee, O divine
Jesus! that being so attracted I may run after the odours of thy perfumes, that
is, of thy divine Virtues, by an holy imitation of them, and following thee by
that way, even as far as Heaven, where thou live and raignest for all
Eternity.

CHAP. III. Of Charity the third disposition for the worthy receiving the
blessed Sacrament.
ARTICLE I. How necessary Charity is, and how much is required to Communicate
well, and as we ought.
THis is the third disposition to a good Communion, and no less necessary then
the former two: yea, without it those two great Virtues would not at all
conduce, or dispose the soul better for the worthy receiving of Jesus Christ.
Although your Faith were as great as that of the Apostles, and your hope equalled
that of the Prophets; if you have not Charity, you are not in a condition fit
to entertain him, who is Charity himself, and who cannot dwell with him, who is
without it.

Although I should have so strong a Faith, says St. Paul, 1. Cor. 13.1. so that I
could move Mountains, without Charity it avails nothing, and proceeding he
affirms, v. 3. Although I should distribute all my goods amongst the poor, and
deliver my body to be burnt as the Martyrs have done, if I am void of Charity,
all these great acts of Faith and Hope are of no use. If then these two Virtues
without Charity are useless in respect of Salvation; it is certain that of
themselves without Charity they are not sufficient dispositions to receive into
our breast the author of Salvation.

The Son of God entering into us by the Holy Communion, would willingly find
there a dwelling place prepared and worthy of him; which cannot be except
Charity be there. For as S. Augustine says excellently well. Faith is the
foundation of the house of God in our Soul, by Hope the Walls are raised; but
Charity is the roof and perfection of the work. Domus Dei credendo fundatur,
sperando erigitur, diligendo perficitur.

This is the reason why Solomon, as it is recorded in Holy Writ, building a
Temple to God, was not satisfied to lay the groundwork upon a Mountain, and
build it with stones of great value; but over and above he caused, 3. Reg.
6.20. that part of the Temple, where the Ark of the Testament was to be placed,
to be covered and seeled with the purest Gold. The Holy Ghost teaching us by
this figure, that the house of God ought to be adorned with the most refined
Gold of Charity, without which it cannot be an agreeable or pleasing habitation
for him.

In this divine Sacrament we receive the Bread of Life, whereby, as by
Celestial food, our Soul is nourished, and preserved in the Life of Grace: It
is then required that it find the Soul alive, no dead thing, being capable of
nourishment. Now the life of the Soul is Charity, and (as the beloved Disciple
says, 1. Jo. 3.14.) He that loves not is already dead.

This Celestial bread is the bread of the Children of God; it is made for them,
and it is an horrible Sacrilege for any one to receive it, who is not of that
Number; as we have said above, Part. 1. Chap. 3. Art. 5. Vere panis filiorum
non mittendus canibus. Now what is it that makes men the Children of God? and
what is it by which they are distinguished from Children of the Devil? St.
Augustine, Tract. 5. in Epist. 1. Jo. says, that it is Charity and nothing
else. Dilectio sola discernit inter filios Dei and filios Diaboli. The sign of
the Cross, Baptism, frequenting the Church, and the other marks of Christianity
do not sufficiently distinguish betwixt the one and the other, Charity alone is
the only distinctive sign betwixt them. He who loves God is the Child of God:
he who loves him not is the Child of perdition or of the Devil.

In fine, it is a Heavenly banquet, where our Lord gives himself for our food,
his body for meat, and his blood for drink, and to which he invites us with a
love, great beyond all comparison; but he invites only his friends. Eat, says
he, Cant. 5.2. my friends and drink. Now he is not a friend of Jesus Christ,
who does not love him, who does not comply with his will in all things. If you
love me, says he, Jo. 14.14. keep my Commandments. v. 21. He who knows my
Commandments and observes them, he, and he alone, it is that loves me.

It is his will that every one should come to this Banquet with that
preparation, which such a feast deserves: that we bring with us the Nuptial
garment: if he find here any one so rash and temerarious, as to present himself
before him, without this Ornament, he rejects him as unworthy. Now this robe is
nothing else, but that of Charity, which renders our Soul acceptable to God,
and worthy to approach unto him. Ps. 44.14. In vestitu deaurato circundata
varietate. In a word it is most certain, that to communicate well and as we
ought, we must be in the state of grace, which without Charity it is impossible
to be; and this is the reason why we cannot communicate worthily without the
Queen of Virtues.

ARTICLE II. That we must have a special care to distinguish false Charity from
true.
THere is not any one, who questions the precedent truth, all agreeing, that to
receive worthily, there must of necessity be the love of God in our heart,
since he has bestowed himself upon us with such an admirable, so unexpressible
a love.

But all do not agree in the nature and quality of this love, forasmuch as
there are many who judge of it rather according to their own inclinations, then
consequent to the rules of truth.

There is not any one except perhaps some furious and desperate Person, who
will not love God, whom he knows to be the Author of all good; and who does not
at least think he loves him; but there are almost infinite numbers of People,
who deceive themselves in this their belief, and have nothing but a false and
imaginary hope of God, whereas they think, they truly love him.

Such is their Charity, who say they love God, and yet hate their Neighbor: or
who will not pardon an injury, or deny to be reconciled to their Enemy; for as
St. John says very well, 1. Jo. 4.20. If any one shall say he loves God and
hates his brother, he is a Liar.

Such is their Charity who say they love God, yet they have ill gotten goods,
which they will not restore; who continue in an evil habit of Mortal Sin,
without having a firm purpose to amend; and theirs, who neglect to acquit
themselves of the obligations of their State: In a word, all theirs, who fail
in the observance of Gods Commandments in any thing whatsoever: This being an
undoubted Maxim, that the true and only mark of the love of God is to keep his
Commandments. If any one love me, says our Lord, Jo. 14.23. he will keep my
words, that is, my Commandments; he who does not love me observes them not. And
St. John after him, 1. Jo. 2.4. assures us, that he who says, that he knows
him God, that is in the Scripture phrase, he who says he loves God, and does
not keep his Commandments, is a Liar, and the truth is not in him.

All and every one of these sorts of Charity are false and deceitful; those
who love God in this manner, do not love him at all; and those who Communicate
only with this kind of love, are unworthy Communicants, and eat and drink
Damnation to themselves.

The true love of God is only that, which makes us observe his Commandments in
all things, which makes us fearful to incurr his displeasure by any Mortal
Sin; and which makes us prefer his friendship before all whatsoever is most
dear unto us; as before our Pleasures, our Estate, our Honor, and our Life it
self; being ready to loose all or any of these things, when otherwise we might
preserve them, rather then offend God.

Behold, Theotime, what it is, that is the love of God, without which it is
impossible to be in the State of Grace, or Communicate worthily and as we
ought; and that you may understand it better, read what follows.

ARTICLE III. What is Charity?
IT is a Virtue infused or given by God, which makes us love him above all
things, and our Neighbor as our selves.

This definition is taken from the Commandment, which God has given us to love
him, Luc. 10.27. Thou shall love, says he, the Lord thy God with thy whole
heart, with thy whole Soul, with all thy strength, and with all thy mind, and
thy Neighbor as thy self. These words, with thy whole heart, signify what we
have already said, that we must love God above all things, and that our heart
ought to be wholly his; loving nothing either equal with him, or more then him,
but under and less then him, and only in order to his Service.

This greater love does not consist in having a more ardent, a more tender, and
a more affective love for God then for any other thing, although this were to be
wished for: But it lies in this, that we esteem God more then all the things of
this world, and that in our heart and effectually we prefer his friendship
before all other goods, and whatsoever it is, we love: So that we resolve to
abandon and loose them all, rather then be deprived of the grace of God.

This preference and this resolution are so necessarily required in the love of
God, that they are the only distinctive signs it has, and it cannot subsist
without them: So that in the moment in which any one willingly and in effect
breaks this resolution, he loses the love of God. However, to make this
preference and resolution, we need not represent in particular all the things
before which we ought to prefer the love of God: This is neither necessary nor
always expedient. It suffices that we have a general, but an effectual
resolution, never to loose the grace of God for any thing of the world, nor to
do any thing whereby we may mortally offend him.

This resolution is the fruit and offspring of the Virtue of Charity, which is
that Divine quality which God powers into our Souls, when he receives us into
his grace, by the holy Spirit which is given us, as the Apostle speaks, Romans
5.5. It continues with us as long as we conserve this resolution; but as soon
as we come to loose it by any either action or desire, which is contrary unto
it, we are immediately deprived of this holy Charity, which is the Queen and
Mother of the other Virtues, and without which all others are insignificant in
order to Salvation.

I do not here examine the motives, which ought to induce us to the love of
God; viz. whether it be that of the reward we expect from him, or that of
friendship and benevolence which we owe him: Charity easily unites these two
together; and although it be not built or grounded upon the reward, yet it does
not exclude it: but the Soul which is endowed with Charity, loving God for
himself, expects at his hands the reward of that love, which is him himself.
She loves God because of the recompense; but she takes care that she do not
say, that she loves him by reason of the reward alone: for she would love him,
although she looked for nothing from him; and (as St. Bernard de diligendo Deo
says excellently well) We never love God without a reward; although we ought to
love him without minding the reward: for though true Charity be never fruitless,
yet it is not mercenary; she seeks not her own Interest. It is an affection of
the Soul, not a contract. It is neither it self obtained, nor does it get any
thing by bargain, as Merchants do. It is a voluntary affection and makes one
give himself freely to his God. True love is satisfied with it self, its reward
is our beloved.

We have already spoken of this Virtue abstractedly, and in it self in other
places, as in the Instruction of Youth, Part. 4. Chap. 3. and 16. and in that
of Penance, in the Examen upon the First Commandment: Wherefore I shall only
add here, what concerns it in relation to the Sacrament of the Eucharist, and
in as much as it serves for the Holy Communion.

ARTICLE IV. Of the Motives of the love of God.
IT was an admirable expression of St. Bernard, ibid. that the reason of loving
God is God himself; and therefore when any one asks, why we ought to love God?
One cannot answer better, then by saying, because he is God.

But being God contains in himself an infinity of perfections and qualities,
which render him infinitely amiable; this general reason of loving God, because
he is God, is divided into many particular Motives, which are so many several
obligations to love that infinite goodness, which can never be sufficiently
loved.

Thus when I consider, that God is great and perfect in himself, an that he
circles within himself all possible perfections, all Power, Goodness, Wisdom,
Justice, I find reason to love him above all other things; because there is
nothing amongst Creatures, which is so amiable as he; and he deserves to be
beloved, although, supposing a thing impossible, he should never have done us any
good.

If I descend to the benefits, which he has bestowed upon us, and consider him
as Creator of Heaven and Earth, and of all those excellent pieces, which he
has made for our sake, I find reason to love him above all things: for how can
I but love so great a bounty, which has wrought such wonders for us? Heaven
and Earth, and all things in them, says St. Augustine, l. 10. Conf. c. 6. tell
me on every side to love thee: they declare the same to all, that none may be
excused, if they do not love thee.

If I reflect upon my self, I acknowledge I am the work of that immense
goodness, which out of nothing has made me what I am; and I cannot refrain
from loving him, if I love my self, and own my self for what I am, viz. the
workmanship of God. This made St. Bernard, ibid. say, that God deserves to be
loved for his own sake even by the very Infidel; who although he be ignorant of
Jesus Christ, yet he knows himself; therefore even the Infidel is inexcusable,
if he do not love his Lord with all his heart, with all his Soul, with all his
strength: viz. A certain innate or natural equity, not unknown to Reason cries
out aloud to him from within, that he ought to love him with all his power,
from whom he cannot but know, that he has received all whatsoever he has.

If I consider the Redemption, I there find a bottomless Abyss of love, an
unexhaustible fountain, from whence motives to love that great and singular
goodness, which has delivered me from an eternal ruin, continually flow. For,
as St. Bernard, ibid. very well observes, If I owe my self totally to God for
that I am Created by him, how much more do I owe him, for that he has Redeemed
me, and in such a manner: For I was not so easily Redeemed, as I was at first
Created. At my Creation it was said of me, as well as of all other things. He
said the word, and they were made. To Create me cost him but one word: But he
who made me by speaking, and that only once, when he redeemed me, spoke much,
he wrought wonders, and suffered much hardship and many indignities. In the
first work he gave me my self, or what I am; in the second he gave himself, and
giving himself for me, he restored me to my self. What return shall or can I
make to God for himself? I owe my self entirely to him in acknowledgment for my
Creation, and what remains for me to give for my Redemption? and although I
could repay my self a thousand times, what am I in comparison to my Lord?

ARTICLE. V. Of the particular Motives of the love of God drawn from the
Blessed Sacrament.
IT should seem that love should not be able to advance further then that of
our Lord has done, and that the highest pitch to which it could possibly
arrive were to dye for us, according to those words of our Lord. Jo. 15.13.
Greater love then this no man has, that he give up his Life for his Friend.
But the same wisdom which taught this truth, has given this distinction to our
hand, no pure man has greater love, human love reaches no further; but the
love of God made man is an exception to this general rule: the divine love
knows no bounds; it passes beyond the bounds of death; and as it is ingenious,
inventive, and omnipotent, it finds out innumerable ways to make its grandeur
and its excess appear.

The Charity of Jesus Christ was not content to lay down his life for us men
and our Salvation; to reconcile us to God by his death, even then when we were
his enemies, according to the remark of St. Paul, Romans 5.10. or as St. Bernard
in the place above cited notes, to love us first, tantus and tantum and gratis,
tantillos and tales, He being so great, to love so much, and gratis, such, and
so contemptible Persons; That is, with such an excess of love, and such an
abasement of his greatness to love to an extremity even such pitiful and
wretched creatures, replenished with Sins, and all sorts of miseries, and all
this gratis, that is without any interest of his side, but merely upon the
consideration of our good.

This divine love has found out means how he may always be with us, and never
depart from those, whom he has loved so far as to die for them; he has found
out an invention to remain with us, and yet be absent from us: and having
withdrawn from us his visible presence, he has nevertheless found out a way
how still we may enjoy him. He has given us his flesh for meat, and his blood
for drink; he has shut them up under the figure of Bread and Wine, that we
might more commodiously receive them: and by means of this divine invention he
enters into and takes possession of us, he Sanctifies our Soul and Body; he
enlivens us with his grace; he cures our interior maladies; he strengthens our
weakness; in a word, He dwells in us, and we in him, as he him self affirms Jo.
6.57.

O Skillfull and ingenious love! O admirable invention, proper to God alone!
Here we may affirm with truth, what the Prophet Isay, said, chapter 45.15. vere tu
es Deus absconditus Deus Israel.

In this Sacrament of the Eucharist God is truly hidden, because he has herein
invented a way to conceal the grandeur of his Majesty, that so we might more
easily approach unto him. and it is in this holy Sacrament that we may say with
David, Ps. 30.20. O my God! how great without number are the effects of thy
goodness, which thou reservest for the benefit of those, who hear thee, and
have made them appear in the sight of the whole world toward all those, who
place their hopes in thee.

What return can we make to God for so extraordinary and so incomprehensible a
good? For if we do not know how sufficiently to acknowledge the benefit of our
creation, much less are we able to make any retutn for that of our redemption;
how then can we testify our gratitude for this third effect, and the utmost
excess of the divine goodness, wherein he not only gives himself for us, but
bestows himself upon us; that we may truly enjoy and take possession of him?
Quid Deo retribuam pro se? nam etsi millies me dedero, quid sum ego ad Dominum
meum? What shall I return to God, says St. Bernard in the place above cited,
Art. 4. in exchange for himself? although I should give my self to him a thousand
times, what am I, when put in balance with my God?

True it is, Theotime, we cannot return to God any thing worthy of him in
acknowledgment of the rich present, which he has made us of himself: Yet at
least we may afford him our love and affection, as far as we are able, saying
with St. Bernard, ibid. I will love thee, O my God, my helper, for the offering
thou have made me of thy self, and that to the utmost of my power. It is true
it can never equal thy deserts: Yet it shall not be inferior to the power,
with which thy holy grace shall enable me.

Me Deus immenso postquam dilexit amore,
Quis modus, atque mei finis Amoris erit?
ARTICLE VI. The practice of the Acts of Charity before Communion.
WHen we expect a person whom we most dearly love, we do three things.

1. We earnestly desire his coming.

2. We take all possible care to have all things in readiness for his kind
reception, as Lodging, Entertainment, Banquets, and Presents.

3. We set forth upon our way to meet him. And it is but just that you perform
these things in respect of Jesus Christ, whom you expect.

1. Wish from your heart for his dear presence, making use of those words of
David, Psalm. 41. As the Heart, parched up with drought, longs after the
fountains of Waters, so does my Soul after thee, O Lord. O my God, my Soul
sighs after thee, and languisheth away with desires to enjoy thee.

Veni Domine and noli tardare relaxa facinora servo tuo. Come, O my Lord, make
haste, release and pardon me once more my Sins, and make me worthy of the
favor which thou art about to bestow upon me.

2. Make all things ready to receive him; and although your Soul be already
disposed by Confession, see however, and examen again whether there remain not
yet something that may be displeasing in the Eyes of Jesus Christ, some secret
Sin, some irregular affections, as a lie, an aversion against your Neighbor,
or any sinful, or dangerous affection. Leave not the least of all these things
in your heart, but root them out by Contrition, and by a fixed and steady
resolution to amend your life. Make ready the entertainments, which you intend
to give him, as soon as you have received him. Those which are most grateful
to him, are the Acts of Faith, Hope, and Charity, these also are the most
delicious viands you can possibly present him with.

Prepare your self to make him an offering of your heart, to love him, and of
your self, with all fidelity to serve him.

3. Set forth upon your way to meet him, and to invite him into your house by
good thoughts and Holy affections. Cant. 5. Veniat dilectus meus in hortum
suum. O Jesus, come into my Soul, as into a Garden, which much delights thee.
Make her, O make her fit and worthy to receive thee: cleanse her, and vouchsafe
to take away from her whatsoever may be Offensive to thee; plant in her, and
adorn her with the flowers which best please thee, that is with Purity and
Humility. Veni Domine Jesu. Come, O Savior of my Soul; Come and save me by thy
Grace, and deliver me from those Enemies, who design my Eternal ruin.

After Communion.
PErform that toward Jesus Christ which we are wont to do, when a Person of
Quality, whom we have long expected, is arrived. For after the first meeting
and salutation, we conduct him to the apartment prepared for him, and there, we
perform these four things.

1. We give him some great or signal testimonies of our respect, friendship,
and acknowledgment for the Honor which we receive by his presence. 2. We offer
him the best things we have, and such as may be most pleasing to him. 3. If we
have need of his assistance we beg such things as we want, and willingly would
have. And in fine, 4. When he returns we give him thanks, acknowledging the
honor of the visit, we renew and repeat to him the protestations of fidelity,
friendship, and service. Behold, as in a pattern, how you are to behave your
self toward Jesus Christ, immediately after Communion.

As soon therefore as you have received the Sacred host with much Faith, and a
profound Humility, adore our Lord who is within you. Then departing modestly
from the holy Table, withdraw your self into some convenient place; and employ
your self in the following thoughts.

Conduct our Lord, not into your body, since he is there already, but into the
place of your Soul, wherein he most delights, that is, into your heart, and
your affection; That is to say, six your thoughts upon him, and comply with the
following duties.

Make acts of Adoration, of Love, and of Acknowledgment in this manner, and
first

Of Adoration.

O my God and my Savior Jesus Christ, I adore thee from the bottom of my
heart; I firmly believe, that I now possess thy Body, thy Blood, thy Soul, and
thy Divinity. I acknowledge that thou art in me all and every one of these
ways. O Greatness of God! is it possible that thou should humble thy self so
low? O goodness! how immense art thou, and yet art pleased thus to remain with
us!

Thou do not only come and inhabit with us, but thou bestowest thy self upon
us for our food and nourishment: and to whom? to a poor and wretched servant as
I am: A Lord to his Slave: God to his creature: Jesus Christ to a Sinner. O res
mirabilis manducat Dominum pauper, servus and humilis.

Although there were nothing else but my mean, and base condition, it would make
me unworthy to receive thee; but I am become more undeserving by my sins, and
yet thou have the goodness, not only to say to me as David did to Miphiboseth,
that I shall Eat at thy Table. 2. Reg. 9.7. Et tu comedes panem in mensa mea
semper. But also thou thy self offerest thy self unto me for my food and
nourishment. O Divine Goodness! how have I deserved such and so great favors?
Ibid. Quis sum ego quoniam respexisti super canem mortuum?

Ponder well upon these words, and consider what you were before by sin: less
in the sight of God, then a dead Dog in respect of his Master: and that you are
now by his grace and favor restored to the number of the Children of God, and
seated at his Table, nourished with his Body and Blood. Next pass on to the
Acts of Love and Acknowledgment.

Acts of Love toward Jesus Christ.
O My God, what return shall I make for this so signal favor, and what shall I
do to acknowledge it? Is it possible that I should not continually love thee,
after this excess of love which thou have showed me? Thou have loved me to that
degree as to lay down thy Life for my sake, and shall I not make this return as
only to live for thee? Thou at present have communicated thy self wholly to me,
and shall not I be from henceforward wholly thine! O my God permit me not to be
so ungrateful and so insensible of thy Love and my own Salvation: I protest
here before thee, that I will be faithful to thee for the future, that I will
never part from thee by any disobedience to thy Commandments. Ps. 118.93. In
aeternum non obliviscar justificationes tuas, quia in ipsis vivificasti me. I
will never forget thy bounty, nor the favor which thou have done me in
admitting me to thy mercy. I will love thee with all my heart, O my Savior.
Ps. 17. Diligam te Domine fortitudo mea firmamentum meum, refugium meum, and
liberator meus. I will love thee, and I do love thee, O my God, my strength, my
support, my refuge, and my deliverer. Thou art my God and my All. Deus meus and
omnia. What is there either in Heaven or upon Earth, that I should love besides
thee? Ps. 72.25. Quid mihi est in Coelo, and a te quid volui super terram? Deus
cordis mei, and pars mea Deus in aeternum. O my God, I will not love either in
Heaven or Earth any thing but thee; Thou art the God of my heart, the
inheritance and only happyness I pretend to, I have made choice of thee, and I
will never change.

An Offering to Jesus Christ.
WHat shall I give thee, O my Savior, in acknowledgment of thy favors, and as
an earnest of the love which now I promise thee? I have not any thing worthy of
thee; and if I had, I have nothing but what is from thee, and what is thine,
and due to thee upon all accounts; but thou art pleased to accept what is thy
own upon several heads. Hence it is that I offer my self unto thee, that is, my
Body and my Soul, which are now sanctified by the Honor of thy Divine
presence: I consecrate them both unto thee, since at present thou have
vouchsafed they should serve thee as a Temple: My Body never more to be
employed as an Instrument of Sin: My Soul to know thee, to love thee, and
evermore to be faithful to thee. O Lord, bless, I beseech thee, the Present,
which I make thee: Sanctify them both, since they have served thee for a
Temple. Benedic Domine domum istam. Permit not that my Body be any more defiled
with impure delights, nor my Soul by a will to commit any Mortal Sin. This
resolution I here make in thy presence to be faithful to thee, and to be all
thine: to serve thee with Body and Soul; to correct the evil inclinations of
them both: to fight against my self, and deny my self my wonted pleasures, my
Delights, my Passions, my Concupiscence, my Anger, my Ambition, my own will;
and lastly, all whatsoever may offend thee, O my God.

A Prayer to Jesus Christ.
DOmine Deus, 1. Par. 29.18. Custodi in aeternum hanc voluntatem. O my Savior
conserve in my Soul this holy resolution which thou have given me, and grant me
grace to put it faithfully in execution: I can do nothing of my self and
without thy assistance: I beg it of thee with all my heart that I may conquer
all, though almost innumerable difficulties, which occurr in the way of my
Salvation. Regard me with the eyes of thy Mercy, strengthen me daily with thy
Grace. Psalm. 24.16. Respice in me, and miserere mei, quia unicus and pauper sum
ego. Tribulationes cordis mei multiplicatae sunt: de necessitatibus meis erue
me.

When you have finished all these acts, you may proceed and make use of the
Prayers in your Manual after Communion, or other vooal Prayers, according as
your Devotion shall dictate to you: And I say the same also of the Prayers
which the same Manuals have as a preparation to Communion. But all this is to
be understood, provided still that you apply your chief endeavors to the
practice of the acts of some one or more of the precedent Virtues.

ARTICLE VII. Advices concerning the precedent practices of Faith, Hope, and
Charity.
THese are some prescriptions to be be observed concerning the practice, which
we have given you, of these three Virtues in order to Communion.

The First is, that it is not necessary to employ them all equally every time
we Communinicate: because they may be too long: But it is enough that we insist
particularly upon the practice of some one of the three, and to direct the
principal fruit of the Commmunion to that End. Thus you may choose for one
Communion the practice of Faith, for the next that of Hope, and Charity for the
third.

Secondly, That you may reap the benefit of any of these Virtues, you must
prepare your self beforehand by reading the practices, which we have given
thereof, you shall read then that which you intend to practice; and take notice
of the acts, and endeavor to understand them well, and make them your own.

Thirdly, When the time of Communion shall be at hand, you shall practice these
acts, as you read them here. But remember that your heart go along with your
words: that is to say, that you read them with attention, and perform them
with heart and mind. To this end you must read them softly, repeat, and
ruminate upon them within your self, insisting upon those, which move you most.
They are for the most part words taken out of Holy writ: which I collected on
purpose that you may learn them with more ease, and that they may more
efficaciously move you, being the very words of the Holy Ghost.

In fine, to conclude and reap the benefit of the practice of these three
Virtues, employ some part of the day of your Communion in pondering upon what
you have practiced in the morning: to this end read the whole Chapter, which
concerns that Virtue: and let it be the Spiritual Lesson for the day of your
Communion.

ARTICLE VIII. Another Advice of Prayer to the Blessed Virgin before and after
Communion.
THis is what I recommend unto you most earnestly, Dear Theotime, that you do
not forget the prayer to the Blessed Virgin before and after Communion.

Before Communion, that you may obtain by her intercession, the grace to
Communicate worthyly, conceiving, as she did, the Son of God in your heart,
before you receive him in your body, as St. Ambrose affirmed of her: Prius
concepit mente quam corpore. And that you may be replenished with those holy
dispositions, whereby she merited to receive the Son of God himself into her
womb and particularly with those of Purity and Humility, which were the two
virtues, by which, according to St. Bernard, she attracted to her the Son of
God, She pleased him by her Virginity, and conceived him by her Humility,
Virginitate placuit, humilitate concepit. For this reason you shall address
your self unto her in this, or some such like manner.

A Prayer to the Blessed Virgin before Communion.
O Blessed Virgin, most worthy mother of God, behold me upon the point of
receiving him the very same person, whom thou did conceive in thy chaste
bowels, and ready to partake of the adorable body and blood which he received
from thee. It concerns thee, that he be received with all the respect and
honor he deserves, and that he be not unworthyly treated by those upon whom he
bestows himself with so much love. This is the cause, why I address my self
unto thee, that thou would vouchsafe to obtain of him in my behalf, all the
blessings which I stand in need of in this Communion: Obtain of him that he
take possession of my heart by love, before he enter into my body by the
Sacrament. And that loving him I may be worthy to receive him. Beg, and by thy
powerful intercession obtain of him these dispositions for me, these two
important virtues; which assured him unto thee, and rendered thee deservedly
his worthy mother, I mean Purity and Humility. That he find nothing in me,
which may taste either of Impurity or Pride. And for this reason it is, that I
detest from my heart these two Sins which infinitely displease both him and
thee. And I am fully resolved to use all my endeavors that I may perfectly
acquire these two excellent virtues, by which I heartily desire to please him
and to imitate thee, begging for this end his grace by thy holy intercession,
which I implore with all my heart.

After Communion.
YOu shall pray to her, that by her intercession you may obtain grace to
conserve her Son Jesus Christ, whom you have corporally received, also
Spiritually in your Soul, as she her self after she had conceived and brought
him into the world, preserved him always in her heart by means of that love,
which kept her Soul continually fixed upon her dearly beloved Son: a love
whereby she enjoyed a greater happiness, then she did by being chosen the
Mother of God; according to the sentiment of a Father of the Church: It is
true, says Venerable Bede, in Luc. the Mother of God was truly happy upon this
account, that she became his Mother in the Incarnation and conceived him in her
body, but questionless she was much more happy, for that she conserved him
perpetually in her heart by love, as she always did.

Form in your understanding a right conceit of this happiness, and pray to the
Blessed Virgin that she will obtain it for you for ever. To this end direct the
following prayer to her.

A Prayer to the Blessed Virgin after Communion.
IT is just, O Blessed Virgin, that thou partake of the thanks, which I am
obliged to render to thy Son, since he has been pleased I should receive him
in this Communion. It was to thee that this living bread descended from heaven,
and from thee he took the body and blood, which he gives us for our food. Luc.
1.42. Blessed be thou amongst women and blessed be the fruit of thy womb. Let
the Angels praise thee for that thou have given us this fruit of life, and
prepared for us this divine food, which nourishes us, and brings us to
everlasting bliss. Help me to preserve this fruit, that I may never loose it
more. And as thou had grace after thou had happily born him in thy womb, to
conserve him also more fortunately in thy heart; obtain of him for me the like
favor, without which this Communion would not be useful to me: O Holy mother
of God assist me, that I may conceive in my Soul thy Son Jesus Christ, that he
may be born in me, that he may daily increase, that he may there live and reign
as absolute Lord and Master of my Soul.

You may add here any of those prayers, which the Church is used to make to
her, as the hymn Ave Maris Stella. her Litanies, or the like.

ARTICLE IX. How we ought to spend the day of our Communion.
IT is an advice of very great consequence to spend all that day in Piety and
Devotion, wherein you have performed so holy, so religious and so august an
action; and to honor that day by the exercise of good works, upon which God
has been pleased to Sanctify you by his presence.

To spend it otherwise is to fail in your respect to Jesus Christ, and it
happens but too often, that by this neglect of our duty we loose the greater
part of the fruit, which otherwise we might reap from the holy Table of
Communion.

What then you are to do, Theotime, on that day, is frequently in the day time
to call to mind, and seriously to reflect upon the honor you have received,
and to acknowledge that it is beyond your capacity sufficiently to esteem it.

2ly, Not to distract your mind either with vain divertisements, or with
unprofitable and frivolous discourses: but to be more serious, modest and
reserved, in all the actions of that day, remembering what honor it is, and how
they value themselves, who are admitted to the presence of a King, and
consequently what has been done to you, whilst you were chosen to be the
Temple of Jesus Christ.

3ly. Employ all that day in good works, as far as you are able: as the rest of
the morning in Divine Service, or reading some good book. After dinner in
hearing the word of God, assisting at Evensong; and the remainder of the day
either in discourse with good and virtuous persons, or in reading.

At night in your prayers be not unmindfull to give God thanks for your
Communion, and for all the favors, which he has bestowed upon you. Beseech
him most earnestly that he will give you grace to benefit your self there-by
the next day, and all the remainder of your life, and to practice well all the
resolutions you have made upon this occasion.

But for the better compliance with these holy resolutions, remember that you
renew them every day in your morning prayers, even to the day of your following
Communion; and at night in your examen of conscience see and consider well
whether you have faithfully fullfill'd them, or whether you have failed
therein, and broke your promise, and in what? that so you may rectify your self
out of hand, and set your self again into the right way of the Service of God,
and the path of your own Salvation.

ARTICLE X. Of frequent Communion.
NOthing remains, but that I exhort you to Communicate often, dear Theotime,
and benefit your self of the great advantages, which God presents you with in
this Divine Sacrament.

It is in reality a great benefit to have Communicated well in the manner we
have but just now declared; But if after this, one abstain a long time from it,
he endangers himself to loose the fruit of the foregoing Communion by relapsing
into Sin and the disorders of his former Life.

There is a certain proportion betwixt Spiritual and Corporal nourishment. This
requires we should take it, as often as the necessity of our Body shall
require: and we need it according as the natural heat consumes our substance,
and whatsoever else serves for its subsistence.

The same we must affirm of Spiritual food, which serves to repair the forces
of the Soul, which are continually diminished and weakened by Concupiscence,
and all the passions with which it is assaulted. If these forces are not
frequently recruited, the Life of Grace is by degrees much weakened, and totally
lost at length. Now that which serves to repair them is the Sacred Eucharist,
which renews our strength and restores our Soul to her former vigor, weakening
Concupiscence, diminishing the Passions, preserving her from Mortal, nay even
from Venial Sins, as we have already said and proved at large.

After this is there any necessity of other motives to persuade either you, or
any other Christian to frequent Communion? Certainly those, who are willing to
do what is pleasing in the sight of God, and to continue in his grace, have
need of none.

And, I suppose, you are one of that number: I exhort you then by the Charity
of Jesus Christ, and by the excess of love, which he showed us, in bestowing
himself upon us in this adorable Mystery, as the best means for our Salvation,
that you will frequently approach unto him in this Divine Sacrament; to the end
he may remain in you and you in him, according as he himself has promised, and
you surely cannot but desire.

Consider that your Soul is always sick, and that these Distempers, if
neglected, may bring you to Eternal Death. Come then to this great Physician,
who only is able to cure you, and preserve you from death, by this Bread, which
he has given, as himself affirms, for the Life of the World. Joan. 6.52. Panis
quem ego dabo caro mea est pro mundi vita.

Ponder, O ponder well upon the earnest desire he has to relieve you, in all
your wants, and the ardent love with which he calls and even compels you to
come unto him, Mat 11.28. Come to me all you that labor, and are burdened and
I will refresh you: -- In me you shall find the repose which your Souls desire.
They who are not won with these so moving and vehement expressions, do they not
evidently show, that they are altogether insensible of the love, which Jesus
Christ has so plainly testified he has for them, and that they are enemies to
their own Salvation? Is it possible that you should be one of these? Look to
it, for if you be, you are not of the number of the Children of God: for
Children listen and attend to the voice of their Father; come to him willingly,
and esteem themselves happy in his company; and above all they take it for a
peculiar honor, that they are admitted to eat at his Table.

What shame is it then for Christians so to neglect so great a treasure, and so
nigh at hand; to be just at the Springhead of Divine Graces, and not esteem
them; to remain in the death of Sin, when the Fountain of Life is at their
disposal, Ezech. 33.11. quare moriemini domus Israel? and why do you deliver
your selves to death, O house of Israel? O Christians amongst whom God has
chose his habitation upon earth, why do you suffer your selves thus to dye,
having the author of Life so near you; who invites you to come, and threatens
you, if you do not accept his invitation. Crying out to you in a loud voice,
John 6.54. unless ye eat my Body and drink my Blood, you shall have no life in
you. Adding that he who eats me shall live for my sake. After such threats,
if we do not come, and so great assurance if we do; what can we allege before
the divine Tribunal at the day of judgment, if still we are at a distance from
him, from God the Fountain of life, and continue still companions to the enemy
of mankind in the state of death and Sin? and this because we are unwilling so
to live, that frequently we may partake of this living and life-giving bread.

Call to mind the feast in the parable, Luc. 14. where the Master of the house
showed so much anger and indignation against those who refused to come, after
they had been so solemnly invited. They excused themselves the best they could,
some with their affairs, others with their pleasures; one said he was obliged
to go to his country house, another that he went to try the Oxen he had bought;
and the third that he was taken up and employed about his marriage: but not any
of these excuses were admitted, they were all rejected as frivolous pleas, and
therefore themselves for framing them were all judged worthy to be, not only
then but ever after, excluded from that Banquet.

And this is the method which God shall use toward Christians, who refrain
from the Sacraments, upon the vain pretenses, which usually they form to
themselves; for all their excuses shall be rejected and themselves punished, as
in in the Parable we have seen.

To those who shall excuse themselves with the affairs and employments of the
world, it shall be answered, that there is no concern of such importance, as
that of their Salvation; which therefore they ought to prefer before all other
things. And they shall be reproached with this, that they have preferred their
temporal concerns before their eternal happiness: and made more account of the
possessions of this world, then of the grace of God.

To those, who shall excuse themselves, with the indispositions of their Soul,
saying, that they have not that virtue which is required for frequent
Communion. One may reply, that their excuse is but too true, yet it is a very
bad one; for that it is their duty so to live, that they may Communicate daily,
and to use all imaginable industry to render themselves capable thereof.

Lastly, we shall find that there is no other cause why people communicate but
seldom, besides their sloth, their indevotion, and fear, lest, if they should
frequent the Sacraments, thereby they should be obliged to live holily; and in
a word, a will, or a tacit resolution not to amend their lives, but to remain
in their Sins, their Pleasures, their Covetuousness, Ambition, and in all their
irregular affections.

O Theotime, avoid this great misfortune; this fault so general, and yet so
common amongst Christians, who slight in this manner their Salvation, and the
great advantages which by the goodness and Mercy of God are presented to them.
Learn in time to set a great value on them, and to advantage your self from
thence, approaching frequently to these divine mysteries instituted by God, the
means for your Salvation.

Begin this exercise from your youth, and continue it thence-forward all your
life, that you may perform it daily better and better, and oftener approach to
the Holy Table of Communion, and receive our Lord.

ARTICLE XI. When and how often we ought to Communicate.
THe time, which you ought most commonly to observe in your communion, is that
of every month; so that you should not exceed that time without giving your
Soul the opportunity to partake of this divine nourishment of the holy
Eucharist.

It is very hard for you to stay so long without having a considerable want of
help to resist the temptations of your Ghostly enemy; or repress the passions
which spring from your age and the heat of blood. You have need of strength,
whereby you may be able to withstand the Devil, as also of a good preservative
against your self: The one and the other you shall find in the holy communion,
wherefore it is fit you have recourse unto it according to the proportion of
the necessity you find that you have thereof.

Beside, it is necessary that you grow up and increase in the fear of God, and
in all Christian virtues, Faith, Hope, Charity, Humility, Temperance, Modesty,
and the rest; Which you can never do, if you Communicate but seldom.

Take this then for a general rule, that regularly speaking you Communicate
once a month, and oftener upon either of these occasions.

1st. When there happens any Solemn feast, as of our Lord, or of the Blessed
Virgin, which you should never let pass without receiving the Blessed
Sacrament; both because you should honor the Feast by this Sacred action, as
also make your self worthy to partake of the graces which God more liberally
distributes, in respect of the united prayers of the faithful, on those days.

The 2d is, when you perceive in your self any considerable want thereof, as
when you are assaulted with more violent, or more frequent temptations, for
then you must have recourse to this remedy to strengthen you, least you fall
into mortal Sin.

And if by misfortune it have so happened, that you are already fallen therein,
for want of due foresight of the fall (which easily happens not only to young
people, but to many others, by reason they are not sensible of the evil before
it be fallen upon them) in this case, Theotime, take care to confess your self
forthwith: And as for Communion take the advice of your Ghostly father, whether
it be to receive that day, if he find you suffiently disposed, or to defer it
some days longer, during which time you may prepare your self for it by doing
penance for your Sins, and deploring in the presence of God the misery which
has befaln you.

Behold what you are to observe concerning the time of Communion, whilst yet
you are young. When you shall be more advanced in age, in judgment, and in the
love of God, you may Communicate more frequently still, according to the
counsel you shall receive in that point, supposing you have a good guide, and
according to the desire you shall find in your self to advance in virtue and in
the service of God: A desire which however it ought to be always very vehement
and strong, yet should it daily increase in you more and more.

An Advice of great Consequence.
BUt I advise you at all times, and especially in this, wherein actually you
now are, carefully to avoid three faults, which are incident easily to them,
who Communicate upon set days.

The 1st is, that they communicate by custom, and by course, without proposing
to themselves an end or design in their communion.

The 2d is, that they Communicate with little or no preparation, and without
devotion.

The 3d is, that they reap no fruit or very little, persisting still in the
same vicious habits of innumerable venial, and many times mortal Sins.

These are three faults which prejudice frequent Communion in an high degree,
and which makes one lose the greatest part of the fruit thereof, and renders it
oftentimes rather worse, then better for us.

Let it be your chief care to avoid them, and to this end remember every time
you come to communicate, to comply with these three duties directly opposite to
the former faults.

First, to propose to your self always a good end; which you hope to compass by
means of your Communion; such as is abovementioned, viz. to please God, to
advance in his grace, and to strengthen or to ground your self better in virtue.

2ly. Prepare your self always the best you can, and endeavor to stir your
self up to some act of great devotion: and to this effect take care that you
put in practice the directions we have formerly given upon this Subject.

3ly. Endeavor to amend your evil habits, and to make good use of all the
graces which you have received by means of this Blessed Sacrament. It is a
matter of high concern, and of which you ought to have a special care.

Remember that there are two faults which you ought equally to eschew in the
holy Communion. The one is to Communicate too seldom: the other is to
Communicate often, but to no effect. By the First, one neglects and looses the
graces of God; by the Second, one abuses those, which one has received: both
which lead directly to damnation.

Fly these two rocks, upon either of which your Salvation may easily suffer
shipwreck. Communicate often with the disposition abovementioned; and
advantage your self of the Holy Communion, in order to the amendment of your
life, your advancement in virtue, and the love of God. If you do thus,
Theotime, the blessing of God will fall upon your devotion; and he will daily
shower new graces upon your Soul, that you may better serve him all the
remainder of your days in this, and enjoy him perfectly in the next life for
evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 15. Line 15. r. vestro. p. 23. l. 31. r. own. p. 28. l. 12. r. it is in.
ib. l. 25. r. Sin. p. 30. l. 5. r. ought. p. 41. l. 23. r. pluvias. p. 45. l.
6. and 12. r. fully conceive. p. 58. l. 23. r. Sapientiae. p. 62. l. 27. r.
anger of God. p. 72. l. 12. r. burns. p. 74. l. 15. r. durante. p. 84. l. 3. r.
prosecuted. p. 85. l. 18. r. vulnera. p. 95. l. 33. r. de Verb. p. 1.25. l. 30.
r. concerned in. p. 159. l. 15. r. the imposition. p. 1 60. l. ult. r. the 6th
Chapter. p. 185. l. 3. r. in general. p. 187. l. 17. r. proscribed. p. 195. l.
6. r. then to. p. 204. l. 11. Prayers. ib. l. 30. r. evince. p. 205. l. 7. r.
C. 2. Admonit. 31. p. 220. l. 19. r. obliged. ib. l. 24. r. do. p. 234. l. 13.
r. spes. p. 255. l. 18. r. facto. p. 260. l. 9. r. of them, so that. p. 271. l.
25. r. dilectio. p. 274. l. 25. r. sociusve. p. 301. l. 31. r. should take. p.
304. l. ult. r. Eternity. p. 314. l. 9. r. in the body. p. 318. l. ult. r.
says. p. 333. l. 8. r. Loquetur. ib. r. faciet. p. 334. l. 13. r. laetabor. p.
356. l. 4. r. art. p. 360. l. 9. r. and what else may. p 305. l. 10. r.
imaginary love. p. 369. l. 20. r. which yet, Ib. l. 21. r. beloved.


