MISCELLANEA; OR, Serious, Useful CONSIDERATIONS, Moral, Historical,
Theological.

Together with the CHARACTERS OF A True Believer In Paradoxes and Seeming
Contradictions.

AN ESSAY.

ALSO, A little Box of Safe, Purgative, and Restorative Pills, to be constantly
taken by all those that desire, either to get their Souls into, or to keep them
in, an healthful, holy, heavenly frame and temper: Or, A wholesome Diet-drink
for Ch^istians.

By THO. GODDARD, Gent.

Lips. de Constant. lib. 2. cap. 4. Pulcra haec laudatio; O virum doctum! sed
illi melior, O virum sapientem! and ista optima, O virum bonum!

August. Ep. Veritas and dulcis est, and amara: quando amara, curat, quando
dulcis, pascit: and Medicamen est animo and pabulum.

LONDON: Printed by E. C. for Tho. William at the Bible in Little-Britain, and
Will. Thompson at Harborough in Leichestershire. 1661.

To the Right Honorable, ROBERT, Earl of SVNDERLAND and BARON of Wormleiton.
MY LORD,
I That in our late dangerous, dismal, deadly days of War was a man of peace,
am now pressed; And therefore I must not only expect, but in prudence prepare to
encounter with such enemies as are resolved and prepared to charge me both with
sword and Pistol, censure and detraction. With the first, for presuming to set
up my dim candle amidst brightness is sufficient to dispel a midnight, yea an
Egyptian darkness, without the assistance or contribution of my faint Ray.
Yet whether the light, warmth, influence of some of those flaming torches do
most resemble the beautiful, comfortable suns, or a blasting, mischievous,
dreadful, prodigious comets we are at this day sadly able to determine. For not
a few Books* are diseases rather then medicines, and of so infectious, so
venomous a nature that Heylin. Geo. p. 717.
like the people called Psylli, they are able to poison Serpents, to corrupt
those and to render them much worse who are too erroneous already. Besides,
instead of affording solid, safe, and good nourishment, they do too often fill
the readers stomachs with hurtful crudities, and their heads with aerie,
false, abstruse, turbulent, truculent, yea blasphemous notions, principles, and
opinions, either not fit to be published, ventilated, and Dispudanti pruritus
est ecclesiarum scabies. Wotto^ ad Reg.
controverted; or else not only unprofitable, but also very dangerous if not
mortal to be embraced; since by woeful experience we find that poisoned
instead of wholesome pills, are too frequently and greedily swallowed, because
they are either roled up in, and covered with the pap of Flesh-pleasing
delights, or else because they are gilded with gain, learning, eloquence, or
seeming piety. Whereas the innocent ends of my unpolished papers are to level
the high, to blunt the keen, to rectify the erring, and to straighten the
crooked thoughts which too many have of pleasure, honor, profit, the worldly
man's only Haec tria pro trino numine mundus habet. And yet an Heathen could say
of them, omnia ista bona quae nos speciosa sed fallaci voluptate delectant,
pecunia, d^gnitas, potentia aliaque complura ad quae generis humani caeca
cupidetas obstup^scit, cum labor possidentur, cum invidia conspiciuntur,
^osque ipsos quos exo^^ant and prem^^t, plus minantur quam prosunt: lubrica and
incerta sunt, nunquam been tenentur, nam ut nihil de tempore futuro timeatur,
ipsa tamen magnae felicitatis tu^cla sollicita est. ^enec: de Brevit. vit. Ad
Pau^^num.
Trinity, to unedge their teeth, to sharpen their appetites, and to inflame
their cold desires after the best things, that so they may no longer feed upon
Husks, or delight in dung, but that they may hunger and thirst after the bread
and water of Life, and by a justifying Faith both feast, fill, and fat their
empty, lean, yea almost famished Souls with the Manna of divine promises: And
lastly to persuade Christians not only to store, enrich, and adorn their
understandings with knowledge, but also to turn and digest their knowledge into
practice, without which Christian care, and pious both endeavor and
resolution, the noblest, wisest, richest, greatest persons in the world are but
living Tombs possessed with evil spirits, glorious, stately, beautiful
sh^ines, and walking Sepulchers carrying dead souls up and down in them. For
wilful ignorance, and learned profaneness are the Scilla and Charybdis of the
Soul. The one leads men hoodwink't, seiled, tamely, and securely unto Hell: The
other makes them walk, or rather run, and leap with their eyes wide open into
the bottomless pit of eternal destruction.

Diana from them, since a sincere love of Holiness, a pious contempt of the
infatuating, deluding world, self-denial, and mortification are both the
hardest rules, and the harshest Lessons in all the Grammar of Christianity to
like, learn, and practice. Besides, it is a custom no less common then both
unreasonable, and unjust, to condemn the workman if the work be innocent, and
when they cannot deservedly accuse the picture, to blemish, bespatter, and
reproach the painter. For it is not only the bloody policy of Satan to persuade,
but it is also the desperate madness of sinners to think, and strive to ward and
guard themselves, and their Dalilah's against the downright blows of truth, by
sleighting, reviling them that speak it: And (like ignorant, or impudent
Sophisters) when they cannot answer the arguments of their opponents, with
their wicked wit to jeer or slander them, as if their wisdom, safety, and
felicity consisted in evasions, detraction, or a wilful opposition of truth.
And as if David's Harp were not sweet compared with the murdering melody of the
Sirens' tongue of sin, or error; The Honesty and Lawfulness of my designs are
such, that as I am assured they will not only Alarm but exasperate and
multiply my adversaries (or rather the enemies of plain-dealing and godliness)
into an enraged, numerous Army against me: The most being ready and resolved to
run unto that standard which is set up against honesty, virtue, sanctity,
heavenly mindedness, contempt of the world and all it is vanished vexing,
vanishing ensnaring, deceiving, destroying vanities: So I am fully persuaded
that the best will both favor, own, assist me. And amongst all them I have
resolved to fly only to your Honor for relief, and safety; well knowing that
your Lord-ships entertaining of me and siding with me will be not only my
security, encouragement, honor, but also an hopeful, smiling presage of a
prosperous victorious issue in these my weak, yet wel-meant undertakings. For
truly my Lord it is my own as well as others Joy, and wonder that your
Lordships dawning is a serene Meridian. That you came out of the Mine refined
gold, and a polished Jewel from the Rock; That your equally amiable graces, and
eminent accomplishments do honor your honor, and ennoble your Nobility; That
your green years and blooming youth have those gray hairs snowed upon them,
which are at once the Ornament, Comfort, Crown, and Glory of venerable age, I
mean Learning, Wisdom, and Virtue; That these equally beautiful, and fragrant
flowers should be full blown in your Lordships January, when they scarce peep
out, but are very rarely ^udded in the May of others; and that you are not only
fair, and flourishing, but also both sweet and ripe in the very Blossom, when
the most are either foul or blasted, deformed, or withered, or both, with
ignorance, and vices in their youth. This I say being really true, and without
an Hyperbole, Flattery, or framed Idea of what might or should be in a
Christian, or a Person nobly descended, it is both an happy Prodigy and a most
auspicious Omen, that your Lordship will grow up, prosper, rise, shine, and
live to be the Glory of your Noble Family, the honor of your Nation, the
darling, happiness, and triumph of your Country; and, like the Sun, a great,
choice blessing to all those that do or shall live under your cherishing,
comforting, reviving influence; by being so happy as to have any relation unto,
or dependence upon, your Honor. My Lord, that is the right, the true Nobility
indeed, that is inlaid with virtue and piety; for he is the Noblest peer in the
World, that is sincere religious. There is no creature on this side Heaven
either so glorious, or excellent, as a Godly great man. The purest Gold is but
shining clay, the most precious and resplendent Gemms are but common and
dushkish Stones, all the sparkling stars are but dim candles set in dark
Lanthorns, and the refulgent eye of Heaven is but a glimmering Gloworm or
Taper; compared with his worth, and brightness. He Is a Phaenix whom the other
Birds of Honor cannot but applaud, esteem, and admire, though they will not
imitate him; A Titus Vespasian, the love and delight of mankind, the Loadstone,
joy, and jewel, of all honest, gracious hearts: He Is one of Gods most
honorable Privy Counselors: A Prince of the most truly Royal blood, the
richest Heir, and the greatest, the happiest Monarch in the World, for Heaven
is his Inheritance, and Kingdom. These, these my Lord are the prerogatives,
privileges, and portion of those that are great, and good. My Lord, its a
custom in some places, when a Tenant dies, for the next that injoies the lease
of the deceased to pay his Landlord an Harriot, viz. The best of all his quick
goods, and Cattle. My Forefathers who for an hundred years were Tenants to
your Lordships noble Progenitors, lie all of them in their beds of dust: I
succeed them in that Relation they had to your Honorable Family. I humbly hope
therefore that it will not be interpreted a breach of Covenants though I pay
that service in lieu of a Harriot to your Lordship which I confess I do most
justly owe, and therefore in Duty, and Gratitude, ought also to pay unto that
mirror, and honor of her Sex, Family, and Name, your Lordships truly noble
Mother. But yet I dare not tender this Homage to your Honor without this most
humble Supplication; That your Lordship will be pleased to pardon my very high
and criminal presumption in thus daring to setan orient Jewel in a leaden Ring;
to stamp your Lordships beautiful image upon a copper medal; and in offering to
pay or rather to acknowledge a little of my great debt, in leather instead of
silver. But truly my Lord besides a faithful heart and fervent prayers for your
felicity, this is the best of all my goods, and the chiefest of all my
treasures that I have to lay at your Lordships feet. And this is also the
liveliest the truest portraiture that I am able to draw: Either Lordships Noble
Progenitors so far as I do either know or could ever hear, have carefully,
wisely, constantly shunned, scorned, and abhorred those fatal shelvs of
oppression, and exaction, upon which so many great, avaritious, worldly greedy
Landlords have wrack't and ruined their estates, honor, consciences, and
posterities.

Lastly, this is the exactest draught that I can make of my own thankfulness,
and obligations. Be pleased therefore, my most Noble Lord, once more I
earnestly beseech you to pardon both my uncivil prolixity, and my unmannerly
injurious boldness in presuming to beg of your Lordship not only that you
would condescend so much below your self as to alight and stay in so mean a
Fabric, but also that you would deign to lodge in such Sheets as are both very
course and black. This honor and favor if your Lordship will vouchsafe to
confer upon me, then these rough-hewn stones which I have set up as columns of
my faithfulness, duty, gratitude, will become and continue (in spite of the
iron teeth, and the insatiable appetite of devouring time, that eats and
consumes without fullness, surfeiting, or satisfaction, even flinty pillars, as
well as feeble persons) a double monument of your Lordships nobleness, and
goodness to succeeding ages. These, these my Lord are the Forces and weapons
wherewith you have, do, and will, easily, certainly, gloriously, not only
conquer, but indear all real, virtuous hearts. These are the fetters too,
wherewith they will be not only chained most strongly, and kept most securely,
but also wherein they will be both willing, joyful, and ambitious to follow the
Triumphal Chariot of your transcendent worth. And amongst all those happy
Captives who thus adorn your Lordships victories, none will or can more
cordially honor you then he who (with his most ardent prayers for the
temporal, Spiritual, and eternal prosperity, Felicity and glory both of your
Honor, and your Noble relations on earth, and in Heaven) takes the boldness
to subscribe himself,

My LORD, Your Honors most Humble and most faithful Servant, Tho. Goddard*

TO THE Christian Reader.
BOOKS are a Feast or Banquet to which the invited guests (all that can read
and understand) do come with various appetites and palats. Some do hunger
after, and like best, that meat which is most unwholesom and dangerous, corrupt
principles. Others do desire and delight chiefly, or only in such dainties and
delicates as are curiously cook't and served up either in the China-dishes, or
silver plates, of wit and eloquence. And some will feed liberally upon such
provision as is both course, and common, when it is laid in the savoury sauce
of truth. The first of these I would not entertain if I could, procul hinc,
procul ite; for I have neither a bit nor a drop for you, unless like spiders
you will suck poison out of sweet flowers. The second I cannot though I would;
For I have no rare or generous wines (no Rhetorical streams flowing from the
pure and limpid fountain of ravishing Oratory) to invite, tempt, or
delightfully to in^briate your Lady-appetites, or thirsty minds withal: Nor
have I the Mine of a rich invention, or the necessary Magic of a lofty towering
fancy, either to furnish and cover my Table with sweet meats, or to confine you
within the circle of Approbation. My pen cannot drop Nectar, or life-honey, nor
are my lines either studded with pearl and Jewels, choice and refined conceits;
or enamelled with elegant, indearing, melting phrases. Only the last sort then,
are my (yea and their own) true friends. They are heartily welcome to my poor
dinner of green herbs. If any thing please them I desire them to eat freely,
and much good may it do them. But as for them (and God knows there are too many
such nominall Christians in the world) that, like those who are surfeited,
sickly, breeding, or dying, do nauseate and abhor almost every thing, and
usually those things most that are most nourishing, necessary, safe, and proper
for them, that will scarce touch, taste or sip of the best potion or Pharmacon
to save their lives; I do advise them either to change their minds, or to
forbear my table; because truth and holy Counsels will (like Physic) either
help or hurt, cure or kill them. I have run and rushed I confess into that
crowd, which does not only press and oppress the press, but surfeit it too:
Otherwise such filthy, unsavory, loathsome, impostumated matter, would not be
vomitted up by it, as we either do, or may too frequently behold. I know very
well also, that this is a quaint, a queasie, a critical, a very inquisitive,
and a peevish Age. I shall therefore that I may not offend it more; (it being
already too apt to be angry with truth and plainness) and in order to the
satisfying of such whose reason is not in their wills, whose heaven is not in
their Lusts, whose brains are not quartered in other men's heads, whose learning
and religion does not consist in opinion, detraction, profession, temporizing,
or faction, who do not do^e upon deformity, live on poison, and idolize their
very diseases; Acquaint the world why I have exposed my self to the danger, and
run the hazard of being esteemed what it shall please the many, or any to
account me.

First then negatively; It is not, Reader, I assure thee a tympanied ambition
to be known to the world; For he is certainly very strangely distempered in his
head that will knowingly and deliberately make, and set up himself a common But
to receive all those forked, and piled arrows which wit, learning, pride, envy,
malice, and ignorance will be sure to shoot at him: Nor a desire or design to
blow a gaudy Hemisphere upon a Nut^shel, or to perch upon a weathercock; to
hunt (I mean) for a vulgar applause, or to sit upon the good or rather giddy
opinions of the reeling multitude: Nor is it the midwifery of others importunity
(that Hackney, bald, threadbare, lean, and wondrous old apology for printing,
and common pimp to the press) that has delivered me of these little, weak,
and scarce breathing children: Nor is it either the wealth or beauty of these
sisters (unless you will be so kind as to account them fair and rich because
they are neither deformed, nor diseased) that has prevailed with me to offer
them unto the love, acceptance, and embraces of the world. Nor is it levity of
mind, or a lascivious Genius that makes me prostitute them to the eyes and hands
of all. Nor are a desire of praise from the virtuous, and judicious, or an
opinion of any excellency in themselves the wings that have carried these
call^w birds out of their warm nest into the cold, unkind, and dangerous world.
Nor is it any confidence that these helpless infants will find either
civility, courtesy, or charity abroad, since the most are friends only to the
wealthy, but Momus's and Nabals to books and Authors. Nor yet is it because I
am persuaded that others have not done much better then my self herein; For I
well know, and freely confess my self to be but a dwarf to those Giants, a
molehill to those mountains, and but a little winking candle compared with
those great and bright Sun^ of learning, by whose polished, exquisite
structures, these my unhewen stones are set up. Affirmatively, or positively
then my reasons and end why I suffered these doves to fly abroad are these:

First, because as our Talents (though but few or little) must not be profusely
wasted; so neither must they be parsimoniously buried in the napkins either of
idleness or silence.

2. Secondly, because it is both my prayer and hope, that with some of these
smooth stones taken out of that crystal brook the holy Scriptures, put into,
and thrown out of the sling of truth though by a little, weak assailant, that
great, dangerous, mischievous, deadly, and really dreadful Gol^ath sin,
(through the guidance, blessing, and assistance of Gods omnipotent arm, who can
when, and where it pleases him give both birth and success to this design and
encounter) will be overcome in some of those that shall seriously and
impartially peruse my papers: And also that those uncircumcised Philistines
(honor, pleasure, profit) which have manacled the hands and put out the eyes
of so many Samsons (chained, corrupted, yea deaded the affections, and blinded
the minds of so many millions of men and women) will be either vanquished or
weakened, in them.

3. Thirdly, because though the thin web of my work be through an unskilful
hand very course spun, yet since the warp is truth, and the oufe profit, I do
not despair but it may, yea will, not only invite but also delight and benefit,
some of my chapmen, my Readers; since I know that there are many both so
inge^^ous, and so ingenuous, that I am persuaded a Cord twisted and made up of
Divinity, Reason, Experience, and History will both hold them, please them, and
become not only an acceptable, but an amiable ornament unto them, although the
workman want both art, and elegancy.

4. Fourthly, because though I am very far from presuming, or pretending to be
fit or able either to teach those scholars that are deservedly preferred into
the upper School: Or to add any light of knowledge to those bright stars in the
high O^bs of Learning: yet I hope I may without offense, yea and with some
advantage to them also, immind, and entreat them, to join science and
conscience together, to live up to their knowledge and duty, by burning
inwardly with a well-grounded, well-guided zeal for God; and by shining
outwardly toward men with sobriety, innocence, sanctity; Since great gifts,
parts and abilities without honesty and grace, are great snares, temptations,
mischiefs, and plagues both to themselves and others. And since without a holy,
diligent, careful improvement of them both to Gods glory and the good* of
others, all those whom God has honored and enriched with them, will by him be
greatly and grievously punished for abusing, or not using and employing of
them. And as for those who are yet in the petty school, and lower forms, that
have not overgrown, nor travailed beyond their A. B. C. in understanding and
religion, nor as yet rightly learned to know themselves, sin, the world, or
their Christ's cross (that great work, duty, and comfort of true Christians)
there are lessens offered and set by me very necessary for them to be
acquainted with, instructed in, imminded of, and seasoned withal.

5. Lastly because I know that although many, instead of accepting my poor
endeavors, and receiving the truth in the love of it, will not only reject,
and disregard it, but also censure, yea bite, and revile the Author with their
invenomed teeth, and frothy, filthy tongues; yet my labor will not, shall not
be in vain, because it is in the Lord, and for the Lord. In his name and fear
this plain (not mosaic or carved) work was undertaken, to his glory it was,
and is intended, directed, and by his assistance, it is finished; I do not, I
dare not say, perfected. His blessing, his powerful, gracious, fruitful
influence, I do therefore most humbly beg upon it. And do only desire these few
very reasonable things and favors of my Readers:

First that they would instead of carping, snarling, or barking at my book,
which I confess has too much Alloy and dross (but no poison) in it,
communicate their own more pure, and better refined labors to the world. It
will be, I assure them, my joy and contentment, not envy or sorrow, to see, and
their own, not only honor but comfort to build marble and magnificent
fabrics, where such low, mudwal^'d Cottages, as mine is are erected.

2. Secondly, that they would prize, welcome, and embrace truth, though it
curb, cross, or kill their carnal Joies, profane ways, and worldly interests.

3. Thirdly, That they would seriously consider that Jewels are both as
precious and resplendent in a wooden box, or in an earthen pot, as in a
cabinet of Pearl: That there may be useful, wholesome, and savoury herbs in
that Garden, which wants the bravery, beauty, glories, and the gaudey
embroidery of curious flowers; And that sweet meats may do well for sauce, or
to taste of, but are not fit, or safe to be made our daily bread.

4 Fourthly, that they would not be their own murderers and Executioners by
loving vice, and hating virtue, by adoring earth, and trampling Heaven under
their feet, by forsaking Christ, to follow the world, by poisoning their souls,
to please their senses, by deferring their repentance, and an holy Life till
death; or by leaving the safe and pleasant ways of truth and righteousness, to
walk in the dangerous, destructive paths of error, heresies, and wickedness.

5. Lastly, I do earnestly entreat them to read what I have written without
partiality, passion, prejudice, and prepossession, that Maxim being most true
here; Intus existens, prohibet altenum. For, vessels top full of earth cannot
receive without being emptied either gold or gemms: And the most precious
cordial, the most sovereign Julep must needs be lost, and spilt, if it be put
into a dish that is brim-ful of dung, or muck-hill-pit water; Read them then
(once more I do importunately, pray and request you) with hearts willing,
desirous and resolved to be informed, imminded, convinced, reformed, confirmed,
and if you receive any good by my weak labors, remember to give God the glory
of his own work and mercy; and instead of your praises Crown me with your
prayers. But if you do not profit by them consider, That bad, disaffected, and
distempered stomachs do turn the best meats into ill humors, and into
dangerous, if not mortal diseases; That none are more either sure to languish,
or likely to die, then those that refuse, loath and cast away the Physic that
should cure them. That those who hate the light shall one day when it is too
late, clearly see their folly, sin, and misery, in outerdarknesse. That
glorified Saints would be Gaolers, Angels tormentors, and heaven it self an
hell to those, that are unholy, unheavenly, unregenerated on earth. That they
who have forgotten, forsaken, left, and lost God and Jesus Christ, shall never
(without humbling their souls, mourning for their sins, and returning to the
Lord) find or feel any true comfort, peace, or happiness, either in life, or
death. That they who do not with the spiritual eye of a justifying faith,
steadfastly behold the sun of righteousness Jesus Christ, (as it is said the
eagle can with her natural eyes the sun of heaven) will and do (like the kite)
with the eyes of sense and corrupt reason look earnestly, yea longingly at,
st^op eagerly unto, and feed greedily upon the carrion and garbage of
creature comforts, which do only fit and fat the wicked (as the richest soil
does beasts) for the day of slaughter, vengeance, and damnation. That they who
do not imp^ the wings of their knowledge and reason with the golden feathers of
virtue and piety, will never be able to soar above the World, or to mount up to
Heaven. Solus vir bonus est revera prudens Arist. Ethic. 6. Contrae (inquit
alius) stolidi et imprudentes sunt mali, Keck, syst. Ethic. lib. 1. c. 3. p.
148.
That they only are really wise and good, who are sincerely religious; because
discoursing learnedly is but the bark, the shell of knowledge, and because
professing zealously is but the husk, the leaf of sanctity: for only honesty
and piety are the kernel, fruit, head, heart, blood, spirits, light, heat,
soul, and body of true wisdom, and saving grace. That therefore Christians
ought to conform their practice to their principles, their works to their
words, and their Lives to their light. That they whose actions are eccentrick
to Gods honor, word, and will, will never (without repentance and reformation)
be found weight in the balance of the sanctuary. That it is infinitely more
both honor and happiness to be a truly holy Christian, than it is to be a
victorious Caesar, a famous Scipio, a renowned Castriot or an invincible
Alexander. That it is transcendently, unspeakably, yea unconceiveably more both
glory, comfort, and felicity to, and for Christians to mor^ifie their sins,
lusts and passions, then to overcome, own or command the whole world.
Praeclarum quidem est, inquit Xevoph in Orat. de Ag^filio.
Agesilaus, inexpugnabiles hostium muros superare, multo verum praeclarius
animum parare suum, ut a We have stricken one good blow, there rests another,
yet better, and greater then that, which is, that we overcome our selves
forbearing to ris^e and kill, said Frederick the Emperor to his German
Soldiers, after he had defeated the Hungarians Camerarius Hist Meditat.
pecunia, voluptatibus, metuque sit inexpugnabilis. That none shall lie so low
in Hell as those that have been nearest Heaven in the enjoyment of the
powerful means of grace, and that have had the gracious tenders of Gods
choicest and most precious mercies in Christ, frequently and earnestly offered
unto them, if they live and die barren, hard, dry, or profane under them, and
wilful undervaluers, neglecters, or despisers of them.

And lastly, consider, that a frequent, serious and pious meditation of Gods
mercy, the love of Christ, Man's duty, the misery of sin, excellency of grace,
necessity of Christ, vanity of the creature, emptiness and deceitfulness of
the world, felicity of heaven, torments of hell, the frailty of life, certainty
of death, and of the dreadful day of judgment, is, and will be found by all
those that will carefully, and conscientiously use, and practice it, a most
sovereign, excellent, fruitful means both to awaken, humble, melt, and inflame
a secure, proud, hard, frozen heart.

Meditatio est soror lectionis, nutrix orationis, directrix operis, omniumque
pariter perfectio et consumatrix. Lege, creed, ora, time, dilige, disce, Age.
Vale.
To his Worthy Friend, Mr. THO. GODDARD.
Learned Sir,
HAving perused your Miscellanea and Character: both which you diminish in your
title page, by naming them an Essaie. I fell upon the consideration of Country
Gentlemen semblable to the three Regions of the Air. In the middle, Clouds and
Vapors and Meteors apt to condense into plagues; or dry and fiery Exhalations
which unrestrained by providence divine, fall down in oppressions, and
violences. Among these we may rank diverse of our dull Grands, who lapping warm
their Dura Matters, in a fat velume of some old college or Cathedral leases,
or later easier purchases; like Mushrooms, or Fuzzes of noisome earth, grow
able to dim both learned Wits and nobler Originalls.

In a lower Region, we discern some, that having contented themselves for a
dozen months to wear a gaudy gown in the University, and only to play with a
few books finely strung and gilded, return with that Library, whence streams
of learning flow up to their lips, and clusters of choice sentences hang
dangling ore their beds and shelves, while they like Tantalus, so set, cannot
sip, nor reach what is indeed above their heads. Who often in their estates of
Land become the prey of Sycophants, or crafty Servants, and their Souls hardly
escaping the book and thraldom, either of our professors, or the popish
confessors, are frighted out of their old wits by new Illuminists, or by that
Bull of Ecclesia Catholica Romana, so charmed, that they dare not leap that
pale out of which they are made to believe, that God has no Dear, nor they any
hope of Salvation.

But (Sir,) As in the supreme Region is Limpid Air, and calm and pure Serenity
preservd. So have we some beaux esprits, rare and elevated Souls, who having
tasted profoundly the fountains both of moral and divine knowledges, cannot
rest till from their own full thoughts they impart (as the Sun his rays) a
fostering and blessed contagion to the Souls of their darker brethren.

Here I would willingly exemplify in words at length, and tell the happiness
of Chesh. in their pious, noble, and learned Sr. G. B: Of Lincoln the like, in
Sr I. M. And of Northam. in Sr. I. I. my most honored Maecenas; and I am
hardly withheld from mentioning our famous and learned countryman, Dr. T. N.
Physician, on whom might worthily be bestowed the Panegyric or Pindarick^odes,
even of that incomparable Poet of Leicest. Mr. I. Cl.

But as the well-known modesty of these, so yours also imbars enc^mions: other
wise I might justly boast a Be of generous race and extraction. From Be Be
in this County, who by industrious draughts from various Flowers in diverse
languag'd books, has framed a composure of Nectarian sweets, and imparts them
thus, not only to that voisinage (whereof he is a double ornament in learning
and in conversation) but with enlarged Beneficence (the crown of good men's
actions) exposes his laborious collections to the use of all that are able to
understand him. Wherein I profess (for fear of sacrilege) I dare not use my
Deleatur nor what you call for, an Index expurgatory. Believe me, Sir, when I
say as Trebatius to his Horace, Equidem nihil hinc diffindere possim, and add,
nec ausim, and yet will boldly affix this short charm to your most observant
Readers This page, right set, should be the last behind;
In this are all the Errata they can find.


Leicest. Janu. 19th 58. Your Servant, Sir. Tho. Pestel.

To my worthily honored, AND Very good Friend Mr. THOMAS GODDARD.
Dear SIR,
I Have at length so far befriended my self as to read over your serious and
savoury Meditations: wherein methinks elegance and piety like friendly rivals
strive for mastery; and that with such equal skill and strength that either
both (which is not lawful) or neither (which is pity since both deserve it)
must have the Crown Sir, the honor of the work (if you will be so benign to the
churlish ungrateful world, to make it publ^que) will be your own, the profit
and pleasure the Readers. For ex^ruditione fructus, ex elegantia voluptas, et
ex authoritate summus honos conciliatur. You have done many Heathen Authors the
honor to make them speak like Christians, and you will make those whom you
vouchsafe to favor with the Reading of your papers to live as such if they be
read with the same spirit, they were written; if they find not the reader good,
they will make him good: as was said of Plato; philosophia Platonem non accepit
nobilem, sed fecit Sir, I received them when I was in a hurrey of business and
could but cast an eye upon them: but at a little more leisure reviewing them, I
see if I could but take in a little more, and digest what as yet I have but
tasted, I should be forced to say more, without danger of being taxed by malice
it self of flattery, rashness, or ignorance, (for nec irrisio in istos
moresnec ad^latio c^dat) then your modesty will bear. Who mind what he reads,
will see your mind, in what you have written, to be well composed and gathered
up within it self; and I wish both mine and yours too, could keep under the
command of those apprehensions you had when you so well employed your self.
Were they to be public, I would desire Cyprian to spare that Ornament for
you, to be put into the Epistle to your Book which Erasmus bestowed on him,
viz. Pectus ardet evangelica pietate, and pectori respondet oration; loquitur
diserta, sed magis fortia quam diserta. And I would (not so much to commend as
engage you to it) say, neque tam fortia loquitur quam vivit. Sir, in
vouchsafing me a sight of your Papers, you have both done me honor, and laid a
very acceptable and pleasing obligation upon me, the more to thank you for your
Love, and the better to esteem you for your Worth. I beseech you, Sir, conceive
no displeasure against me for deteining your papers so long; for till within
these 3 or 4 days I had but just looked on them: And, Non satis est vidisse
semel, juvat usq morari; Ter pulchrum est quod ter lectum placet. I confess my
own judgment condemns me for keeping it so long and minding it no more, as
doing an act that should belie my respects and mis-report that true love and
esteem, which I do and have so much cause, both to pay and owe you. At my next
meeting with you, I will submit my self to your charitable censure, and in the
mean time pray that you and I may copy out your papers in our lives. Live and
be happy, and if you can, continne to love

June, 4th, 165^. Your already too much regarded Friend, and Servant, E. S.
(...).
The Printer to the READER
WHETHER Courteous, Christian, or Critical, READER,
IF Courteous, thou will kindly accept what is freely, and civilly here
presented to thee. If Christian, thou will not disdain, fret, or frown to be
imminded of thy duty, though thou been so learned as not to need a Teacher. If
critical, remember thou art but a man, and so thou will be sure to have not
only wants, but weaknesses too (if not crimes,) till thou becommest a Feast for
Worms. Do not then gad abroad, but stay at home, til thou can see nothing
within thy self that justly deserves either reproof, or detestation, least thy
wit (like a foul Gun) recoil and wound thy self. Remember, that great Parts
without Grace are poison. That a vail laid over the defects of thy Brother,
will be a mantle to cover thy own. That the worst men are usually the most
censorious and peevish. That it is neither wisdom, nor honor to endeavor to
please all. And therefore the Author well knowing that some will prize and
delight in that which others despise, has exposed this Child which was born in
the year 1658* (as by the Letters of some of those learned, orthodox, religious
Gentlemen herewith for thy satisfaction printed who did see and peruse it, is
manifest) to thy view. It has been swadled up in silence, and laid down in the
cradle of privacy, longer then at first the Father of it intended, to prevent
that prejudice which an ingenuous, open-breasted plainness would very probably
or rather most certainly, have done unto him; since many in these black,
blasting, bloody d^ies did lose their teeth, and not a few their lives, by
going too near the heels of truth. Thou will find some expressions hoodded,
because it was not safe to let them go abroad barefaced. It Is too well known
that it has been a very cold, dark, frosty, winter in England, and that has
kept these ^^^^owers a long-time within their Bed. But since we have now (for
ever blessed, adored, admired be the only God of wisdom, justice, mercy,) a
pleasant, fruitful Spring, by the happy, joyful, seasonable rising of the
welcome Sun of Soveraingnty again in our H^rizon; the comfortable quickening
influence thereof, has caused them not only to peep out of their grave, and
look abroad, but also freely to offer themselves to thine eye and palate; as
willing, yea desirous at once to please and profit thee: Do not then wither
them by thy envious censure, or reject them with a churlish disdain, scornful
slight, or peevish disrepect, but cherish them by thy kind acceptance. Do not
only taste or gargle, but swallow, and digest what is here prepared for thee.
Thou will find variety to invite thee. For here is History to delight thee,
Truth to confirm or convince thee, Divinity to profit thee, Brevity to please
thee; here are no knotty controversies, to puzzle or perplex thee, no
lascivious passages to corrupt or debauch thee, no venomous principles to
poison or destroy thee: and here is a little poetry, least having nothing but a
dish of prose set before thee, thy (perhaps queasy) stomach, should be
distasted, cloyed, or oftended It Is true, many of the materials in this
building are old (yet sound;) but the method, the fashion is new, or however
not common. These papers were sent to London at the beginning of May last past
to give thee a visit; and had long since offered themselves to thy perusal, if
the unhandsome neglect of him that desired to have the printing of them had not
at once abused the Authors civility and frustrated his expectation by detaining
them several months in his hands without doing any thing in order to the
publishing of them. And since that time, the press of that party who engaged to
dispatch them against the last Term or sooner has been so full and busy that
the delay was unavoidable and constrained: since therefore its not my fault,
but trouble, that this Book has been so long imprisoned, now it is enlarged let
it be acceptable, and then it will (though it comes so late) be not only
seasonable, but I hope profitable to thee. The end of printing it is not (I
assure thee) thy applause, but thy spiritual good: And that this may be the
happy success of the Authors writing, my publishing, and thy reading; is both
his earnest prayer, and my hearty desire. Farewell.

Courteous Reader,
I Am constrained, contrary to my desire and expectation, instead of ceasing
further to trouble thee, to present a Letter of Request for a new favor unto
thee; I mean, to entreat thy pardon of the following Errata's, which being both
many, and great ones, do stand in need at once of thy curtesy and ingenuity to
correct and excuse them. Besides, the Book being transcribed by one that did
neither observe the Orthography, nor regard the Comma's, Semicolons, Colons, or
Periods of sentences, they do in too many places of it both request thy Candor,
and want thy care to rectify them. Its my unhappiness and not fault, that
this trouble should be given thee. I hope therefore thou will not condemn the
Author, but pass by, or amend in thy Reading the faults in transcribing and
printing of them. This favor if thou please to grant, it will double his
obligations to love and thank he, who both desires thy spiritual good, and to
do thee good spiritually.

ERRATA.
IN the Epistle Dedicatory. p. 7. l. 20. r. varnished, p. 11. l. 7. r. paper.
l. 13. r. virtues. In the preface. p. 3. l. 16. r. Opinion. p. 5. l. 18. r.
highest. p. 2. l. 6. r. Haven. p. 8. l. 5. r. and kingdom. p. 9. l. 3. r.
comedy. Ibid. p. 12. l. 37. r. which. del. equally. p. 14. l. 30. r. and they.
p. 17. l. 33. r. exulted. p. 18. l 5 r. thy and. dele. own. p. 19. l 3 marg. r.
in Trinitate. p. 12. l. 14. r. covet. p. 23. l. 10. r. this. p. 24. l. 12. r.
all miseries. p, 25. l. 19. r. all whose prayers. p. 27. l. 7. marg. r. but. p.
35. r. storm. p. 44. l. 13. r. but rebellion. p 49, l. 6. r. erected. p. 50. l.
25. r. pittacus. p. 51. l. 24. r. eutrapelus. p. 51. l. 19. marg. r. Frilby. p.
52. l. 22. r. juvandi. p. 53. l. 22. r. is. l. 36. r. patientia. p. 54 l. 9. r.
with Isaac. p. 55. l. 7. r. quest. p. 56. 10. r. dum siti^ sitare ^item. p.
57. l. 21. r. visiting. p. 61. l. 36. r. dark. p. 62. l. 2. r. delight in. p.
68. l. 27. r. their. p. 71. l. 14. r. pleased. p. 76. l. 15. r sheds. l. 22 r.
in the Center. p. 89. l. 2. r. as l. 11. God in all things ends the
parenthesis) p 90. l. 5. r. clean. p. 94. l. 16. r. expressions. p. 95. l. 12.
r. which. p. 103. l. 8. r. leaden. p. 104. l. 20. r. a Nathan. p. 117. l. 31
del. that. p. 122. l. 9. r. pessimus. p. 132. l. 21. r. and in the margen^ r.
and articles of the Chapter of England. 23. A little Box of pills. p. 13. l. 29. for
Varius r. Narius. p. 18 l. 23. r. down.

Reader thou art desired to take notice that all the Pages from 48 are false
folied, that instead of 49 there is 45, etc, but we have kept them in this
^rrata as they should be, that is, in order.

MISCELLANEA; OR, Serious Useful Considerations, Moral, Historical,
Theological.
I. Of God.
THE nature of God who is the deepest Ocean of being, cannot be measured by the
short, the snarled line of man's shallow, dark, erroneous understanding, nay it is
equal madness, and presumption to attempt it. For how can that which is narrow
and finite, contain, or comprehend that which is infinite. Deus religione
intelligendus est, pietate profitendus, sensu vero persequendus non est, sed
adorandus. His glorious essence so dazles the purblinde eyes of reason and
natural knowledge, that the more they look on him, the blinder they are. We
can at best but spell him in his wonderful works of Creation, Providence,
Preservation, and his Gubernation of the world, as Men; as Christians, we may
and can read much of him, and see his back parts in his Attributes, Word,
Ordinances, by his holy Spirit teaching, illuminating and applying the
spiritual eye salve of heavenly wisdom, and saving knowledge, to our
bemisted, darkened, benighted minds: But when we are Saints in Heaven, the
Prospectives of Glory and Immortality being given unto us, we shall then see him
face to face, and know him as he is. Here on earth where we are but strangers,
guests, pilgrims, it is our duty to serve, obey, admire, adore him. There,
which is our City, Heaven, home, it will be our both delight, happiness,
reward and portion to behold, possess, enjoy him for ever; and this is the very
Apex, and completion of a Christians felicity. Here it is presumption, danger,
sin, to peep into the secret Cabinet the Sacred Ark of his unrevealed will;
there God will discover, and the soul will with fresh, unwearied, renewed
desires, sweetest pleasures, most refined bliss, purest Joies, and fullest
contentment, without all possibility of either sorrowing, sinning, losing them,
or being satiated with them, see and possess whatever can afford it
blessedness, glory, or satisfaction. Here errors, crimes, miseries, and
judgments are the fruits, effects, rewards of a busy, bold, curious, profane
inquiry into the essence of that thrice blessed incomprehensible Majesty; and
therefore we must be sober, fearful, humble, modest in our search of it, in our
approach toward it, and not dare or presume to touch that glorious Mount, by
any irreligious, irreverent, unwarrantable notions, opinions or expressions of
this great God, blessed for ever: for otherwise in stead of a discovering light
to guide and comfort us, we shall be sure to meet with a fire that will consume
us. L^qui volentes de Dei profundo, merst sunt in profundum. It is honor,
comfort, and happiness enough for us to know him by a justifying faith to be
our God in Christ, while our souls abide in the Tents of our bodies, in the
Wilderness of this world, and that when death has taken them down, we shall
have spiritual Mansions, and a glorious inheritance in the Canaan of Heaven.
This Almighty, yet most merciful God, is the sole Landlord of the whole world;
we are his Tenants at will, and the Rents which he requires of us, and has
obliged us to pay duly, truly, and not only yearly, but daily unto him, are
obedience, holiness, love, praises, prayer, and thankfulness. This God is
both omniscient, omnipresent, omnipotent, and just, and pure, therefore he both
knows all those sins that are acted, though never so secretly or cunningly by
the sons of men, abhors them, and will certainly, yea severely punish them: Yet
he is also, patient, pitiful, gracious and merciful, therefore he is not only
willing, but ready, yea desirous to forgive them, and to be reconciled to all
truly penitent transgressors. Aelius Spartianus.
Trajane the Emperor of Rome being on horseback to go to the Wars, he
alighted again to hear the complaint of a poor Roman. If the Lord of Hosts be
marching against a poor soul in a way of wrath, he will yet both stay to hear
the Petition of an humble, sorrowful sinner, being that God, who hears
prayers, and he will also turn from his fierce wrath, being that God who
delights in showing mercy, Thucidides.
Admetus Molossorum Rex ignovit Hosti suo. Themistocli, filiolum proprium
intuens, quem Themistocles supplex utraque manu complexus patri ostentabat.
This good God who is infinitely more compassionate, then the most pitiful
Prince, yea then the most affectionate father, and (which is yet more) then the
most indulgent tender hearted Esaias 49. 15.
Mother ever was, or possibly can be to the child of her own womb, will both
freely and fully pardon all those who bring his own, his only son Jesus Christ,
in the Arms of faith and love, with humility and supplication unto him for the
life of their souls. (c) Marc. Aurelius in a Letter to his friend Cornelius.
It was a custom amongst the Romans after they had proclaimed open wars
against an Enemy, and when they had sent their Armies against them, for all the
Roman Senators to go into the Temple of Jupiter, and in it to swear, that if
those enemies against whom they were going to fight, did desire to enter into a
league with Rome, or ask pardon for their faults, that then all revenge laid
aside they should grant them mercy. The Lord of Hosts has proclaimed open wars
Esaias 3. 11.
against all impenitent Sinners, who are implacable enemies to his Majesty, to
the Prince of Peace Jesus Christ his son, and to his people; yet he has
declared, Esaias 55. 7.
promised, Ezechiel 33. 11.
yea sworn that if by true repentance, sound humiliation and a through
reformation of their hearts and lives they will mourn for and turn from their
sins enter into a Covenant to walk holily, closely, uprightly before him, keep
it, and by servent prayer beg for mercy, and forgiveness, heartily Prove. 28.
13.
acknowledge their crimes that then he will pardon them, be reconciled unto
them, and not destroy them. Don Anthony de Guavara Dial of Princes. Fol. 200.
Darius to mock Alexander the great, sent to him to know where his treasures
were for such great Armies: Alexander answered, Tell Darius he keeps his
treasures in his coffers, and that I have no other treasures but the hearts of
my friends. He that has God for his friend shall be sure to be rich, he shall
want no good thing, the Lord will give him both grace and glory, he will make
him both holy and happy; And he that makes God his Treasure, esteeming, loving,
seeking his favor, a sweet holy Communion with him, and a stock, a hoard of
virtue, and all heavenly graces, above all earthly enjoyments, shall be sure to
find all precious substance here, and to be crowned with eternal felicity
hereafter. Rainold O^as. p 484.
When Caesar had commanded Pompeys Statua's to be erected, M. Cicero said thus
to him; Statuas Pompeii statuisti, stabilisti tuas. He that sincerely
endeavors to honor God, shall certainly by it, but not for it (because all,
yea more then we can either do or pay is both debt and duty to him) * honor
himself. Non reputes magnum quod Deo servis, sed maximum reputa quod ipse
dignetur te in servum assumere sibi. 1 Samuel 2. 30.
Julian commanded by an Edict all the Christians in his Army to sacrifice to
his Gods, (g) Spee. Chro^^^. p. 171. 173.
or else they should lose their places and Honors: whereupon Flavius
Valentinianus chose rather to forsake the Camp then Christ, his Conscience, and
his Religion; but God did eminently, abundantly, reward him, for afterward he
became Emperor of Rome. Amongst the Ancestors of the Rhodians it was a Law,
that if a Father had many Children, the most virtuous should inherit; and if he
had but one virtuous child, that then he should be the sole heir of his goods
and Estate. Only they who art obedient, pious, gracious men and women, shall be
Heirs of glory, and enjoy the inhe^itance of the Saints in light. It is
therefore our wisdom, duty, interest, and will be our comfort, peace,
happiness to get clear evidences that this God, is our God: for unless we
have a propriety in him, and can truly, beleevingly, experimentally say with
Thomas, My Lord and my God; although he be aboundlesse, bottomless, Ocean of
mercy, not so much as one drop thereof will ever flow out from him, to refresh
our souls. Its no advantage or comfort to an Esau, that the Lord loves a Jacob.
Quid mihi profuerit Deus alienus? Vae illi qui non habet Deum de proprio. The
Ark preserved none but only those who were in it from perishing.

Let us therefore do to God as Senec. de Benef. lib. 1. Cap. p. 385.
Aeschines did to Socrates his Master, resign and give up our souls and
selves, freely, sincerely, entirely to him, saying with him, Nihil dignum te
inveni quod dare tibi p^ssim, and hoc modo pauperem me esse sentio. Itaque dono
tibi quod unum habeo, Me ipsum. Such is O Lord my poverty that I have nothing
worthy of thy acceptance, or answerable to my desires, to present unto thee,
and therefore I do cordially give thee my self; and then the Lord will answer
us, as Socrates did him, Accipio, sed ea lege ut te tibi meliorem reddam quam
recepi; I do not only accept thee, but I will also make and return thee to thy
self better, richer, holier, happier, then I received thee. For if we will be
his people, then the Lord will be our God, and in, and with him, we shall enjoy
all good things, but without him nothing. Because, Quicquid praeter te est
Domine non reficit, non sufficit; si ad Corpus sufficit, non tamen perpetuo
satiat, quum adhuc amplius quaeratur: qui autem te habet, satiatus est, finem
suum habet; non habet ultra quod quaeratur, quia tu es supra omne visible,
audibile, adorabile gustabile, tangibile, sensibile. In a word, what King Henry
the 5th. promised to his Soldiers when he said to them. Speed. Chro^. p. 796.
Whosoever desires Riches, Honor, and Rewards here, he shall find them, Ni mirum
haec medio posuit Deus omnia campo, the Lord of hosts makes good to his people
who are sure to find life in his favor, to receive grace with every good thing
here, and eternal glory hereafter. This is the portion, pay, and promotion of
all that faithfully serve, that truly love God.

The Prayer.
MOST High, most holy, most gracious, and most glorious God, since thou art
both the Lord of Hosts, and the King of Saints, the Father of Mercy and the
fountain, or rather the inexhaustible, never-failing, every fully, sweetly and
freely satisfying Ocean of all true felicity, heavenly Joys, heart-reviving,
supporting Graces and thirsty souls; Let all those I beseech thee that know
and profess thy name, fear, love, trust, obey thee and delight in thee; Let
them know thee savingly, fear thee filially, love thee cordially, obey thee
sincerely, and delight in thee chiefly, yea infinitely more then in Corn, Wine,
Oil, pleasure, profit, honor and all sublunary enjoyments. Let oh Lord
nothing please, quiet, or content them till they have gotten comfortable
evidences of thy special Love, and until they enjoy an humble, holy, sweet
communion with thee. Let them not account the choysest, rarest, most endearing
things in the whole world worth either desiring, seeking, or possessing without
thee, since they all are (if they do not flow from thy Love in Christ, as well
as come or stream from thy common, thy general providence) but shells without
kernels, Bones without marrow, Combs without honey, and Husks without fruit
to those that receive them: that so being sensible and persuaded of their
Creators All Sufficiency, the Creatures emptiness, deceitfulness,
insufficiency, their own nothingnesse, unworthiness, wretchedness,
loathsomeness and spiritual misery by reason of their Original pollution,
actual Rebellions, and crying abominations committed against thee, they may beg
earnestly, heartily, constantly to thee who alone can, and wilt hear, help,
heal them, for spiritual Mercy, for hearts to abhor sin, humiliation for sin,
pardon of it, strength against it, and victory over all sin; for minds to
know thee, holiness to be like thee, sincerity to please, grace to glorify
thee, and for thy Favor which is at once (like a Cabinet of Pearl full of most
precious unvaluable gemms) Joy, Peace, Honor, Riches, Comfort, Light, Life,
and Bliss. O let us all-blessed God make thee our end, our Center and Rest,
our Portion. Our Treasure, and our All; and let us never be quiet till we know
and experience thee to be a reconciled God and our merciful Father in and
through thy dear Son Jesus Christ, that so we may both enjoy thy Love O God,
which is better then life, whilst we sojourne upon earth, and live Crowned with
the God of Love in glory when these Mud-wall'd Cottages of our frail Bodies
shall be crumbled and resolved into Dust by Death. Grant this O God for Jesus
Christ his sake. Amen.

Sine Deo nec Gratia, Gaudium, Bonum, nec Coelum.
II. Of Jesus Christ; and, A Christians Duty unto Christ.
HE is truly, really, both God and man; God, that he might satisfy the Lords
justice, appease his wrath, justify and acquit guilty, condemned man; Propter
hominem homo Deus factus est.
man that he might die for sin, purchase life for those who were spiritually
dead, and redeem them both from their woeful slavery, and from eternal misery.
He put off those Royal robes of Majesty and Glory, and put on (in his
Incarnation) the course, rotten Garments, or rather rags of flesh and frailty,
and so became like us in all things sin only excepted. Behold here infinite,
astonishing, miraculous debasement, Compassion, Condescension. The Creator of
the world became a mortal man, the King of Kings a subject. Man sins, and his
God willingly dies to expiate his Crimes. The Actions and passion of this
blessed Jesus are a continued series of miracles, a golden chain let down from
heaven to earth, all whose links are love, mercy, goodness, pity, wonder. Dio
Cassius.
Trajanum ferunt suorum vulneribus medicam manum adhibuisse, and cum fasciae
dificerent, nec fuaelquidem vesti pepercisse, sed eam totam in ligamenta and
fomenta discidisse. But this, and ten thousand times more, Compassion,
affection, charity, is not so much as a drop to the Ocean, a beam of light to
the Sun, or a dust in the balance to the whole earth, compared with the love
of Christ to undone man. For never did the most tender hearted Sovereign do
that for a wounded Soldier; nor yet the most faithful lover for his dearest
friend, which Jesus Christ did for his deadlyest enemies. What Prince did ever
give his Throne, Kingdom to his chiefest Rebels? What Physician did ever let
the blood out of his own heart to cure a most malicious unthankful Patient?
What Judge did ever freely sacrifice his own life to save a condemned
malefactor, who did not only desire and resolve, but endeavor to murder him
upon the Bench? What General or Commander did ever suffer willingly himself to
be mortally wounded, to cure the hurts or save the lives of those Soldiers who
conspired to betray him? Yet Jesus Christ did all this and infinitely more; for
he left heaven, descended out of the Chariot and came down from the Throne of
his Glory, to sit upon his footstool the earth. He willingly endured a close
imprisonment in that dark Dungeon, the womb of his both Mother and Creature for
a time; and afterward he removed himself into that greater Jail the world,
into which he was no sooner entered by his birth, but disregard, dishonor,
contempt, dangers attended on him, saluted him, and was the best entertainment,
the chief Rent, and Homage which his Tenants, Subjects, Creatures afforded,
presented, paid unto him their Lord, King, Creator. Immediately, yea constantly
after this cold, uncivil, unkind, ungrateful usage till his death, bloody
enemies hunted this Royal Lion of the Tribe of Juda to destroy him; cruel
Eagles pursued this harmless, galless Dove, to prey upon him; Malicious
cunning Foxes attempted to catch this innocent meek Lamb of God, whom they
should have worshipped to worrey him: some openly persecuted, others secretly
combined against him; some impudently affronted, others subtly by questions,
varnished with Religion, and gilded with pretense of conscience labored to
ensnare him: some scorned and derided, others blasphemed him: This golden Ball
was continually bandied and tossed up and down in the Tennis Court of this
world by wicked men with the Rackets of Implacable malice, enraged ignorance,
blind ambition, and barbarous persecution till he was stricken into the hazard
of his Grave by the hand of death. And yet all this was kindness, Comdie to
those injuries, to that Tragedy, which he received, and soon after acted: for
they consulted, apprehended, accused, buffeted, derided, reviled, undervalued,
insulted, slandered, crowned with thorns (at once to mock and wound him)
arraigned, condemned, and then crucified him. And yet all this too was love,
ease, pleasure, mercy, to that ineffable, yea unconceivable misery which their
own, and the sins of the whole world burdened, and afflicted him withal in
that bloody, violent, terrible conflict of his upon the cross with sin, Satan,
and the wrath of God, the dreadfulnesse, weight, horror, and fierceness
whereof was such that it amazed, affrighted nature, and almost unhinged the
whole Creation. Matthew. 27.
For the sun of heaven, whilst the son of God was suffering upon earth hid his
resplendent face under a pitchy cloud, at once blushing, grieving and fearing
to behold so sad a spectacle. The heavens put themselves into mourning, wore a
sable garment, and gave a black livery to the world, when that prodigious fact
was committed, that so they might both wear an habit suitable to the crime,
and apparel heaven and earth in a dress fit to attend their maker withal to
his grave, expressing their sorrows in showers of tears. The very Rocks (to
upbraid his more then flinty hearted Enemies, to teach them and us compassion,
when others, especially those who are innocent do suffer, and compunction when
we by sinning do crucify our Savior) did relent, yea break, and (because man
was dumb^, or rather silent and would not,) they clave themselves into mouths
and tongues to proclaim, and preach his Majesty, mercy, Divinity, torments,
funeral; The senseless earth seemed to apprehend, grew aguish, and falling
into a cold fit, she did quake and tremble, as if she had both understood, and
been terrified with those woeful, dismal, dreadful calamities, plagues, and
judgments with her equally stupid, cruel and rebellious Children were then
with both hands deliberately, diligently, certainly pulling down upon their
own wicked heads, and by that fearful, bloody, prevailing Imprecation Matthew.
6, 25.
(his blood be upon us and our Children) importuning an omnipotent, just, and
highly offended God to intail upon their unborne posterity. The vail of the
Temple rent from the top to the bottom in twain, and by that Sympathizing,
mysterious Act did declare, assure and publish, both to them and all the world.

1. That the vail of ignorance, and superstition, which had so long covered and
blinded the minds of men, should be immediately taken way, and torn in pieces
by the promulgation of the glorious, precious, comfortable Gospel of Jesus
Christ.

2. That the vail or pale of partition betwixt Jew and Gentile (the Jews being
till then enclosed, and several, but the Gentile open-field and Common) were
now plucked up and broken down.

3. That all the types, ceremonies, shadows, and sacrifices of the Law, were
vanished, abolished, the Antitype being come.

4. That the veil of sin which hid the face of God from beholding his noblest
sublunary Creatures with the eyes of pity and mercy were taken away, so that
now God would look with a pleased smiling countenance upon man, in and through
his dear son Jesus Christ.

5. And lastly, that the obdurate, and stony heart of sinful man must be rent
and broken by true repentance, humiliation and contrition, before he can have
any saving interest in, or spiritual benefits by the passion, merits and
satisfaction of Jesus Christ: The Graves unlockt their hitherto fast bolted
doors, and many of the Prisoners of hope came out of their cold, silent, dark
habitations at once, to acknowledge the divinity of Christ, to manifest their
allegiance to him their Sovereign, to assert and demonstrate the certainty of
the bodies Resurrection, and to confess him to be their God, Head, Redeemer.
Thus all things but ungrateful man, for whom Christ endured all this, did
sympathize and suffer with him, the greatness, sharpness and intolerablenesse
of whose sorrow, anguish and miseries were such (And needs must they be
unparalled, unconceivable, since the guilt, load, punishment, torments of all
the elect, yea, of the whole world, together with the utmost, keenest and most
implacable rage, spite and fury both of Dev^ls and wicked men, pressed,
pierced, wounded both his body and soul at once) that at last he bled out these
words, Matthew. 27. 46.
My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me? But yet his misery was our mercy,
his Crucifixion our Comfort; For now the wounds of this gracious, glorious
Jesus are become a Christians City of refuge. So that he who flies unto, and
hides himself in the Clefts and holes of that Rock, shall not be consumed,
though the Lord pass by in Majesty, glory, and fury.

A Bird being pursued by an Hauk flew into the bosom of a Xenocrates.
Philosopher, who gave his unexpected guest both welcome and safety. When a
poor soul is pursued by that red Dragon, Satan, who desires and strives to
catch and destroy it, then if it do but fly with the wings of Faith and Prayer
to Jesus Christ, whose very heart was opened with a spear upon the Cross to
receive it, it will there find both Evacuatur peccatum non ut non sit sed ut
non obsit. Aug.
security, and deliverance from him. The very name of Jesus Christ has a
thousand treasures of Joy, Peace, comfort, pleasures in it. Nomen Jesu Christi
est nomen sub quo nemini desperandum. It Is an Asylum to the most heinous,
wicked, guilty Malefactor. It is honey in the mouth, music in the ear, and a
Jubilee in the heart. Pulio in ejus vita.
A poor woman coming to Claudius for Justice and weeping, Claudius also wept
and dried her eyes, for which being censured by some Courtiers, as doing that
which was unbecoming his Majesty, and too much below an Emperor: I had rather
(said he) be a partaker of my Subjects griefs, then give them occasion to have
their eyes full of tears. When a truly humbled sinner comes to Jesus Christ,
either for mercy to his soul, or Justice against his spiritual enemies, (who
do daily, yea, hourly assault, injure, tempt and endeavor to murder him) with
prayers and tears, this Sun of righteousness will arise, and shed the beams
of light, joy, comfort, peace into that darkened, drooping spirit; he will dry
up, or howsoever sweeten the bitter springs of doubting, temptations,
dejection, desertion here, and hereafter, he will for ever wipe away all tears
from the eyes of Saints. He is so full of yearning Bowels, and tender
compassion, that what Speed. Chro. p. 88. Et Suetonius.
Vespasian said, viz. No man should go away sad from the Speech of a Prince,
Christ does, for he sends all them away that come to him with mourning hearts
Matthew. 5. 4.
rejoicing. Speed. Cro. p. 111.
Albinus the Roman while he was in Britain, commanded his soldiers no
service, but he would bear therein a part even in carrying of burdens. What
work soever Jesus Christ the Captain of our salvation, commands his soldiers,
faithful Christians to do, he will not only assist but enable them to perform
it, and which is yet more, he will not only carry budens with them, but he will
also Matt, 11. 28.
ease them of them. Come unto me all ye that labor and are heavy laden and I
will give you rest. Axiocus almost sick to death, at the very sight of Socrates
recovered his former health. If a sin-sick, sin-wounded, dying soul, can but
by a lively faith look upon Jesus Christ, it will undoubtedly, infallibly,
(probatum est) receive, recover, enjoy, cure, health, life, What Alphonsus King
King of Spain advised his brother in Law, Henry the 3 King of England to be:
viz. A Lamb to his Subjects, a Lion to Rebels: Jesus Christ is, 2 Thessalon.
17, 8, 9.
For he will come in flames of fire to take vengeance on those that obey not his
Gospel, but he will own, protect, promote, love, honor and reward all those
who are loyal and faithful to him. For his love to his betrothed, p^rchased,
redeemed ones, infinitely exceeds, excells that of Jonathan to David, of
Regulus to Rome, of Curtius and the Gracchi to their Country. And the mutual
love betwixt Christ and a true Christian does transcend both in respect of
dearnesse, divinenesse, and duration (beyond all possibility of expression) the
affection of Hortensius and Cicero to one another, of whom it is said Raynold*
Or^^. p. 43.
Alter semper ab altero adjutus erat communicando, favendo, monendo. The
Grecian Ladies counted the years of their life from the day of their marriage.
All men and women are by nature spiritually dead, and therefore neither do nor
can live either holily or happily till by faith they be espoused to Christ. So
that it may be truly said of every one who dies without a saving interest in
him, Fuit non vixit, he was, but he lived not. The French Historian concludes
the Reign of Charles the 9th King of France, in which thirty thousand
Protestants by those cruel Massacres in Paris, and other places, went through
a Sea of Blood to the heavenly Canaan, with these words; All posterity will
both admire and abhor it. And surely not only all ages, but all true
Christians, will both admire, and adore the wisdom and goodness of God in
contriving such a way and means as was equally full of miracle and mercy,
namely the sending of his dear Son freely out of his own bosom, to seek and
save, lost, undone cursed man: They will also with wonder love, and
thankfulnes^ meditate of, and acknowledge the, unparalled unspeakable Solus
pro nobis suscipit sine malis meritis paenam, ut nos per illum sine bonis
meritis consequeremur gratiam, Aug.
affection and compassion of Jesus Christ, in dying not only to redeem
Captives, but which is much more, to purchase pardon for those who were
implacable enemies to him, and bloody Rebels in arms against him.

And lastly they will abhor, and loath all sin and express their detestation
thereof, by never committing, delighting or living in those impieties,
transgressions, and abominations, which Jesus Christ hates, which cost him so
much anguish, grief, trouble, and which brought him to so horrible, so
painful, and so ignominious a death: They being those Jews that crucified
him, that Crown of Thorns which wounded his head, who is the head of his Church
and members, those hands and whips that scourged him, those nails that fastened
him to the Cross, and that spear which pierced his very heart, and killed the
Lord of life. Nor yet is this all the duty we are to perform, all the tribute
we are to pay, or all the gratitude or praise, which we must express and
return to Jesus Christ; for we are most justly and strongly obliged, not only
to avoid carefully, to oppose resolutely, to strangle impartially, and to hate
implacably all sin though never so dear, sweet, or profitable to us; but we
must also carefully, conscionably, sincerely, constantly strive and resolve, to
tread in the steps of Christ, to make him our rule, and to measure our
conversation by the straight line of his most holy life, it being the sum of
all religion to imitate him whom we worship. * Matthew. 11. 29
Et frustra appellamur Christiani si imitatores non simus Christi; qui ideo se
viam dixit esse, ut conversatio magistri esset forma discipuli, et illam
humilitatem eligeret servus, quam sectatus est Dominus. If he be not our
Exemplar, he will not be our Savior. If we will not learn of him here, we
shall not live with him hereafter. Besides the great, the unavoydable danger,
which we incur, and the insupportable miseries, which we are sure to bring
upon our selves by refusing to walk in those paths of piety and Righteousness,
which Christ has chalked out for us: we have many and great encouragements to
follow him in those blessed ways, which he has trodden before us. For we can
never engage with such a Captain, nor choose such a Husband, nor follow such a
Guide, nor serve such a Master, nor imitate such a pattern as Jesus Christ.
Because he is a Captain invincible, a Husband most rich, wise, faithful,
great, honorable, a guide infallible, a most munificent, loving, bountiful
master, and a pattern unmatchable. Verbi verba sunt nobis documenta, Verbi
facta sunt nobis exempla. The words of this word, who is John 1. 1.
God the Word, are our instructions, and the actions of this Word are our
examples. This glorious, this gracious Jesus, is the good, the great Shepherd
of our souls: he speaks to his flock, his people, as Judges 7. 17.
Gideon did to his little Army, look on me and do likewise; and his sheep
will not only hearken to his voice, but obey him also. This King of Saints
says to his Subjects, as (i) Edward the 3d. (g) Speed Cronic. p. 704.
King of England did to his soldiers, when he entered into a Foord, in the
River Some; (notwithstanding a thousand horse and ten thousand foot, were sent
thither by the French, to impeach his passage over it) he that loves me let him
follow me; they will cheerfully courageously march after him, for they are such
Cordelyons, that the greatest dangers cannot affright them, nor Enemies, though
Anakims (Giants both in power, might, malice, and cruelty) discourage or
dispirit them, nor sufferings and torments, though never so sharp, bitter, or
painful, dissuade or deter them: Nay, death it self, though presenting it self
in its grimmest hue, and most ghastly shape, cannot dismay, or appale them: for
their Captain is their Bridegroom, and rather then they will not enjoy him,
they will meet, and celebrate their Nuptials to him in a flame. They will
embrace him with hands and arms burning for him, as well as with hearts fired
with Love unto him; Yea, they will welcome both miseries and death, when they
are the messengers to invite them unto, and the means to hasten, effect, and
solemnize their longed for marriage to Jesus Christ: Fox book of Martyrs vol.
3, p. 140.
As Mr. Sanders did, who being brought to the stake to be burned, kissed it,
saying, Welcome the Cross of Christ, welcome everlasting life: idem. vol. 2.
p. 554.
and as Anthony Person did too, who being brought to the place of Execution,
with a cheerful countenance, he embraced the post (to which he was to be
bound) in his arms, and kissed it, saying, Now welcome mine own sweet wife,
for this day shall thou and I be married together in the love and peace of God.

And rather then they will either desert or dishonor their Captain or his
Cause, they will freely, constantly undauntedly sacrifice their lives in it,
and prefer death for Christ, before life, yea, and all the world too, without
him, as another faithful Soldier of his Fox book of Martyrs. vol. 3. p. 200.
Stephen Knight did, who being come to the place, where he was to be burned, he
kneeled down and said; Thou see O Lord that where I might live in worldly
wealth to worship a false God, and honor thine enemies, I choose rather the
torment of the body, and loss of this life, and have counted all things but
vile dust and dung, that I might win thee, which death is dearer to me, then
thousands of gold and silver. And which is yet more, they not only have, and
will meekly, willingly, invincibly carry the cross of Christ, but like the
blessed Mercatura est quadam amittere, ut majora lucreris. Tertul.
Apostles they have heretofore, * Acts. 5. 41.
do at present, and will hereafter rejoice also, that they were, and are
counted worthy to suffer for the name of Christ. But that which is more then
all, that which I have yet said, or these have done, or suffered for their
husband and General, is this; some of them have exalted, yea, sung in the
midst of such tortures, torments and miseries, as have caused palenesse to sit
upon the faces, trembling to seize upon the joints, and sighs, terrors, grief,
amazement and horror to fill and wound the hearts of their Spectators,
persecutors, Executioners, even whilst they were joyfully suffering of them.
Fox B. of Martyrs vol. 3. p. 390.
Master Denley sung a Pslame in the midst of the fire, when it was kindled, and
he was burning in it, and having a Faggot thrown at him, by one of the
tormentors at the command of cruel Doctor Story, which so hurt his face that
he bled again, he left his singing, and clapped both his hands on his face; but
afterward he put his hands abroad, and sung again. Idem. vol. 3. p. 537.
And when George Roper came to the stake, where he was to be burned, he leaped
at it for joy. Some have blessed God for setting the Crown of Martyrdom upon
their heads. Idem vol. 3. p. 850. When Alice Driver who was burned at ^pswich
had the Iron chain put about her Neck; O, said she, here is a goodly
Neckerchief, blessed be God for it. Id. vol. 3. p. 888.
Blessed be the time that ever I was born to come to this, said John Noye, when
he came to the stake to be burned. Others have both fervently desired to
glorify God in those fires, and grieved that God would not suffer them to be
made a burnt sacrifice, as that precious Jewel, our Bishop Jewel did. Thus we
see the pious, gracious, faithful Servants, Subjects and Soldiers of Jesus
Christ are not only desirous to reign with him; but they are also ready to
suffer for him. And for such Lambs, and such only as do copy out the holy Life
of Jesus Christ, and write it in their own, in those golden characters of
sanctity, constancy, humility, meekness, patience, charity, prayer, obedience,
etc. did this Lamb of God Jesus Christ die.

Redemptor noster pro bonis misericorditer incarnatus est. Nihil igitur haec
Margarita ad porcos and canes. The Prayer.
MOST dear and yet most dreadful Jesus, who art a God of might and Majesty as
well as mercy of justice as we as pity, a Lion as well as a Lamb, a Savior and
a Sovereign, and at once the Creator, Husband, Brother and Redeemer of thine
Elect: Be pleased blessed Jesus to grant that those who own thine own name,
wear thy Livery, and have Covenanted with thee to be thy Servants may be
careful, watchful, zealous, conscientious and willing to honor their Master
thy sacred and most excellent Majesty, to obey thy commands, to imitate thy
holy Life, and to accept thee on thine own terms joyfully, thankfully,
heartily, even as a Lord, King, Prophet, to govern, command, teach them, as
well as a Priest and Savior to sacrifice and die for them. Let them consider
what it will cost them to buy this precious field, this inestimable jewel; what
they must do to be real Christians, and to get a saving Interest in Jesus
Christ. That they must sell all that they have, part readily and resolvedly
with the World, with their sins, their Isaacs, Idols yea their Lands, Liberties
and Lives also, if he who is the Lord and giver of them require us to surrender
them to and for his own use and glory. That they must take Christ as in a
matrimonial Covenant, and be not only chaste, obedient pleasing, faithful,
constant to him, but also that they must honor and esteem him above all other
things, admit no corrival into their affection with him, rejoice in his
presence, mourn for his absence, grieve when he is offended by them, and angry
with them, forsake all for him, cleave steadfastly to him, and neither for
either love of life, or fear of death, leave, dishonor, or deny him. That they
must be mortified, Self-denying, sincere Christians. That they must not expect
to be carried on Beds of Down, or to have their way green, smooth, easy, soft,
or strawed with flowers to Heaven. That they must run without fainting,
loytering or tyring to the end of the Race if they would obtain the prize. That
they must cheerfully, courageously bear Christ's cross, or else they shall
never triumphantly wear a Crown. That they must not only sweep, sweeten,
cleanse, and open the dusty, dirty-filthy, sin-lockt houses of their hearts
with the beesome of repentance, and the hands of Faith and Love to entertain
him, but they must also welcome him, set him at the upper end of the Table in
the highest seat, esteem, affect him above and beyond all other persons or
things whilst they live on earth, or else when they die he will never open the
narrow Gate of Life to let them into Heaven. That if they be not good and holy
in the Kingdom of Grace, they shall never be great or happy in the Kingdom of
Glory. That if their sins and lusts which Lord it over them revel in them,
captivate them, and are dear and sweet unto them, be not hated, crucified and
forsaken by them, the Lord Jesus Christ though he was crucified for sinners and
died to purchase Life for transgressors who were spiritually dead, will never
save them. That therefore we may resolve and labor to get into that Arc Jesus
Christ, where safety and salvation only are to be found; make us, I beseech
thee, speedingly really, savingly sensible of the want, the worth, the
excellency, All Sufficiency and the necessity of a Jesus, that so we may court,
seek, and value thee, in and from whom alone is all fullness, sweetness,
happiness above all things. And let, O most gracious God, all our sins be laid
upon the Head, set upon the Account of that Scapegoat Jesus Christ, that so
they may be carried into the Wilderness of forgetfulness. Take away, O Lord,
our filthy Garments from us, and clothe us with change of Raiment; impute the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ to us, that so being found in the Garments of
our elder Brother we may receive from our heavenly Father the Blessing of Grace
here, and that wherewith thou crownest thy own freely given, and yet by Christ
dearly purchased Grace, eternal Glory hereafter. Grant this O Lord for his sake
who died to satisfy thy dreadful Justice, who shed his heart-bloud to quench
the fire of thy flaming consuming wrath, to pay our debts, to purchase our
pardon, to redeem us from eternal slavery and misery, and to save, our undone
Souls. Amen.

In Christo and per Christum solum modo,
Vita, Libertas, Foelicitas et beata Aeternitas.

III. Of the Holy Ghost.
THE Holy Ghost is the third Person in the glorious, blessed, Deus est indivise
^^us in Trini^e, et inconfuse trinus in unitate.
undivided, Sacramentum hoc venerandum non scrutandum quemodo pluralitas sit in
unitate, and unitas it plura litate, Sc^uta^i hoc temeritas est, credere
pietas, nosse vero vita aeterna.
Incomprehensible Trinity, proceeding from both the Father and the Son, and yet
Coessentiall, Coeternall, and Coequal with them. The opera and officia, the
works and Offices of the Holy Ghost, are these.

1. It illuminates our blind understandings, and teaches us to know what we
are by nature, together with the necessity and felicity of being born again. It
teaches us also to know the danger, deformity, and misery of sin, the infinite
and undeserved love of God and Christ to undone man, and the means both to
escape eternal death, and to obtain immortal glory.

2. It regenerates us, making us that were profane, holy; barren, fruitful;
rebellious, Loyal; and impenitent, truly sorrowful for all our transgressions.

3. It quickens, and breaths Life into us, that were by nature dead, and
buried in trespasses and sins.

4. It both inspires and stirs up good motions in our souls.

5. It helps our infirmities, makes Romans 8. 26.
intercession for us, indites our prayers, inables us to pray fervently,
faithfully, prevailingly to God for Grace, pardon and salvation.

6. It comforts, quiets, and supports mourning, doubting, drooping hearts.

7. It leads and keeps Christians into, and in the way of holiness, till
they come to heaven, and enjoy eternal happiness.

8. It sanctifies and makes Gods ordinances effectual for the conviction and
conversion of sinners.

Lastly, (to name no more) it dwells and abides in all those that truly
repent, believe, love, obey, fear, and serve God.

The Holy Ghost is compared and resembled in Scripture to diverse things.

First, it is compared to Jere. 23, 29. Acts 2. 3.
fire, and that in these respects. Fire first heats, 2. shines, 3. ascends, 4.
softens, and 5. refines drossy and hard things: so the Holy Ghost, 1. inflames
our frozen hearts with love to God, and zeal for God. 2 It makes Christians
shine in works of piety, justice, charity, mercy, and in holiness of life. 3.
It raises their naturally low-flying, or rather crawling affections from
earthly things, and makes them to mount, and fix them upon God, Christ, and
heavenly things. 4. It turns a heart of Adamant into a soft and tender heart
of flesh. 5. It purges away a Christians dross, it purifies him from his
corruptions and filth.

Secondly, the Holy Ghost is compared to Ezech. 36. 25.
water; for as water, 1. refreshes, 2. quenches, 3 cleanses, 4. fructifies: So
the Spirit of God, comforts, cheares, and reviveth troubled, weary, languishing
hearts. 2. It quenches Gods fiery wrath, kindled and flaming out against
transgressors in their terrors, spiritual desertion, trouble, and anguish of
soul and conscience for their sins. 3 It cleanses them from all filthiness
both of flesh and spirit. 4. It makes them fruitful in every good work.

Thirdly, the Holy Ghost is compared to a John 3. 32.
Dove: As Doves are 1. meek, for they have no gall; 2. innocent and harmless
creatures; 3. Lovers of, and delighted with white houses to sit and roost in,
Amant alba tecta Columbae: So those Christians that have the spirit of God are,
1. free from malice, hatred, sinful anger, envy, or however they mourn, and
are exceedingly displeased with themselves for being otherwise. 2. The Holy
Ghost makes them not only careful to do no hurt or wrong to any, but also
willing and desirous to do good unto others, especially spiritually, that is to
their souls. 3. It makes their hearts pure and white by sprinkling the blood
of Christ upon them, and working godly sorrow in them, without which it will
neither delight nor dwell in them, because sin unrepented of, makes the soul
black, ugly, and filthy.

Fourthly, the holy Ghost is compared to Acts 2. 3.
cloven fiery tongu^s, to teach us that our tongues must be cloven with Charity
and fervency in our prayers: for 1. we must not only beg earnestly for mercy,
but we must also praise the Lord most heartily for his mercies; petition and
thanksgiving must cleave them. 2. We must pray for both spiritual and
temporal mercies, these, must again divide our tongues. 3. We must pray and
^ry mightily not only for pardon of sin, for the removal, or sanctification of
afflictions, for grace and prosperity, to and for our selves, but for all
others also. 4. We must pray not only that God would give us and others glory
hereafter, but also that we and they may honor and glorify God here. And
certainly all those that have this glorious Spirit, have also not only their
tongues, but their hearts too, thus cloven: with zeal, I mean for God, and love
to their own and others souls.

Fifthly, the Holy Ghost is compared to a Ephesians. 1. 13.
Seal, because as Deeds and Conveyances are unable and ineffectual to settle,
and assure those things contained in them, being null and void in Law, till
they be fealed: So we can have no sound, good, or clear Evidences, that our
sins are forgiven us, that God is reconciled to us, that the Lord Jesus is our
Jesus, and that our souls shall be saved, till we be sealed by the Spirit of
God.

Sixthly, the Holy Ghost is compared to 2 Cor. 1 22, and ch 4. v. 5.
Earnest; for as Earnest is an argument and proof of an agreement betwixt man
and man, for something to be delivered and given by one to another; and also an
assurance that some other and greater thing shall be made good, and received,
when that is given and taken: So by having the Earnest of the Spirit Christians
are assured that now the Lord and they are agreed and reconciled, that they
shall undoubtedly have his favor, blessing, grace here, and that they shall
hereafter enjoy eternal joy, and bliss with him for ever.

Seventhly, the Holy Ghost is compared to John 16. 13.
a Guide, because as Guides do, 1. Comfort, 2. direct, 3 defend, 4. keep those
they travail with, from wandering, 5. accompany them and bring them to their
Journeys end: So the spirit of God does 1. wonderfully solace and rejoice the
hearts of true Christians in their pilgrimage on earth. 2. It directs and
shows them which is the sure good, and best way for them to go in.

3. It secures and delivers them from those enemies and dangers that lie in
Ambush to surprise them, and are ready to seize upon them. 4. It keeps them
from erring and straying in the broad, dangerous, yea deadly ways of sin, and
leads them forward in the narrow, but safe and happy path of life.

And lastly, the Holy Ghost never leaves them finally, but conducts them with
safety, joy, and comfort to their earnestly longed for, and desired home,
Heaven.

These and such like are the bright, beautiful, and refreshing Beams, that ray
from his glorious Sun, and dart consolation, exultation peace, and felicity
into the hearts of Gods people. These are the pure, reviving and pleasant
streams that flow from this Fountain, or rather Ocean, into the fouls of true
Christians. These are the radiant, rich, yea precious and inestimable Jewels
that embellish and adorn the Holy Spirits Mansion, a truly Gracious heart. Let
us then sincerely desire, fervently beg, highly prize this Holy Spirit, and
when ever it knocks at the door of our hearts by any holy motions, say as
Genes. 24. 31.
Laban did to Abraham's Servant, Come in thou blessed of the Lord; wherefore
stand thou without? for I have prepared a room for thee.

The Prayer.
O Eternal, infinite, and incomprehensible Lord God, who art Three in One and
One in Three most glorious Persons, distinguished but not divided grant, I
humbly beseech thee, that the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of Light, Truth and Life
may illuminate all those that are darkened with Ignorance, and benighted in
Superstition, with the glorious Beams of saving knowledge. Let it guide all
those that wander in the by paths of Error, and Wickedness into the safe way
of Verity, and Holiness. And let it quicken such as are dead in Trespasses and
Sins, that those dry bones, those stinking Lazarusses may rise, live and praise
thee, Let it, O Lord, convince, convert, humble, purify and regenerate those
that are secure, profane, carnal and unclean, that so being sanctified by the
Spirit of Christ they may be comfortably assured they are justified by the
Merits of Christ. Let, good God, thy Holy Spirit excite, persuade, enable
Christians to try, discern, and judge which is the true Spirit, the Spirit of
Truth, that so they may not be deluded, but infallibly directed by it to
choose, and to walk under the C^nduct thereof, in the way of Holiness that
leads to happiness. And do thou, O Lord, who art the Father of Spirits, give
us all thy Holy Spirit, whereby we may be enabled to cry Abba Father, for thy
Sons and our alone Saviors sake Jesus Christ. Amen.

Sine Spiritu Sancto nec lux, pax, puritas,
Sanctitas, nec gloria.

IV. Of Sin and Sinners.
It Is the true and fruitful mother of miseries: A Pandoras Box full of all
real deadly plagues and curses. It Is the poison of the soul, rack of
Conscience, the Bellows, fuel, oil, that blow, kindle, and continue the
fiery wrath of God burning against all obstinate perpetrators thereof, Ho
(...). p. 632.
Like Homers Thersites it is ugly without as well as within, having like the
subtle cruel Panther a deformed head as well as a destructive deadly paw.
Like Judas it kisses and betrays us. Like Ioab it embraces, stab^, and kills
at once. Quint Curtius lib. 8. p. 154. Sin is like to the River Nilus whose
streams do cause and produce a fruitfulness even to wonder, but yet it abounds
with crocodiles wickedness is sometimes prosperous, but its always dangerous,
and without Repentance deadly.
It Is like the Caspian Sea, which affords the sweetest waters, but breeds the
greatest Serpents. The Preface of sin may be pleasure, its Exordium delight,
but the Finis thereof will be punishment. At sins table, the first course may
be contentment, but the second will be death. It may appear to our dim eyes a
Dove, but if we once lodge it in our bosoms, or embrace it, we shall find it
a serpent, that will both sting and kill us. It Is a Siren which allures us to
our ruin; a Thief that robs us of our chiefest treasures, our choycest
mercies, Gods favor, a saving interest in Christ, pardon of sin, peace of
Conscience, grace and glory: It Is the souls both Leprosy and murderer; Like
the stone by the river Maeander called (...) the sober stone which put into a
man's bosom, would make him mad, it distracts us. Like that deaf-stone (which I
have read is in Scotland) that one standing at one end of it can not hear what
another says standing at the other end thereof, it stops the ears of the Lord,
that our Prayers cannot find audience, or acceptance with him. Esaias 59. 1. 2.
Behold, the Lords hand is not shortened that it cannot save; neither his ear
heavy that it cannot hear. But your iniquities have separated between you, and
your God, and your sins have hid his face from you that he will not hear.
Plutarch in ejus vit^.
What Phoci^n the Athenian once said to the people of Athens, viz. All that
ever you say and do dislikes me, God Prove. 15 8, 9. 26.
says and declares to all wicked persons, whose both prayers, ways, and
thoughts are abominable to him, yea and their civil actions too, for the
ploughing of the wicked is sin, * Prove. 21. 4.
Sin it blots out all the characters of beauty, comeliness, and amabilitie
which God at first engraved upon the soul; it covers also the face of the soul
(which was most fair and lovely till sin did spoil, blast, and soil it) with a
black vail of deformity, and renders it loathsome, and ugly in the pure eye of
God. It defaces, yea ruins the rarest piece of the whole Creation, the Epitome
of the Universe, the wonder of Nature, the miracle of the world, Man. It not
only poisons the lower springs of earthly enjoyments, and turns blessings into
curses, but like Pharaohs lean kine it devours and consumes those sat ones,
riches, health, greatness, peace, plenty, and all Read Deuteronomy. 28. chapt.
worldly prosperity. It also (which is a mischief infinitely greater then the
other) dams up the current of those upper springs, grace, mercy, special love,
salvation, so that the soul like the mountains of Gilbea has no celestial
showers of holiness, or real happiness rained upon it. It turned Paradise
into a wilderness, and makes the world a Pesthouse, when that too pregnant
womb the heart has conceived Sin, by the Devil, who is the true Father
thereof, it nourishes, seeds, and keeps it till it falls in travail of those
cursed dreadful monstrous Twins, Guilt, and Misery, and then it is carried and
laid down by death, and judgment in a bed of fire, and attended only with
Devils, and Reprobates, without all possibility or hope of ever being
delivered. It grieves Heaven, but makes Hell triumph. It Is a tree that bears no
other fruit but shame, sorrow, wrath, and death. Do but wipe your eyes, and
behold the ugly face of sin, in the Crystal glass of Gods word, and also in
those red mirrors, the fearful judgments, the dreadful vengeance of the Lord
upon those pillars of salt, those miserable standing monuments of Gods hatred,
and detestation, erected both in his word, and in the world; Impenitent
transgressors; And lastly in the bloody sufferings of Jesus Christ, and then if
your hearts be not harder then an Adamant, or like the Job. 41. 24.
Leviathans, as firm as a stone, yea as hard as a piece of the nether millstone,
they will relent, and you will mourn, confess, forsake, yea loath all sin.
Numb. 32. 23.
It Is the souls bloud-hound, which will hunt, pursue, overtake, and (as Acteon
was killed by his own dogs, as Haman was hanged upon his own Gibbet, as
Holofernes was beheaded with his own sword) destroy it. It Is that Jonas in the
ship of the soul which raises a terrible tempest of divine wrath against it,
whereby it will be not only restlesly tossed upon the briny bitter Billows of
fear, anguish, dejection, and perplexity, but also before the stone cease,
(unless it be thrown over board, cast out of the heart, and life, by godly
sorrow, and unfeigned repentance,) it will most certainly, and miserably be
wrackt and perished without hope, or help, in a boiling Sea of fire, and
brimstome, which has neither banks, nor bottom. For as Leigh choice observat.
in the Life of Claudius, p. 102.
Claudius was murdered by Agrippina, his wife, with that meat mixed by her with
poison, which he most, and best loved: So those sins, wherein the wicked do
most delight, and please themselves, will certainly (if they do not get their
pardon in this life,) both poison and kill their souls. It Is a truth equally
sad, apparent, and prodigious, that there is no Creature in the world, so
merciless, or mischievous to its self, as a wicked man is. For it is an Bed.
Axiom ex Arist. lib. 2. phys.
Axiom in Philosophy, Idem non agit corruptionem sui ipsius nisi per accidens.
Every thing naturally either desires, or tends to its own preservation,
perfection and felicity. But an impious profane Man, yea every impenitent
sinner does deliberately contrive, cunningly plot, diligently seek,
industriously pursue, and most laboriously, yea, indefatigably endeavor to
ruin both his body and soul for ever. He is a Wolf, a Devil to himself, (for
he is his own adversary, his own tempter) as well as to others: Since he spends
much time, uses many means, spares for no cost, and takes very great pains to
go to Hell. So that Camerar. Hist. medit. lib. 1. p. 29.
what the Common Soldier said unto Marius (who was in his youth a Cutler, but
afterward an Emperor) when he slew him, This is with the sword, which thy
self have made; God, men, Conscience and Satan may, yea will one day say, to
every impenitent sinner, This sin of thine, thy pride, hypocrisy, drunkenness,
thy profaneness, uncleaness, worldlyness, etc. which thou have in thy youth and
life committed, is the sharp and glittering sword with which the Lord of Hosts
does now pierce thy hardened heart through with sorrow, and kill thy sinful
soul. It Is the sole object of Gods eternal hatred. Deo nihil est invisum,
odiosum, execrabile, nisi malum. It Is a spiritual Gangraena which (if it be not
cured by hearty repentance) will provoke the Lord to cut the soul off, with the
sharp Revenging axe of Justice, and the two-edged sword of wrath from the body
of Jesus Christ. What the Jews said of the golden Calf, Godw. Jew. Antiq. lib.
4. p. 175.
No punishment befalls thee Israel, in which there is not an Ounce of this
Calf, is most true of sin, it being certain that both temporal punishments,
spiritual judgments, and eternal torments are procured by it, and that they
have been, are, and will be inflicted by the Lord upon those that are wicked,
as the just reward, and deserved wages of iniquity; because sin like Goliath
comes always with an Army of Philistines, with woes, miseries, curses and
troubles in the rear of it. And if men will suffer, or rather combine with, and
help Satan to pinion themselves with the Cords of iniquity, God will also (in
his own time) bind them with the fetters of afflictions, and hang them up as
Spectacles of his just fury, in the Chains of Damnation. The counsel therefore
of Otho 2. ought to be our practice, Pacem, inquit, cum omnibus habe, bellum
cum vitiis; because we cannot make our peace with God, nor enjoy that peace of
God which passes all understanding, unless we wage war, and maintain a
courageous, constant fight till death, against sin, Satan, and our selves. If
we would have the Lord our friend, and love us, we must be enemies to, and hate
implacably every wicked way, and every evil thing. Matthew. 5* 7.
If we mourn for sin here, we shall rejoice hereafter, but if we rejoice in sin
here, * Job 20. 5.
we shall grieve hereafter; because the short empty deceitful pleasures of sin,
which are but (like the colors in the Rainbow) pleasures in appearance only,
not in truth, or reality, in the end will sting and fill the heart with
unspeakable, yea unconceivable horror and sorrow; for sin is neither Socrates
Epist. 7.
a gainful, nor an honorable, nor a pleasant thing, but the greatest calamity
in the world. Although then the distempered palat's of wicked men may at their
first drinking a sugared draught of sinful delights, taste some Sin is like the
River Atheneus whose upper waters were sweet and grateful, both toward the
bottom brackish.
pleasantness, and honey therein, yet they will be sure to relish and find
bitterness, yea gall and wormwood at the bottom of the Cup. Besides, they
cannot satisfy, but they will satiate them, and as at the first, they will be
sick of Love, so ere long they will be sick of loathing (like 2 Samuel 13. 15. 27.
Amnon) even those dearest, fairest, Tamars, on which but even now they so
passionately doted. For like the bloody Sword of cruel war, it will be
bitrernesse in the end.
The Devil like a cunning cruel Master at first uses his Servants with
seeming kindness, and bids them welcome, he will not cross, displease or deny
them any thing, nor in any thing: but when he has once got them into his
workhouse, and engaged them in his service, then the condition of an Isralite
in Egypt, or a Galley slave in Turkey, or of a Christian in the Inquisition,
is infinitely more desirable and comfortable then theirs. When Satan first
tempts men and women to drudge for him, to sin, he persuades them that the
evil which he would have them act is so little, venial, inconsiderable, that
it has no danger in it, and that they shall not fail to find, and receive
either delight, advantage, or advancement, or all, (for he hides his deadly
hook with such baits, as he by his long experience finds are the likelyest to
be swallowed by those he desires to catch, and resolves to kill) by the
committing of it, and by this pulley he draws them, with this screw he turns
and winds them up to presume; In this hood put over the eyes of their mind, he
leads them, blindfold, quietly, easily, and securely to the very brink of the
bottomless pit; for they go with him, as that more then foolish young wanton
did with his unchaste minion, Prove 7. 22.
Even as a Beast goes to the slaughter, or as a fool to the correction of the
stocks: But when this bloody Jailer has hung and locked so many Irons upon his
jocund, fearlesse, muffled, miserable Captives, that he is confident they
cannot break Prison, nor make an escape, then he awakens them with thunder, and
represents their woeful condition in the most grisly, terrible, dreadful form,
which he with all his skill and spite is able unto them, suggesting and telling
them; That their sins are got above Gods mercy being too great to be pardoned,
that since they have chosen him for their master, damnation must be their
wages; that since they have given him the flowr of their youth, God will never
accept the bran of their age; that the day of Grace is ended, and the door of
mercy shut, and therefore it is in vain either to work or knock; that their
sins have made them like stubble fully dry, and therefore God will be a
consuming fire to them; that they have walked so far, and so long in the broad
way of death, that it is now too late to turn into the narrow way of life; that
their iniquities have made them too filthy, for Gods pure eyes to pity them;
that they have turned a deaf care to their Makers commands, and therefore he
will not now hear their cries; that they have both locked and bolted the iron
doors of their hearts against Christ, and therefore God will not open the gate
of mercy to them; that they have sinned against infinite love, admirable
patience, glorious light, etc. and therefore the Lord will now in fury both
pour out the fullest vials of his dreadful wrath upon them, and cast their
souls into utter darkness, that they have trodden the precious blood of Jesus
Christ under their profane feet, and therefore God will never set a Crown of
glory on their heads; that they have chosen to have their portion in this
world, and therefore God will not give them an inheritance in Heaven. With
these and such like Milstones of temptation which he strives to hang about the
necks of their guilty, awakened, amazed, perplexed consciences, he both
endeavors and hopes to sink and drown their souls in the Dead sea of despair.
For our groans are the Devils music, our sins his Banquet, our sufferings his
solace, our torments his pleasure, our sorrow his Joy, our evils his does
desire and satisfaction, our wickedness his very wis^, our destruction his
delight, and our eternal ruin his Triumph. And our sins are those murdering
pieces, wherewith this politic, cunning, active, cruel enemy of mankind both
wounds, and kills so many immortal souls. They are the wheels of that Chariot
wherein this Prince of the Air rides triumphing up and down the World, over
vanquished, captivated, murdered men and women; They are the Rocks, and
quicksands which split, and swallow up so many millions of precious souls. It
is then a dear bargain when men purchase a few, empty, transient delights, with
infinite, endless pain, grief, torments; when they sell heaven, and their
souls, to buy H^ll; yet thus do all wicked profane persons. Breve est quod
delectat, aeternum quod cruciat; for impenitent sinners shall be always burning
in streams, and drowning in flames, without all hope or possibility of ever
being either drowned or consumed. Those that are truly wise will therefore fear
Sin. But a fool (for so the wisest of men, Prove. 1. 7. 32.
Solomon calls every one that is wicked) makes a mock at it, sports with it,
and like one that I have read of, Joco venenum bibit, serio mortem obiit, He
drinks the poisoned waters of sin in jest, but murders his own soul in earnest.
And as Julius Caesar was killed with daggers; Fabius was cheaked with an hair;
some have been killed with a plumbstone, and others have been choak^d with a
bit of Ch^ese. And the l^ast sin without R^pentance will be deadly to the soul,
because it is an essence and contempt done and committed against an infinite,
pu^e, holy, just God.
Cleopatra killed her self with a little serpent called Apis: So wicked men do
destroy themselves, not only with great Scarlet, and gross sins, but with
little ones also, because the soul may be strangled with cords of vanity, as
well as with the Cart-ropes of iniquity. And the greatest wisest man in the
world, if wicked, will, or however has just cause when he dies to say, as Nero
did, Heu qualis Artife^ pereo! since if he be not rich in grace, and wise to
salvation in this life, at his death he will find himself to have been the
veriest Idiot, and the poorest Lazar that ever had a being upon Earth. What was
said of Domi^ian; namely, That all those evils which were scattered in others
met, and were united in him, is most true of sin, it being that Ocean, from
which all those streams of misery and mischief flow, which over whelm and
destroy the ungodly. If sin reign, the man is dead, since Grace and sin like
Mezentius his couples cannot live together. Like light and darkness, Heaven
and Hell, they are irreconcilable: so that what was at first said of those two
Princes, Conradine of Sicily, and Charles of Anjou, and afterward Camden
Annal. of Q. Elizabeth, lib. 2. p. 142.
applied to Elizabeth Queen of England and Mary Queen of Scots; The death of
Mary is the Life of Elizabeth, and the Life of Mary the death of Elizabeth, is
most true of them; for the life of piety is the death of iniquity, and the life
of impiety is the death of Sanctity and the Soul. Besides all this both danger
and misery to which a wicked person renders himself obnoxious by his sins,
enough one would think to rouse, affright, and humble the most Atheistical
wretch in the world, every impenitent transgressor does yet add more fuel to
the fire of Gods wrath, and more weight to the already insupportable burden of
his sins by his ungrateful, injurious, dishonorable undervaluing of Christ;
for he prefers Barabbas before Jesus, his lusts before his Lord, and (which is
a crime both most horrible, and abominable) Satan that roaring lion who seeks
daily to devour him, before his Savior, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, who
laid down his life to deliver him: For Christ commands, and he rebels, Christ
woo's, and he will not love, Christ knocks, and he will not open the door to
him; but now let the Devil call, and he will run, let the Devil persuade, and
he will obey, let the Devil knock by a temptation, and he will let him in,
either at the gate or window, and rather then he shall be kept out, his ears,
eyes, mouth, heart and all shall be unlockt for him. His condition is most sad,
and woeful, for bloody cutthroats are got into his house, his heart, yet he
fears no danger, he is mortally sick, yet he feels no pain, death stands at the
door, and destruction is ready to come over his Threshold, and yet he says,
Soul take thine ease: Nihil enim est miserius misero se non miserante. Let then
all unholy ungratious men and women consider that if they do live and dye on
earth fast asleep in a sinful Quisquis desolationem non novit, nec
Consolationem agnoscere potest et quisquis ignorant consolationem esse
necessariam, super est ut non habeat gratiam Dei. Inde est quod homines seculi
negotiis and flagitiis implicati dum miseriam non sentiunt ^o attendum
misericordiam. Bern.
security, their souls will most certainly awaken in Hell, in unavoydable never
dying misery; for if impiety and impenitency be the praemises, eternal
damnation both of body and soul will be the conclusion. Pe^^atum puniendum est
aut ate, aut a deo; si punitur ate, tunc punitur sine te, si vero non punitura
te, tecum punietur. To be merciful to sin is to be cruel to our selves, since
he that loves and spares it does not only lash, and wound, but O Israel thou
have distroyed thy self H^sea 13. 9.
murder himself. Because as holiness is both a work, an incomparable felicity,
and a reward; So sin, is both a Crime, a punishment and an Executioner to all
unconverted offenders.

Pharoah's sins, as well as the Sea drowned him. Numb. 16. 32.
And Corah's swallowing down sin without repentance was the cause that the
earth swallowed up him without example; for never did so many of her ungracious
children as he and his wicked companions were (who was therefore most justly by
God made woefully miserable in that dreadful destruction, because they was all
wilfully guilty of that damnable Rebellion) fall down into her gaping,
enlarged, new made mouth, slide, or rather tumble headlong into her empty,
greedy stomach, and entrails, or lie down alive in her cold and merciless
bosom before. O the misery and madness of a graceless Sinner! How can he
expect or hope to escape the dreadful vengeance of God, that by his
unkindnesse, unthankfulness, and undutifulnesse to his heavenly Father has
most justly provoked the God of mercy to become his everlasting enemy. What the
people of Rome said when they lamented the death of Octavius Augustus, he will
most certainly when it is too late have cause in another sense to say, Vtinam
aut non Aurel. Vict.
nasceretur aut non mor eretur, would he had never been born, or never dyed.

The Prayer.
O LORD, thou art a God infinite in all Divine perfections. Thou have all
things, and art all things eternally from, within, and unto thy most glorious
self. Thou do therefore want neither the praises nor the Services of either
the most gracious Christians, or the most glorious Cherubims. The holiness,
prayers, and duties of Saints or Angels can add nothing to thy most
transcendently divine Excellencies: Nor can the vices, vileness, crimes, and
Sins of men lessen, stain, or eclipse thy Glory. Yet such O Lord is thy
miraculous condescensi^n, thy wonderful, thy undeserved Compassion to the
Bankrupted posterity of Adam, that thou art pleased not only to acquaint, but
also to assure all those who walk humbly, conscientiously, holily before thee,
and sincerely endeavor to praise thy great, and glorious name, that though
they be but dust, ashes, and worms, yet they do honor and glorify thy ever
blessed Majesty. And although sin be so contrary to thy holy nature, opposite
to thy righteous Laws, and Will, and loathsome in thy pure eye, that even the
least sin is a great, yea an infinite offense, injury, and contempt done unto
thee, and does at once vex, load, and grieve thee: Yet such O Lord is thy never
enough to be admired, acknowledged, or magnified mercy and patience to
rebellious, self-polluting, poisoning, self-ruining Man, that thou d^st not
only forbear to punish, plague, and damn him, but thou art also pleased though
he daily offend thee, and persist in his provocations of thee, and reject thy
gracious tenders of peace, pardon and salvation to seek unto him, to entreat;
yea by thy Ministers to importune and beseech him that he would be reconciled
to thee, love, accept, embrace thee, and thy offered mercy, that so tbou may
forgive, own, delight in him, deliver, and save him both from Wrath and Death.
O Lord, let the riches of thy unparalled goodness, long-sufferance, and
forbearance l^^d us unto speedy, unfeigned, hearty Repentance. Let the serious
consideration of the cursed, defiling, deforming, damnable nature of sin, the
guilt whereof could not be expiated, nor the filth thereof purged away with any
Sacrifice but the blood and death of the only Son of God, Jesus Christ both
God and Man, make us not only fear but tremble to commit the least evil. O let
it pierce and break our hearts with Grief and Remorse to consider how we have
pierced our Saviors very heart, and broken his most just and holy
Commandments by our wilfully transgressing against him. Let O Lord our spirits
melt, mourn, and bleed within us for our shedding and trampling under our
profane feet without pity or sorrow that precious blood of our dearest Savior,
which alone can cleanse and cure our defiled, wounded Souls. Whenever we are
tempted to commit any sin, let us O Lord not only meditate and remember what
it cost Christ to make our peace with a displeased God, to pay our debts, and
to ransom our inthralled Souls, but let us also set before our eyes and look
upon Jesus Christ, who never committed any sin, sweating, suffering, gr^aning,
wounded, bleeding and lying for our Sins, that so we may in his unexampled and
unexpressible miseries with the eyes of detestation and lamentation behold the
danger, and desert of our own Iniquities. Let not sin, most holy God, be sweet,
dear or delightful to us, which was Gall and Vinegar, bitter, painful and
deadly to Jesus Christ. O let the knowledge of thy power and purity awe and
deter us from evil, but chiefly let our frequent, serious, admiring and
thankful reflections upon the bounty, mercy, and longsuffering of our gracious
God, and the free, the infinite Love of Jesus Christ prevail with us, and make
us both watchful and careful to detest, decline, loath, leave, confess,
forsake and crucify all our lusts and transgressions, and to love, honor,
please, praise, and glorify our God. And let us not embrace, entertain, or
welcome sin into our hearts, and crucify our blessed Savior any more, lest
our bloody cruelty both to him and our own souls deprive us for ever of Christ,
Comfort, Grace and Glory. Amen.

Peccatum lethale est Venenum,
Quod delectat and necat.

V. Of the World, and the brightest Jewel in its Crown, Sovereignty.
It Is a fools Idol, a wise man's Inn; it is a storehouse of vanities, a shop
full of gaudy but empty pots; a fair house haunted with evil Spirits; it is a
maze, a desert, a disguised mockery, an Ocean of troubles, a pitfal to the
rich, a burden to the poor, a traducer of the good, a deceiver of all that love
and trust it. It Is a Garden enamelled with beautiful flowers, under which lurk
deadly Serpents; a green, soft, pleasant walk, covered and bespread with nets
and snares; Speed Chron p. 118.
a path like that of a Heliogabalus, strawed with the powder and dust of Gold
and silver, but leading to a Gibbet. A sweet spring set round with lime-twigs;
a stately wealthy City infected with the plague. It Is the body's Paradise, but
a Purgatory to the soul. It Is a painted, treacherous Harlot, which allures,
invites, but destroys her Lovers: a tender Nurse to vice, dandling it upon her
knees of Pleasure and Profit, but a stepmother which hates and strangles
virtue; It Is a d^ie pit, a broken Cistern, in a drought, an empty cloud, a
Feast in a dream, and without Christ (as one said of her dead husband) a cold
armful. And as for Sovereignty (though it be the Acme of an ambitious man's
desires, and felicity, his God, his Christ, and his all in all, yet) it is but a
Crown sparkling with Jewels, and lined with thorns: It Is very glorious indeed,
bnt withal so heavy that it makes both their heads and hearts to ache with
cares, and troubles who wear it. Camerar. Hist. Medit. lib. 3. p. 159.
Saturninus being invested with the Imperial Robes by the Soldiers whether he
would or no, with tears in his eyes, said thus unto them; Friends, you know not
wh^t an evil it is to command, Javelings and Swords hang over our heads, pikes
are bent on every side against us, our guides do make us aghast, we fear them
who accompany us, N^mo tam humilis est qui paenam velsummi hominis sperare non
possit. Seneca de lya lib. 1.
there is no savor in our meats, no safety in our ways etc. In making me your
Sovereign, you draw me into the Jaws of death. And therefore when the Romans
had dispoiled Antiochus of all Asia, he gave them hearty thanks Brathwai^
survey of Hist.
saying they had freed him of many insupportable Cares. The world it is a pit
covered with leaves; she does boast her self to be rich, and to be able to give
her Servants the Livery, her favorites the reward, and her Children the
portions of wealth, honor, contentment, happiness, prosperity; but when a
true Inventory of all she has is taken by her Heirs, the greatest Potentates,
and wealthiest worldlings, the Summa totalis amounts only to Vanity and
Vexation of spirit. She seems to have a treasury full of precious things, but
when it is opened and viewed, it will be found (just like the Trunks of that
vain glorious Cardinal Camp^jus, with his twenty Mules carried through
Cheap Side, for oftentation, to win him admiration, and to gain him an high
esteem, amongst the people, that yet had in stead of gold, and silver, and
rarities, only bits of bread, pieces of broken meat, Hors^-shoes, bones, old
boots, eggs, and shoes, etc. in them) to have nothing that is truly good,
excellent or desirable in it. Lucius M^ri^eus Span. Hist. lib. 18. et Camerar.
Charles great Grandfather to Ferdinand King of Arragon, and Sicilia, a little
before his death, with great anguish of spirit (looking upon those who stood
about him) cried out, O how vain are the thoughts of men! O wretched they that
aspire to the glory of the world, that desire nothing but riches, pomp and
dignity! O how happy is the condition of poor men, and how safe and pleasant is
their life, that eat their bread with the sweat of their brows, and that live
by the labor of their hands! miserable I, what good does my Kingdom to me?
What do my Subjects, and the service of so many men profit me? What have they
gained me? much travail and turmoil, and infinite dangers both of body and
soul, without the enjoying of so much as one good day. Miserable and wretched
I, that so late came to know the deceitfulness of the world! How much better
^ad I lived, if in stead of a Scepter I had wielded a hedging Bill, and if of a
King I had soon made my self a Clown. And yet the besotted Idolaters thereof
say of this world as Burton Melanch.
Metszuma an Indian Prince did, Bonum est esse hic, It Is good to be here,
although her best beloved Children are sure when they sit in her Lap to have
thorns for their Cushion, and when they lean upon her Bosom to lay their heads
on a Serpent. The Sun of this world (which is the wicked man's Heaven) is
prosperity, the Moon mutability. Besides, true contentment or pleasure seldom
dwell in the same house with greatness. Camerar. lib. 3. p. 163.
It Is reported the Emperor Charles the 5th. used to say, that after he had
resigned the Empire, he had tasted more pleasure and contentment in his
Monastical retiredness in one day, then he found in, or reaped from the
Seeds, and harvest of all his Victories and triumphs, which had made him be
esteemed happy above all other Princes. Ludovicus Vives.
Quid enim aliud est potentia, quam speciosa molestia? The world is the
greatest cheat, for there is nothing in it, that can satisfy, sanctify or
save our souls, or that can make us truly wise, holy, or happy, though it
pretend to afford them all. Marc. Aurelius. Dial of Princes.
Marcus Aurelius, who was both an eminent Philosopher, a victorious Commander,
and a prosperous Emperor, after many years enjoyment of his Throne, with all
worldly both glory and felicity, being at length summoned to appear before the
King of Kings, upon his deathbed said: Of all that I have had, possessed,
enjoyed, attained in this world, I have now only two things, to wit, pain for
that I have offended the Gods, and sorrow for that time which I have consumed
in Vice^. And the glass of his life being almost run, he cried out, O
miserable man that I am, in a short time of all that I have enjoyed in this
life, I shall with me carry nothing but my winding sheet. The experience of its
vanity, emptiness, deceitfulness, made Burt. Melanch.
Sebastian Foscarinus sometimes Duke of Venice command this inscription to be
writ upon his Tomb, Hear O ye Venetians, and I will tell you what is the best
thing in the World, To contemn it. I leave thee (said a dying Emperor to his
Son) in leaving thee my Empire, poverty, labor, wars, enemies, sorrow, and in
a place where thou will have always something to bewail. The world it is
nothing but a floating Island: a Sea (like Euripus,) always ebbing and flowing:
a wheel wherein you may see the uttermost spoak^ of greatness, and
Sovereignty on the ground with one turn of the hand of providence Speed. chron.
p. 625.
I once saw (says Comines) Henry Holland Duke of Exceter run on foot
bare-legged after the Duke of Burgundies train, begging his bread for Gods
sake. King Henry the 3. King of England told some whose bounty he craved, that
it was more Charity to relieve him with money, then one that went begging from
door to door; Camerar.
Marius uno die factus est Imperator, altero imperavit, tertio interfectus est
a gregario Milite. Speed. Chron. p. 135-153.
Licinius Valerianus the greatest Monarch in the world, to whom all nations did
homage, was both vanquished, and taken prisoner, by Sapor King of Persia, who
caused him to bow down his neck and back, for himself thereon to tread, and
mount into his saddle, and afterward his skin was flead off, he being alive.

Lastly, that I may not present a meal in stead of a taste, and so turn delight
into trouble, or appetite into satiety and loathing, Knolls Turkish Hist.
Bajazet was in the morning a glorious mighty Emperor, but ere night, he was a
miserable Captive, and fell so low from off those highest pinacles, Empire and
Majesty, as to become Tamerlanes footstool. The wise, valiant and victorious
Romans were so sensible of the danger and inconstancy of the highest worldly
honor, and the greatest earthly felicity, that in their triumphs the General
or Emperor that rode in honor through the City of Rome, with the principal of
his enemies bound in Chains behind his chariot, had always a servant running
along by him with this Corrective of his Glory, Respice post te, hominem
memento te. As if he had said, Look behind thee, and in those truest faithful
Mirrors set by the angry (yet most just) hand of providenc^, in a sable frame,
thou shall clearly see the vanity, When Pomp^y's head was presented to Julius
Caesar he wept bitterly, saying; I lament Pompey's fall and fear mine own
Fortune. Leigh. Choice Obser. p. 17.
mutability, misery of all terrestrial greatness, glory and prosperity. For
those Captives who adorn thy Triumph may be thy executioners. Those rattling
chains which are now thy music, may become hells to ring thy passing peal.

That Chariot wherein thou now ridest in so much state, may be the Coffin
wherein before night thou may be carried to thy grave; and those friends
which now so much rejoice at thy dearly earned, or purchased honor, may be to
day sad mourners at thy Funeral. Thou dwell but in a house of clay, whose
foundation is in the dust, and therefore may lie level suddenly with the
Earth, although at present thou art reared up to such a height, and built so
many stories higher then those feeble, tottering and rotten supporters of thy
pomp, those unwilling, mourning, miserable witnesses of thy dangerous
Exaltations. Remember thou art but a man, thy victory cannot deifie thee, nor
conquer thy mortality; nor can thy triumph protect, or secure thee from being
vanquished and led into captivity by death. Mortalia eminent, cadunt,
deterun^ur, crescun^, ex^uriuntu^, implentur Divinorum una natura est. Sen.
Epist. 66. 645.
Seianus fell suddenly from those slippery Battlements where thou now stand,
both re^ling and giddie; Let not therefore thy success or Eminency make thee
forget either thine own frailty, or their inconstancy, since calamity stands at
that door, where Security is Porter to the house; fearlesse greatness, and
blind, presumptuous prosperity, being like that Arist. Problem Sect. 13.
Quest. 5.
Sea wherein ships use to be cast away in the midst of a Calm. Crowns then are
not so bright as burdensome, nor so glorious as dangerous, nor so pleasing as
they are painful to those that own and carry them. The sad experience whereof
made that potent King Seleucus often to say, Thorn is the Anagram of Throne.
Mihi credit, mori mallem quam imperare. Otho.
That if a man knew with what cares a Diadem was clogged, he would not take it
up, though it lay in the dust. If then either Subjects knew how dearly Princes
buy their power, or Princes, how sweet, comfortable, and happy a thing it is to
live in quiet, free from cares, Timeo incustoditos aditus, timeo ipsos
custodes. Tiberius.
fears, dangers, Jealousy, (those evil spirits, which always haunt,
affright, vex, torment and imbitter greatness) Subjects would pity their
rulers, aod Kings would envy their Subjects; For without a saving interest in
the Sun of Righteousness Jesus Christ, the mightiest Monarchs both live and
dye, in a black, perplexing, afflicting night of trouble, distraction and
misery, notwithstanding all the Stars of Pomp, Power and Wealth, which shine,
or rather glimmer in the firmament of Sovereignty. The whole world is not able
to give the soul one satisfying meal, much more unable is she then to feast
it. She may spread and cover her table with variety of costly, curious, dainty
dishes, but she serves them up with such bitter, unsavory, yea deadly sauces,
that her best and kindest treatment of her noblest, dearest friends, proves
either their sickness, or death. Her guests sit down indeed to a rare, a
pleasant banquet, but swords hang over their heads, tied to nothing but single
horse-hairs. What contentment or delight then can it afford, or they receive
and enjoy, when they know not whether they shall live or die, feast or perish
at her board? Luther calls the Turkish Empire nothing but a crumb given by the
Master of the family (God Almighty) to dogs. The World like a Lottery gives a
hundred blanks for one prize, to those that venture their whole estates, even
body, soul, name and posterity at it. And if any one do happen to draw out a
Throne, yet will not that reimburse him, or pay his Bill of charges which he
has laid out for it, Fortuna vitrea est, quae cum splendet frangitur,
because when he has gotten it, he is not sure to enjoy it. For the strongest
Kingdoms are but tottering Fabrics, whose foundations are laid (though they
dig never so deep) in sand. And although they may seem to be founded on a Rock,
or to be so deeply rooted, as that they need not fear a period, nor that they
shall be overturned, or swallowed up, by either the most furious tempest of
Foreign Invasions, or the raging, inexorable Billows of domestic divisions
and intestine Rebellions, yet Sir Walter Rale^gh p^aeface to his Hist. of the
World.
dies, hora, momentum sufficit evertendis iis dominationibus quae Adamantinis
radicibus videbantur esse fundatae. But this innate, inevitable, insuperable
not only mutability, but also mortality of Kingdoms, as well as Nonne telluris
tres tantum cubiti te expectant? Basil.
Kings (which yet is enough to render the sweetest earthly enjoyments, and
comforts that the cousening deluding world can afford, to those who have the
greatest interest in her, and share of her, both sour, flat, and dead, to the
intellectual palate of a truly wise man) is not either the only Ghost that
disquiets, Magna s^rvitus est magna fortuna. Seneca de Bervit vi^^ ad Pauli^um.
or misery that waits and attends upon Empire, from its Birth, to its burial,
from its Cradle, to its Coffin; For the A^pes of honor and greatness are
ascended always by the troublesome steps of danger, drudgery, difficulty, and
too often also by the fatal stairs of Treachery, Tyranny, and Impiety. And
when such men after all their sweating, toiling and striving, do get up to the
top of them, it is true they have a delightful prospect, but withal they
perceive and find, that they do stand upon Domitian said, That the condition
of Princes was most miserable who could not be credited touching a conspiracy
plainly detected unless they were first slain.
a dangerous praecipice, and that it will cost them no less care and
vigilancie to preserve themselves from falling into the bottomless gulf of
Ruin, then it did pains and perils to attain that which they are now assured
has more vexation, then satisfaction, more thorns then Roses, and more Gall
then Honey in it. To arise to honor, it is enough that the body sweat water,
but to maintain it, it is necessary that the heart weep blood, said Sophia the
Emperesse to Tiberius. Thou will not deny, said one to Alexander the great,
that all which thou have in thy Conquest gotten is little, and that the
quietness which thou have lost it much; the Realms which thou have subdued are
many, but the cares, sighs, thoughts, which thou have heaped upon thy heart are
infinite: for the Gods do seldom suffer them to enjoy that quietly in peace,
which they have unjustly gotten in war. Bacon Essai. 19. p. 105.
Kings like to heavenly bodies have much veneration, but no rest, for the
choycest and best refined treasures, or favors which the world has to bestow
upon her eldest sons, are but (...) Giftless gifts, nor does she only deceive
her Favorites, but destroy them also, even by advancing of them, the price
which they usually pay for their worldly felicity, being not only temporal
calamities, but too often eternal miseries. For dignity is not only often, but
most commonly the moth of virtue, honor the Canker of honesty, power the
poison of piety, and greatness is too frequently the death of goodness. Mr.
Ba^ter Saints everlasting rest. p. 78.
The difficulty is so great of conjoyning graciousnesse with greatness, that
is next to an impossibility; and their conjunction so rare, that they are next
to inconsistent. To have a heart taken up with Christ and heaven, when we have
health and abundance in the world, is neither easy nor ordinary. O^uphri^s.
Pius quintus dixisse fertur, Cum essem religiosus sperabam been de salute
animae, Cardinalis factus extimui, Pontifex Creatus pene, despero. Quid igitur
insanius quam pro momentanea felicitate aeternis te mancipare suppliciis. It Is
a madness even to miracle to lose eternal bliss and glory, to gain temporal,
withering honor, and mundane felicity.

The Prayer.
O LORD, thou art that God who did both create this beautiful World out of
nothing, and do know that there is nothing in this bewitching, begui^ing,
insnaring, intangling World, that can either afford the Soul of man any rea^^
Comforts, or make it truly happy. For if thou but frown, chide, hide thy face,
or manifest the least displeasure against us, all the lower springs of
Creature Comforts will immediately fail, dry up, disappoint, deceive us; and
like the early dew, or morning Clouds, consume, fly away, and vanish before the
heat and wind of thy fiery wrath, and fierce, fearful, irresistible
Indignation. Let therefore Christians, O Lord, I beseech thee, that know the
greatness, the terriblenesse of thy Power, admire thine omnipotency, adore thy
wisdom, praise thy goodness, tremble at thy wrath, strive for Heaven, and
contenm the World. Let them, O Lord, prefer Goodness before Greatness.
Holin^sse before Honor, Piety above Pleasure, and Righteousness b^yond
Riches. Let them not shipwreck their Consciences or destroy their Souls for
Dominion. Let not their Ambition to be great men make them forget, neglect, or
cease to be Christians, and good men. Let them study and endeavor more
earnestly to command their own rebellious hearts, to govern aright their unruly
passions, to get their misplaced Affections unnailed, and their headstrong
traitorous Lusts subdued, then to obtain Authority or Dignity amongst Men. And
let ibem account it a greater happiness, mercy, advancement, glory to be
Loyal, faithful, dutiful Subjects and Servants to Jesus Christ, then to be
Sovereigns over Kingdoms. Let not their eyes be blinded with the Splendor of
power, nor dazzled with the Luster of Honor, nor their hearts and affections
lime-twigg'd by an inordinate, sinful Love of Wealth, or Greatness, that so
their rise may not prove their ruin, their exaltation their destruction, their
power their poison; and that so their temporal Eminency, and momentany
Felicity may not usher them unto, ingulph and suck them into, or both sadly,
suddenly, unexpectedly, and unpreparedly end in ever enduring misery. Amen.

Mundus delectat, decipit, destruit.
VI. Of Loyalty, and Rebellion.
THAT Kings (whose Original in England is beyond the Memory of History)
whether good or bad, do derive, and receive their Authority immediately from
God: That Subjects do justly, and indispensably owe both submission, and
subjection unto them: And that God has placed them so far beyond the power,
and so high above the reach of their Subjects cruel, unjust, ungrateful, when
(against them) armed hands, that they are accountable to himself only for their
Actions; are Truths so bright, so evident, that we may run, and read them
confirmed by the sacred Scriptures, asserted by the pens of learned men, and
sealed with the blood of pious Christians in all Ages. prove. 8. 15.
By me (says God) Kings reign. Dan. 2 21.
He removes Kings and seteth Kings up. Dan. 1. 37.
The God of Heaven (says Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar a wicked King) has given
thee a Kingdom, power, and strength, and glory. 2. Touch not mine anointed,
says David a man after Gods own heart, 1 Samuel 24. 5.
whose Counsel and Command to others was his own * practice, as well as Duty.
Nor are we only inhibited to oppose or resist him, for there is no rising up
against him, says wise Prove. 30. 31.
Agur: But which is yet more, we are prohibited by Eccles. 8. 4. Who may say to
a, King, what do thou?
words to question him, much more then certainly it is unlawful, and sinful for
his Subjects to depose, or with Swords to murder him. Holy Augustine tell us
that Kings have their Kingdoms from God, not from men. Solus verus Deus dat
regna terrena bonis and malis. Famous Bracton says positively, Rex non habet
superiorem nisi Deum; The King has no superior but God. The Oath of Supremacy
which we take both as lawful, and necessary, has these express words in it:
The Kings Highness is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and all other
his Highnesses Dominions and Countries, as well in all spiritual, or
Ecclesiastical things, or Causes, as Temporal, etc. And Lastly, our Magn. Cha.
29.
Law says, That none shall be arrested, imprisoned, disseized of their
Estates, deprived of his Liberty, banished, or otherwise destroyed, but by the
verdict of his equals, and the Law of the Land. This Magna Charta was granted,
enacted, confirmed by the Kings of England, from whom this, and all other Laws
receive their life and being. For he is Anima Legis, his Fiat animates and
quickens them; without it Bills are but breathless Embryo's: where or whence
then have we any Law, or just power to restrain, imprison, arraign, condemn,
banish or to destroy our Sacred Sovereign; who has no peers, no equals within
his Dominions?

Thirdly, this truth, That Christians ought not to resist, or R^bell against
their Kings, though Pagans, Papists, or Tyrants, has been subscribed by
millions of them with their Blood, not only under the ten Roman: most barbarous
persecutions by those Heathenish Monsters, when so many of them were
slaughtered that there were for every day in the year (says St. Jerome) 5000
Martyrs: But this was also the judgment, and practice of our English Martyrs in
Queen Macies d^ies. The fire of Loyalty burned in their hearts, and flamed out
at their mouths in Christian exhortations, and persuasions of the Spectators to
Allegiance, and obedience unto the King and Queen, when they were unjustly by
their Authority, Command, or permission condemned, sentenced to be burned, and
when that cruel Sentence was ready to be executed by remorsless men, or rather
Tigers upon them. Fox Book of Martyrs. vol. 3 p. 665.
Bishop Cranmer a little before his Martyrdom in his last words to the people
said thus: I exhort you that next under God you obey your King and Queen (viz.
Philip and Mary) willingly and gladly, without murmuring or grudging, not for
fear of them only, but much more for the fear of God, Knowing that they be Gods
Ministers appointed by God to rule, and govern you: and therefore whosoever
resists them, resists the ordinance of God. Authority is Gods creature;
Monarchy is a divine Institution, not the work or Child of men; Loyalty
therefore is our duty, and at once the comfort, and the character of
Christians, and real piety. The spirit of truth has joined Fear God, and
hon^ur the King together, true Christians therefore dare not attempt either to
divide, or divorce them. And as they have no warrant for it, but a plain, a
peremptory Comm^nd against it: so neither is th^re any either wisdom or safety
in doing of it. For Loyalty is not only the Mother, but the Nurse of Peace. And
peace is the Magazine, the Mine, Root and Spring of plenty, safety, prosperity
and all temporal felicity. Rebellion is the source of desolation. Succ^s^full
Traitors, are usually most cruel Tyran^s. Nemo unqu^m imperium mal^^ artibus
quaesitum been exercuit. Tacit.
Vsurp^rs are commonly Oppressors. Their victories make them bloody and
miserable Captives to their brutish lusts and passions which overcome and
enslave them. Ira, Superbia, Crudelitas, Furor, Rabies sunt victoriae Comites,
and victorum hoste^, a quibus saep^ Clarissimi victores turpissime victi sunt,
says Petrarch, and we can sadly say we have found his words most true. Can we
exp^ct or hope that those Wolves which worrey the Shepherd, will love, spare,
or defend the Sheep? That such as thirst for blood, struggle for Thrones, and
court the possessions of others, will desire peace, execute Justice, or delight
in mercy? If conscience then do not, prudence should persuade us not only to
hate Treason, but also to decline, yea to detest all Communion, Concurrence,
and correspondency with Traitors. By woeful experience we now know (though the
widest, broadest words, and the highest the most eloquent language are too
narrow, low and flat fully to express it) how great, how grievous a Judgment,
and Calamity it is to have no King in Israel. Have we not seen since the Crown
did fall from our head because we had sinned against the Lord, such things
acted amongst us as we cannot but tremble to hear, and abhor to think of? Have
we not had such Nero's as did with delight, inhumanity, and impiety rip up the
Bowels of their Mother, murder their gracious Father, and endeavor with
cunning, cruelty and indefatigableness to ruin at once both the Church and
State? So that we may say of some of their Fathers, as the Romans did of him
when he commanded a Boy to be so cut as to make him an artificial Woman, Would
Nero's Father had had such a Wife: Since Speed Chron. p. 103.
what was said of Lucius the King of Britain, may be too truly affirmed of
them; namely, That they had been happy if they had not left a Son behind them,
because their Children (as Lampridius said of Commodus) h^ve liv^d for the
Subjects m^schi^f and their own shame. We have been taught (but we have paid
exceeding dear for our Learning) the difference betwixt being governed by
L^mbs, and Lions. Let us therefore prize Gods mercies whilst we enjoy them,
lest our sufferings and sorrows show ns the heinousness of our Sin, in
s^ighting, and rejecting of them. And let us not only profess Loyalty with our
lips, but let us carefully, really, constantly express it in our Lives to our
Sacred Sovereign, it being both pleasing to God, and profitable to our selves
to be obedient, faithful Subjects. For Allegiance is the faithful Li^e-^uard,
the invincible R^mpart both of King and people. It Is that sweet smell It Is said
that sw^et smells will k^l Vultures, and revive D^ves. A^ms are the defense of
Tyrants, and therefore ^he unsavory (...) of Gunpowder is delightful, but the
odo^i^erous savor of pe^ce is distast^ul, yea deadly to them.
which kills Vultures, I mean foreign, and Domestic Enemies. It Is that Hoop,
that Ring, which keeps Cormorants, Avaritious, Ambitious men from devouring of
us. It Is that Muzzle, that Chain, which ties up and hinders those cruel wild
Beasts, Factious, Aspi^ing, Trait^rous Incendiaries, from tearing in pieces,
preying on, and kindling amongst us the consuming, fearful fire of Civil War,
which (e) like the Trojan horse) has ever an Army of Plagues, Miseries, and
Calamities in the Belly of it. It Is that music which drives away the evil
spirit of Division from us. The King is the Head, Husband, Father, Lord of his
people: It Is therefore against Piety, Nature, Law, Reason, Gratitude, for those
that are his Members, Wife, Children, Subjects, Servants to injure, resist, or
Rebel against him. It Is an odious, infamous, damnable Crime to conspire
against him that protects us to endeavor his Ruin that is exposed to daily,
yea hourly cares, dangers, troubles, to screen, shield, preserve us, and
wickedly to violate those Sacred Oaths which we have solemnly taken to express
our A^legiance by a Christian sincere obedience unto him. Tbough he be a bad
King that rules us, yet we ought to be good, dutiful, loyal Subjects. For
whether he be Merciful or Cruel, Righteous, or Impious, Just, or Tyrannical,
God does Rom 13. 1.
ordain, send, set up, and Dan. 4. 32.
give him his Kingdom. He that gave Sovereignty to Augustus, gave it also to
Nero. He that gave it to the Vespasions, Father and Son, sweetest Emperors,
gave it also to Domitian that bloody Monster. In a word, he that gave it to
Christian Constantine, gave it also to Ju^ian the Apostate, says St.
Augustine. We are therefore strongly obliged (He being Gods Vicegerent on
earth) whether he be good or evil, to reverence, not resist him to 1 Timothy 2. 1.
pray for him, not to plot against him, to fear, not to fight him. Yea so
tender, jealous, and careful is the Lord of Kings, that in his holy Word he
does not only forbid us Exodus 22 28.
to speak evil of our Lawful Sovereign, but also to think, * Eccles. 10. 10
or wish any evil to him. Cap. 25. ^. 3.
And the Law of England has made it high Treason for any one, or all his
Subjects but to imagine his Death: Much more certainly then are we forbidden to
do any evil to our King, to t^ke up Arms against him, and to seize, apprehend,
imprison, Arraign, Condemn, Murder him. Our Law says the King can do no wrong,
it must needs be then against all right, reason, justice, equity, Conscience,
that he should suffer any wrong by or from his Subjects who cannot attempt his
destruction without being guilty of Treason, nor act it (unless they repent)
without Damnation. God says 2 Pet. 2. 13. 17.
we must submit to him, how then can we justify our selves in rising up
against him? Let us therefore not only esteem Gods command our Duty, but let us
make it our delight, care and resolution inviolably to observe it. Let us
remember and consider that Loyalty is pleasing to God, an honor to Religion, a
Bulwark against foreign invasions, and an Antidote against the stinging,
killing power of the Law; but that Rebellion 1 Samuel 15. 23.
is as the sin of Witchcraft, which is death without mercy by the Laws both
of Levit. 20. 17.
God and Man. It Is a crimson sluice pulled up to let in Confusion together with
all other imaginable, yea unexpressible miseries upon a people. It Is a bloody
Flux that often destroys, but always extremely weakens that Body politic,
that unwise, unhappy Kingdom which is diseased, and afflicted with it. It Is
that furious Wildfire, which quickly turns the strongest, the best built and
the most flourishing Nation into Ashes. It Is a Cart-rope of Iniquity, that draws
down Gods heaviest Judgments upon a People. It Is a dagger that stabs Religion to
the very heart, and lets out the Life-bloud thereof. It Is a sword that cuts the
Sinews and ligaments of Love, Unity, Honesty, Justice, Mercy, and Piety
asunder. It Is the Devils grand Engine, wherewith he batters down the Throne and
Temple of Christ in a State, and the means he uses to erect his own Kingdom
upon their Ruins. It Is the broad way to Poverty, Infamy, Death, and Damnation.
The Triumphs of Traitors are nothing but glorious Chariots wherein Satan drives
them securely, furiously, suddenly to destruction. Their most eminent
Conquests are only barbarous, successful Murders, public Robberies, and
short-lived prosperons Impieties. For Rebels (like blind Samson) do always
pull down Ruin either upon their own, or upon their Posterities heads, or
both. Their Victories do but multiply at once their Iniquities and Calamities.
God abhors them, good men detest them, Vengeance pursues them, their scarlet
Crimes cry aloud for Plagues to be inflicted on them, and their deserved
Execution is often as strange, sudden and unexpected, as their wicked, horrid,
cursed practices are loathsome in the eye of God, and odious to all gracious,
honest men. And that you may see what signal marks of Infamy, Misery,
Indignation, and Detestation, the King of Kings, God Almighty has visibly set
upon Traitors, I shall present you with a few instances of his severe, yet most
righteous dealings with them, and the uufortunate Children of some of them. Was
not Absalom justly, and strangely punished? That head which contrived the sin,
cut off the sinner, for his Hair became his Halter: he hanged by it upon an
unexpected Gallow-tree and so perished. 2 Kings. 12. 20.
The Servants of Joash conspired against him, and slew him: 2 Kings 14. 5.
But Amaziah so soon as he was confirmed in the Kingdom slew those wicked
Servants that murdered his Father. Julius Caesar's Butchers came all of them to
untimely Deaths, and some of them were cut off by their own hand with those
very Weapons wherewith they killed him. But since I need not travail out of
England to fetch examples of this kind, I shall offer a few of our own to your
view and serious perusal. King Henry the 6th. was deprived of his Kingdom,
and together with his young Son Edward imprisoned, and put to death by King
Edward the 4th. King Edward the 4th. died not without suspicion of poison.
After his death his two Sons were imprisoned, and murdered in the Tower by
their bloody Uncle the cruel Duke of Gloucester, who being a Tyrannical Usurper
was encountered and justly slain in Bosworth Fields by Henry the 7th. King Henry
the (...). (an Usurper) had only one Son and one Daughter: his Son William was
drowned in his passage from Normandy; his Daughter Maud was disinherited by
Stephen of her Birthright; and E^stace the only Son of King Stephen, died mad
in his Fathers lifetime. But that English Judas, Machiavil, Ravillack,
Cromwell, though he deserve to lead the Van of all Heathenish, Atheistical.
Pe^jur'd, Jesuitical Traitors, shall bring up the Rear of these Odious,
Execrable Exampler. He murdered his Gracious Sovereign, Exiled his pious Son,
enslaved his Fellow Subjects, shed abundance of innocent Blood, Tyrannized over
Three Kingdoms, Nursed Heresies, protected, and promoted Traitors, justified
Rebellion, designed, labored, and endeavored to extirpate Monarchy together
with all the Royal Progeny of our late blessed King of ever glorious Memory.
This is that Cromwell of whom (as of most Tyrants) that may be truly affirmed
which Florus says of Beasts, (sc.) Maxim mortiferi esse solent morsus
morientium bestiarum: for usually the Older the Crueller, the nearer their end,
and destruction, the bloudier, and more barbarous they are. His name stinks
worse then his rotten carcass, his memory is loathsome to all honest hearts,
and his Children who had built their nests amongst the Stars are tumbled down
by the angry Arm of a just God, and do now lie level with the surface of the
earth, not so much as a branch, sprout, or stump of that hollow, rotten tree
remaining either in power, or honor. So true is that of Curtius, Nulla
quaesita scelere potentia est diuturna. Thus we see that Rebellion kindles such
a Fire as will not be quenched till either the Traitors themselves or their
miserable posterity be consumed. The joy of Hypocrites is but for a moment, and
the triumphing of the wicked is short, says Zophar. Since I began to write,
God has effected two more famous Monuments of his hatred against Rebellion in
England, I shall therefore (though I intended to add no more) briefly mention
them. The one is his merciful blasting the hopes of those persons commonly
called the fly-blown, stinking Rump. The other is his seasonable breaking the
horns of those Phanaticks in the North. This is the Lords doing, and it is
marvailous in our eyes. And thus we see again, that though God may for a time
forbear to punish Rebellion, yet he will not forget it. Though the just Laws of
men may sleep, or rather seem to slumber a while, yet they will both surely and
quickly awaken: And though they may be gagged or bound by the cruel hands of
Violence and Treason, yet they will most certainly be rescued, set at Liberty,
and preserved to the disappointment, terror, unpitied destruction, and the
joyful execution of the enemies of God, and the King. For whose happy
Restoration without swimming through a Sea of Christian blood to his Throne,
and his preservation from barbarous, bloody men, when he is safely arrived and
restored, let us all frequently, heartily, cry unto the Lord.

The Prayer.
ANd be thou pleased most gracious God, I humbly beseech, theeto protect his
Royal person from open violence and secret Conspiracies: Let no weapon formed
against him prosper, and let every arm stretched out against him wither. Make
him, O Lord, good, and great, holy, and happy. Establish his Throne in peace
upon the sure foundations of Truth and Righteousness. Crown him with the
chiefest and choycest of all thy blessings; Be, O Lord, a shield and a Sun unto
him, fasten him as a Nail in a sure place, and make him a gracious, ancient,
glorious Father in Israel. Shour down the Mercies and Comforts of the upper and
nether springs upon the Heads and Hearts of him and the rest of that Royal
Family. Cause, dear God, Wars to cease, Religion to flourish, and Love to
abound in this Kingdom. Let not our sins provoke thee to turn our Goshen into
an Aceldama any more. Make, O Lord, our Sovereign happy in his People, make his
People happy in Him their rightful King, and make us all happy in the enjoyment
of thy love, protection, and favor for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen.

Per obedientiam pax, prosperitas, libertas: per Rebellionem
Inf elieitas, poena, paupertas, infamia, desolatio, damnatio.

VII. Of Riches.
Riches are a golden hook wherewith Satan catches and destroys the greedy Sons
of Mammon. They are (without Grace) the rust, canker, poison, that eat,
consume, and kill the very sinews, heart, and vitals of honesty, contentment,
piety. They are nothing (without Christ) but silver letters, glorious burdens,
gilded miseries, glittering troubles, shining vexations, painted Cares,
afflicting friends, miserable Comforters, Egyptian reeds, broken Cisterns,
birds on wing, a squalid Gloworm. They are the Mother of Pride, fuel of
contention, pandars to vice. Divitiae sunt alimenta vitiorum, voluptatum
organa, Clavis aurea scelerum. They make men the prey of Enemies, spunges of
Tyranny, and the But^ of envy.

And therefore when the Aemy. Probus in vita Thrasibuli. p. 28.
Mitylenians had given to Pittcus one of the seven wisemen, many thousand acres
of Land, he refused their gift, saying, Nolite, rogo vos, mihi dare quod multi
invideant, plures etiam concupiscant, Do not, I pray you, said he bestow that
on me which many will envy, and more will covet. Riches, they breed a Dropfie
in the mind, which makes it thirst insatiably. They make that Heart which
immoderately loves them, (like the ground wherein the Mines are found) so
barren that no good thing grows in it. They are that fair enticing apple, for
which men lose Paradise; Prove. 11. 4.
false friends in distress; a shadow which vanishes when the clouds of
sickness, trouble of mind If every feather in that fetherbed whereon I lie
were a piece of Gold, it would now do me no good, if I had not made my peace
with god said that sincerely gracious, eminently religious, and most heavenly
Servant of Jesus Christ Ms. Sarah Sharp of Filby in Leicestershire upon her
deathbed, who put off her rotten Rags of flesh and frailty to be clothed with
the white precious, and shining Robes of Immortality, Felicity and glory,
March. the 14. 1658.
or death hang over our heads, being no more able in such a condition, to
quiet, content, or satisfy the mind with real Comforts, then virtue is to
fill a pot, or the sight of Gold an hungry stomach. As that rich-poor man
found, who being very sick and full of grief called for a bag of Gold and laid
it at his heart, in hope thereby to find help and ease, but presently after he
called to them that stood by to take it away, saying, O it will not do, it will
not do. Riches they glue, and nail the heart of a Worldling to the earth, so
that what Valerius says of Ptolomaeus King of Cyprus, he was in title King of
that Island, but in his heart a miserable drudge of money, may in truth be
affirmed of most very wealthy men. They are called Impedimenta, the Bacon
Essa^. 33 p. 205.
Baggage of virtue, that hinders men in their march toward Heaven. They are
compared to long garments which hinder men from running the Race of Piety. Gold
and Silver are too heavy metals for him to carry that seeks Heaven. They are
the roots of care, and the seeds of Trouble. Divitias invenisti? requiem
perdidisti. King Eutrapeus used to heap most riches on them whom he most hated,
saying, that together with their Riches he should crush, and oppress them with
a^ heavy burden of cares. And Bishop Latimer said in a Sermon, Believe me,
auditors, if I had an enemy to whom I might lawfully wish any evil, I would
desire chiefly that he might be very rich, because I am certain that when once
he enjoys abundance of wealth, he will always want rest and quiet. Riches they
dead our affections to heavenly things, and make us prefer gain before
Godliness, Silver before Sanctity, Plenty before Piety, and cosfers full of
Gold before a gracious Christ. If I were not Alexander the great, I would be
Diogenes the Philosopher, said Alexander. If I were not great, I would be good,
says a rich man. It Is almost impossible, says one; it is a miracle of grace,
says another, for a rich man to be righteous. And yet if Riches be sanctified,
Prove. 10. 12.
they are great * blessings, and singular advantages to honor God, and to do
good withal to others, if not curses; being like poison, if corrected,
physic, if not, death: and like muck, if not spread abroad, good for nothing.
Wealth consists not in having, but in desiring: Vis fieri dives? nil cupias,
Would thou have enough? desire nothing. A contented mind is Lord of both the
Indies. Plut. Apophthegm.
The Samnites after M. Curious had overcome them in battle sent unto him for a
present a good Sum of Gold: the Ambassadors came, found him sitting by the fire
side tending the Pot, wherein he boiled certain R^pe Roots, and tendering the
present to him, he gave them this answer, Plurimum habet qui desiderat minimum,
habet autem quantum vult qui vult minimum. Putean. Orat. 1.
That he who could content himself with such a supper, had no need at all of
gold. Would ye be rich? be virtuous, and righteous. Be virtuous because they
only (says an Heathen) Qui virtute sunt praediti divites sunt, soli enim
possident res et fructuosas, and sempiternas: solique (quod proprium est
divitiarum) contenti sunt rebus suis, etc. Be righteous, because fidelibus
totus mundus divitiarum est, says a Christian; the Saints have all the world
for their possession. And if you would increase your riches, the surest way is
Prove. 11 24. 1 Timothy 6. 19.
Charitably to scatter them. Reinold. Orat. p. 397.
Divitiae quo aliis jurandis profunduntur magis, eo magis nobis ipsis
amplificantur; servando minuuntur, minuendo crescunt; acquiruntur largiendo,
congeruntur dissipando, cetinentur impertiends. Si parcas perdis, amittis si
recondas, si distribuas custodis; non erunt diu tuae si sint solius tuae,
nunquam erunt magis tuae, quam si cunctis communes facias. Qui ditissimus esse
volet, profusissimus sit oportet; qui parcissimus esse studet, egentissimus sit
necesse est, says the Orator elegantly. Riches the more bountifully we
distribute them, the more abundantly we increase them. They are lessened by
keeping, and multiplied by lessening of them; they are gotten by giving them
away, heaped together by dispersing, and retained by bestowing of them. If we
spare them, we consume them; if we hide them, we lose them, but if we relieve
others with them, we save them: They will not stay long with us if we keep them
only to our selves; they will never be more truly ours, then when we freely
communicate them to others. If then we would be wealthy, we must be liberal,
since the way to be beggarly is to be niggardly, and to be poor to be
parsimonious. The safest place to keep our Riches in, is Christ's treasury, the
poor. When Alexander the Great had given away his Treasure, and they asked him
where it was, he pointed to the poor, and said in Scriniis, in my Chests And
the only way to take our wealth with us to Heaven, or to find it there, is to
send it before on poor men's backs thither. Money is a good Maid, but a bad
Mistress. If we over love Riches, they will destroy us. If we trust in them,
they will deceive us; They will serve a wordly wicked man: when he puts off
from the shore of life by sickness, and launches into the Ocean of eternity by
death, as Pharaohs Chariot wheels did him and the Egyptians in the midst of
the red Sea, they will fall off, and fail him in his greatest extremity: And as
the Mr. Weever Funer. Acts and Monuments.
Courtiers, Counselors, Friends, and Servants did that renowned King of
England, Edward the 3d. upon his deathbed, they will forsake him, and neither
stay, nor so much as appear to administer any either temporal, or spiritual
Comfort unto him. Rainold Oratus p. 290.
What Hannibal said of Antiochus his Soldiers, Auro fulgebant satis ad Pompam
armis, ad pugnam nihil valebant; it is most true of them. They may, yea, can
indeed make us shine and glitter with bravery; but they cannot fit, arm,
enable, or spirit us to fight against our spiritual Enemies with Courage, nor
the wrath of God with victory. And therefore Beatus ille qui non post illa
abiit quae possessa onerant, amata inquinant, amissa cruciant. A man may be
very poor with abundance of Wealth, yea when he has the highest Tide of
plenty: and a man may be really Men's bona possidet Regnum. Nerva Imperator.
rich in the midst of wants, yea in the lowest Ebb of Poverty; for pauper esse
non potest qui apud Deum dives est, it is not goods but goodness, not earthly
wealth but Heavenly Wisdom, not a great Estate in the World, but a saving
interest in Christ, not gold, Prove. 8. 21.
but grace that makes us truly rich. Isse ad deum copiosus, * Judges 4. 18,
19-21.
ille opulentus advenit cui adstabunt continentia, misericordia, potentia
fides, charitas. God is not always pleased with those he prospers in the
World, for he gives wicked men riches as Jael gave Sisera milk and lodging;
Judges 3. 17-21.
As Ehud gave Eglon a to their destructions; * 1 Samuel 18, 21.
And as Saul gave Michal to David to be a snare unto them. Riches are but the
blessings of Gods left hand, the comforts of the lower springs, and therefore
Goats, profane men and women, that shall be eternally damned, may drink freely,
fill themselves at those wells, and have abundance of them. The Indians who
never heard of Christ, were owners of the Gold and Silver Mines, when
Christians had but quarries of stone. But God deals with his Children as Genes.
24. 6.
Abraham did to Isaac, he gives them all that he has, grace, mercy, peace
here, and glory hereafter. And as 2 Cron. 21. 3.
Jehoshaphat did with his Sons, he gives the eldest (those that are regenerate
that are adopted and have the Spirit whereby they can truly comfortably cry
Abba Father) a Kingdom, but unto all the rest (to all those that are
unconverted, unholy) he gives only gifts of silver and Gold and of precious
things; for the wicked have nothing but outward Mercies for their Portion.

The Prayer.
O LORD thou alone do both bless the substance, and curse the blessings of
Men. Thy dispensations, holy God, are various, perplexing, wonderful. For thou
make some persons that are poor, oppressed, distressed, imprisoned, banished,
and very indigent rich in Faith, and do assure them that they are heirs of an
heavenly, great, glorious, ever-enduring Inheritance, whilst others that are
great, full, opulent, free from troubles, and prosperous in the World, are both
exceeding miserable and very Beggars; And yet thou art most just, equal,
righteous in all thy doings, ways, and dealings with men. Thy mercy O Lord is
plenty with Poverty. Thy blessing is pure real, refined Riches, having no
mixture of sorrow, care, or fear in it. Thou O God fillest the empty, thou
satisfiest the hungry and thirsty with good things; when the wickedly wealthy
are empty both of Grace, comfort, peace and contentment, though they be
brimful, yea though they run over with Abundance. Let not Christians
therefore, O Lord, fix their eyes or set their hearts upon earth, or earthly
things only, as if there was no Heaven for them to look upon, or no Celestial
riches for them to desire and seek. But let them account all sublunary
enjoyments but fair and fading Flowers: which thine Anger can and will both
blast and wither in a moment. Let them not prefer a muck-hill before a Mine by
esteeming gain more then Godliness. Let them not strangle their souls with a
silver Snare, nor suffer themselves to be catched in a Net of Gold by either an
inordinate Love of, or an over-eager, and sinful guest and pursuit after Riches
while they live, lest when they dye their Iniquity and Calamities teach them
their folly, upbraid them with their phrensy, and sting them for ever with
unexpressible misery. Grant this O thou who art rich in Mercy, for his sake in
whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom, real Wealth, and Happiness Jesus
Christ, Amen.

Divitiae sine Gratia nocent, affligunt; vexant, premunt,
opprimunt, irretiant, interficiunt.

VII. Of Covetousness; And Covetous Persons.
It Is a Thief that steals a man from himself leaving him his treasures, but
robbing him of an heart to use them. It Is a Wolf in the heart, that must daily
be fed, yet at length kills the Caterer who provides for it; and besides, while
he lives it torments him with continual pain, fear, trouble. It Is a gulf which
cannot be filled up with the Curtius of plenty: A whirl-pool, which though it
should suck in, and swallow up both the Indies yea and the whole World, would
yet be both empty and hungry. It Is the rickets of the soul that keeps it from
growing in grace. It Is the spring from which flow those muddy stinking streams
of baseness and dishonesty. The Center, in which the lines of cruelty, bribery,
ambition, theft, murder, usury, oppression, injustice meet. Yea, all evils
grow, sprout, and proceed from this bitter 1 Timothy 6. 10.
Root and are bred in the womb of avarice. It Is the shop, the forge^, where all
wickedness is wrought, and formed. Avari^ia fornix est in qua omnia Jesu
Christi opprobria, sputa, clavi, lancea, flagella, spinae, crux, mors, and
caetera passionis instrumenta procusa et formata. It Is the Boulimia of the mind,
which inlarges man's appetite and desires beyond all capacity, and possibility
of being either pleased, or satisfied; for Dum sitiat sedare sitim, sitis
altera crescit; The heart like the Horse-leech still crying, Give, Give. The
gluttonous earth may as soon be satisfied, yea cloyd with dead bodies put into
its hungry stomach, its empty Bowels, as an avaritious heart can be filled with
baggs of gold or silver. The Sea can as soon be calm, in a violent tempest, yea
in the most furious Herricano, as that mind can be quiet which is stirred with
stormy desires after wealth. A covetous person is an Ahab, longing, sickning,
dying for a Naboths vineyard. He Is a Leviathan in the Ocean, a Pike in the pool
of this world devouring by oppression, depopulation, uncharitableness, etc.
the lesser fry, the poor, like Saul, he is busy and diligent in seeking of
Asses, even when a great, a glorious Kingdom is offered unto him; He Is sick of
such a disease as makes a man die of famine in the midst of plenty, he is a
Bank-rupt with a great estate. Marsil Ficinus Lib. Epi. 3^.
Non est bonum haec habere quae dicuntur bonae, nisi bonis dignus fueris; Bonis
enim non fruitur nisi bonus. And both in life and death he is a felo 'de se. He
always wants what he has, and this is part of his punishment (as one said to
Alexander the Great) that he shall neither with enough, nor yet with too much
be contented. He has Caninum appetitum, so that nothing but either Death or
Grace can take the greedy Muck-worm of avarice from him. He Is like that Lapis
chelidonius which retains its virtue no longer then it is set in Gold. Wealth
and his heart like Hippocrates Twins, laugh and cry, live and dye together.
Like those Barbarians, who rejoice at, and bless the Sunrising, but mourn, and
curse it when setting: he is only thankful foe prosperity, and pleased with
plenty, for losses, wants, and crosses, do fret, torment, distract him. Hackw
Apolog. p. 404. et Sive tonius.
Avarice it is the souls madness, witness Caligula who set up Stews in his
Court and Palace, prostituting therein Boys and Women to get money by it, and
not herewith content he would sometimes walk upon heaps of Gold and Silver, and
sometimes as they lay spread abroad in a large Room roll himself up and down
stark naked upon them. Bias his Problem, Qua re non es lassus? luerum
faciendo: Quid maxim delectat? Lucrari, is, if not a Covetous man's whole
Bible, yet at least a most Canonical Text therein, upon which his life is a
commentary, and to which he conforms his Actions, his practice, with very much
delight, yea with all his heart. He is an Alchymist that extracts gold not only
out of dirt, or dung, but sin also, and says with Hackw. Apolog. p 4^4.
Vespasian, bonus est odor lucri ex re qualibet. He (like a Lapwing) has a
Coronet, an immortal soul to prize, and to take care of, yet feeds upon
excrements, and like a Worm both lives and dies in a dunghill: he like the
conclusion of a Syllogism semper sequitur deteriorem (...), and his Motto may
well be, I^opem and miserum me copia fecit, Wealth has made me a miserable
beggar. What Diogenes said to Alexander i^iting and persuading him to leave his
Tub and follow him, every man may truly say to Avarice tempting him; In
following thee Alexander (thee Avarice) I shall forsake my self, and in being
thine I shall cease to be my own. A worldling with Alcibiades places his
chiefest felicity in getting and keeping of goods, and is most troubled that
when he dies he cannot (like Hermocrates) make himself his own Executor; being
as unwilling to be divorced from them to whom he has espoused his affections,
as he was who when he found the certain symtoms of death upon him commanded his
bed to be set up betwixt two Chests which he had filled with money, and himself
to be laid thereon, saying; let me lie betwixt my friends, and enjoy them as
long as I can, these I have most loved, and when we are parted, I have no hope
to find any other friends. Rainold. Orat. p. 128.
Tyridates King of Armenia called Nero his God; a covetous person Heylyn. Geog.
(like the Romans who erected a Temple to Dea pecunia and worshipped her in it
in the figure of a woman holding a Cornucopia in one hand etc. at if all
happiness did consist in Riches only) makes Gold his God, and has that
infamous brand of Ephesians. 5. 5.
Idolatry set upon him by the hand of truth it self. How more then bru^ish then
are all those men and women who adore that which they should trample under
their feet! That hope to find fresh and sweet springs in a wilderness where no
water is, nay in a broken Cistern: That promise to themselves beautiful, and
pleasant fruits from a dry root, or a dead tree, That expect (without making
any other provision for themselves) to live upon flying birds because sometimes
they light, and settle upon their ground. That have no other Balm to apply unto
their wounded Consciences but Money. That neither have not care for any other
Evidences but their Deeds for their lands. That think to unlock the narrow Gate
of Life with a Golden key. That like a Silkworm kill themselves with working
for others, spinning the thread of wealth out of their own Bowels, and yet can
make with all (...) toil, art, and pains but a spiders web, which either the
hands of enemies, or the B^esome of destruction, or the wind of Gods
displeasure, can and will both easily and certainly break, sweep down, and blow
away; That deny and deprive themselves of all Comforts, to make both themselves
and their posterities miserable. That acknowledge, as it were, a statute of,
that morgage, nay sell their souls for a little wealth, that so they may buy a
corruptible fading inheritance for their Children, although to purchase that,
they are sure to forfeit and lose both Heaven, happiness, and their own souls.
That both lay and give Esaias 9. 18.
fire to a train to blow up and consume those I do earnestly desire all
covetous, irreligious Parents seriously to consider of and tremble at these few
amongst many places of scripture. Exodus 34. 7. Job. 18. 19. Job 19. 10, 11, ^5.
22. 23. 28.
houses and lands which they have built upon, and bought with the ruins of
others. That feed their Children with poisoned dainties, That Prove. 3. 33.
sow their Lands with Sin for their offspring while they live, which will
bring forth no better fruits, nor yield any other harvest but infamy, beggary,
curses and misery unto them, and intail together with their inheritance, the
wrath of God upon them. Certainly those that do thus are equally mad, and
miserable, for (as that Blessed and Pious Martyr Bishop Hooper said) the gains
of the World with the loss of Gods favor is beggary and wretchedness. And
all they are such and so do who prefer Earth before Heaven, plenty before
piety, for they will one-day (to their grief, shame, and astonishment) find,
that their greenest hopes will be blasted, their Egyptian reeds broken, their
strongest holds demolished, that their honey will be turned into Prove. 20. 17.
gall and gravel, and that their wealth will end in wants and endless misery.

Alexander the great going upon a hopeful expedition, gave away his Gold, and
being asked what he kept for himself, he answered, Spem majorum, and meliorum,
The hope of better and greater things. But these infatuated Mammonists give
away their hopes of the most choice and precious things, Christ, Heaven,
Pardon, a good Conscience, Salvation, etc. and reserve nothing but their Gold,
and the guilt both of over-loving, and sinfully getting it. And although they
may or do expect a plentiful harvest after so laborious and troublesome a
seed-time, yet they will find, that they have only plowed upon a Rock, labored
in the fire, sown the wind, and therefore that they shall reap nothing but the
whirlwind, for Prove. 10. 2.
Riches profit not in the day of wrath, says Solomon. And a greater then
Solomon, God himself says, Ezech. 7. 19.
their silver and their Gold, shall not be able to deliver them in the day of
the Lords wrath, they shall not satisfy their souls neitheir fill their
Bowels. Let us then as we desire not to be spiritual beggars and
everlastingly undone, with an holy greediness covet the best gifts, and strive
to be virtuous and pious, since Plato.
Omne super terram et sub terra Aurum non est ex ulla part cum virtute
comparandum. Let us with an indefatigable diligence labor to be rich in faith
and good works: And let us with an holy scorn trample upon shining dirt, and
that thick clay, wherewith, whereby, and wherein so many are both soiled, and
suffocated, defiled, and destroyed, remembering always that man is de terra,
and ex terra, sed non ad terram, nec propter terram; And also seriously
considering, that Avarice is one of the Devils strongest toiles, wherein he
takes, a Drag-net, wherewith he catches, and a pioner whereby he both
undermines and kills the soul. Superbia clausit Diabolo coelum, Gula primo
parenti abstulit par adifum, Avaritia diviti aperuit infernum. All covetous
persons are spiritual Idolaters, (i) Heylyn. Geog. p. 790.
so that what the people of Brasile said to the Spaniards holding up a wedge of
Gold (g) viz. Behold the God of the Christians, may truly and sadly be objected
to, and charged upon all avaritious men and women; for they make goods their
God, account gain, godliness, and so do treasure up wrath instead of Wealth,
Prove. 3 33.
Curses instead of Riches to themselves, and their posterities. Having thus
presented to your view (though very unskilfully) an Anatomy of that loathsome,
meagre, unsavory, unprofitable carcass, worldly mindedness, together with a
true (though unlively) picture of the folly, indigency, slavery, and misery of
all covetous persons; I shall now commend to your consideration a duty which
Christ commands, Matthew. 6. 20.
But lay up for your selves treasures in Heaven, etc. Beg earnestly, cry
mightily to God for his favor, and carefully endeavor to keep your selves in
his Love, labor for a justifying faith, for purity, humility, and sincerity of
heart, for holiness and all heavenly Graces, etc. For these are such Treasures
to which all the Indian Mines are but dust, heaps, empty Exchequers, or
Gravel-pits; and in comparison whereof the rarest, the most precious Jewels in
the World, are but Glass and flints. As so many spurrs therefore to quicken,
or Arguments to persuade you to express your Loyalty to the King of
Righteousness your Sovereign by your obedience and conformity to his will and
Commands; and also to prevail with you, even for your own sakes, and the
eternal good of your Souls, Conscientiously and carefully to put this duty (the
pious performance whereof you will find to be equally necessary, profitable,
and comfortable unto you) in practice consider,



say is good, Conira palpitationem cordis, against that trouble called the
palpitation or trembling of the heart, but it cannot cure a wounded spirit, nor
so much as ease a heart that is burdened with the sense and fear of Gods
dreadful wrath for sin. The Soul is a spiritual substance, and therefore it
cannot be fed, contented, maintained, or preserved, with mundane mercies, or
carnal comforts, though shel was Emperesse of the universe. No, nothing but a
saving interest in Christ, peace of Conscience, a sweet communion with God,
victory over all her spiritual enemies, assurance of Gods mercy in the full
and free remission of all her Iniquities, etc. can quiet or satisfy her. And
therefore she cries out in her pangs, wants, and serious reflections upon her
self when she is either scorched with Gods hot displeasure, and fiery
indignation, or warmed with the Beams of Love and Mercy darting from the Sun of
righteousness, and shining upon her, as that Martyr John Lambert did in the
fire, Fex B. of Martyrs. vol. 2. p. 427. col. 2.
None but Christ, None but Christ; He alone being able to quench her thirst, to
satisfy her hunger, to grant her desires, to supply her wants, to cure her
maladies, to support her under pressures, to ease her of her burdens, to
vanquish her enemies, to resolve all her doubts, to revive her in her
swounings, to strengthen her in her languishings, to give her cordials in her
faintings, to secure her from her fears, to comfort her in her sorrows, to calm
her in, to sanctyfie unto her, and to free her from all her troubles, by
confirming her faith, increasing her graces, multiplying her Joys, and
establishing her peace in the firm assurance, and clear Evidence (by his holy
Spirit) of his free, infinite, eternal, unchangeable love unto her, the full
satisfaction given by him to the Justice of God for her, and his free
miraculous redemption of her, from her spiritual thraldom, from the curse and
rigor of the Law, from the reigning, condemning power of sin, and from Satan,
wrath, eternal Death, and Hell.

Thirdly, Consider, that these divine Treasures will afford you real comforts
in the dark, cloudy, showry days of adversity; yea in the saddest condition:
whereas all those subl^nary enjoyments, comforts and contentments which the
worldly minded in their prosperity do so much admire, delight, and so eagerly
pursue if you seek to them, when you are afflicted, tempted or dejected, for
relief, deliverance, or consolation, will answer you as the 2 Kings 26. 27.
King of Israel did that distressed woman in the Famine of Samaria, when she
cried to him as he passed by, Help my Lord, O King: If the Lord do not help
thee, said he, whence shall I help thee? Riches will answer, it is not in me to
succor, solace, or save you. Honor, power, pleasure, etc. will answer too,
nor in us; For all we cannot make or give you an healing plaster for your
hurt. We cannot cure the wound which the fiery Serpent of sin has made in your
Consciences, nor take out its painful deadly sting. We can neither make your
peace with the Lord, shield you from his mortal arrows, interest you in his
tender mercies, procure the yearning bowels, nor purchase the precious blood of
Jesus Christ to sanctify or save, to cure, or comfort you. Thus and no
otherwise will they answer, own, befriend, and bestead all those in the day of
their visitation, that have made earth their Heaven, Honor their Idol,
Opulency their Deity, the World their God, and Greatness their Happiness.

Quid enim prodest si omnia habes, eum tamen qui omnia dedit non habere? It Is
not lucre but loss, it is not wealth but wants, yea beggerie, to have all the
world from God, if that God who made the World, and gives us all things, be not
our God. But if you have these spiritual treasures, then you will enjoy
Christ, and with him all things Romans 8. 32.
. Will he who has freely given us gold, deny us clay? Will he who has
bestowed pearls upon us, refuse to grant pebbles to us? Will he who has
clothed us with Robes, deny us Rags? will he who has given us Diamonds,
deny us dust or dirt? No, * 1 Cor. 21. 22. 33.
no, do but read that great Charter of all true Christians, which (like the
Laws of the Medes and Persians) will never be altered, nor repealed, and there
in Golden Letters you may run and read the portion, privileges, and
inheritance of every true believer. All is yours (says that great Apostle)
whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the World, or Life, or Death, or things
present, or things to come, all are yours, and you are Christ's, and Christ is
Gods. So that every heavenly minded Christian (as well as a holy Corinthian)
having a deed of Gift made to him by God, written with Christ's blood, sealed by
his holy Spirit, and witnessed by his faithful Servant, pious and blessed St.
Paul, of such precious, inestimable Riches, may truly contemningly say to the
World, when she Courts him to embrace, covet, love, Idolize her, and says (as
the Devil did to Christ when he tempted him to worship him) All these things
will I give thee, sugared pleasures, gaudie riches, glittering pomp, swelling,
studied titles, down^e ease, rosy delights, dazzling Majest^e, etc. as Dan. 5.
17.
Daniel did to Belshazzer, when he promised him Riches, honor and promotion to
interpret his Dreams, Let thy gifts be to thy self, and give thy Rewards to
another. And as Genes. 33. 9.
Esau did to his Brother Jacob when he tendered his present to him, I have
enough, keep that thou have thy self. For how can they want any thing, whose
Husband is not only kind, loving and faithful, but also both the Lord and Heir
of all things: and whose Father (the God of truth) has promised to give to his
Sons Wife, every sincere Christian, for a Dower or Jointure, both Psalm. 84. 11
Grace, Glory, and every good thing.

Lastly, Consider, that an holy greecinesse and covetousness Psalm. 37 25
want nor be wronged, since the Lord is not only able but willing to protect
and supply them: And it is a truth equally bright and comfortable, that the
Children of religious Parents who have had no other inheritance, portions, or
legacies but their faithful prayers, holy Counsels, and pious Examples to
settle upon them, or be queath unto them to live upon, and to set up withal in
the World, have yet prospered, come to honor, and been blessed with both plenty
and felicity: whereas the offspring of the wicked, who have been left heirs
to very vast sums of money and great estates, have come to a morsel of Bread
by reason of Gods either secret, or visible (but always most just) curse upon
what they enjoy, for either their own or the sins of their forefathers, in
wickedly getting, unlawfully keeping, or sinfully abusing and mispending of
them. Male parta male et cito dilabuntur. Besides, Injusta lucra breves habent
voluptates, longos autem dolores. The momentanie pleasures of unjust Gain will
be imbittered and punished with eternal pains, and sorrows.

The Prayer.
O LORD, so desirous art thou to save, and so unwilling to destroy the
miserable, undone (because wicked, and rebellious) Children of Adam, whose Life
on Earth is both a Warfare and a wayfare, a Fight and a voyage, that thou have
both provided them a Magazine, and set them up, great, yea glorious, Landmarks
(The Holy Scriptures) to furnish them with Weapons to subdue all their
Enenemies: And also to afford them Light, and to give them Direction whereby
they may safely sail by those Shelves and Quicksands that threaten to ruin
and swallow up their Souls in their passage to eternity. And further as one of
the greatest and most mischievous of them all have in love to their Souls
acquainted them with the danger, mischief and misery of Avarice, that so they
may both fear, avoid, decline and escape that Soul-wracking, Soul-ruining Rock:
Blessed God add one Link more I beseech thee to the long, the precious Chain of
thy free Love, and rich, immerited Mercy, Give Christians hearts I pray thee to
hate Covetousness: Let not their Affections O Lord be riveted to earthly
things. Let them not set up Gold or goods in their minds above their good God.
Let them not sinfully love or seek that here which will either leave or betray
them, when they come to lie under black and sad Providence, under the burden,
anguish, trouble, and terrors of a wakened Conscience, and the affrighting,
confounding Arrest of Death. Give them Grace, O Lord, to covet the best Gifts,
and then the best of Gifts, Jesus Christ, that real Indie wherein all the most
precious, I never-failing Mines of Saving Grace, heavenly Blessings, spiritual
Joys and Comforts, everlasting Treasures, purest sweetest pleasures, highest
Honors, and eternal Felicity are to be found, and gotten, will be given unto
them. Let them, O Lord, make Christ their All, and then they will be sure to
want nothing. Let all their, fresh springs be in thee, and then dry and broken
Cisterns, Creature Comforts will neither deceive nor destroy them. And let all,
O Lord, that enjoy the Gospel of Jesus Christ both remember and consider with
timely Care, and Fear, that covetous Persons are not written in the Book of
Life, and enrolled in Heaven, but that they are Registered, Listed and put by
the Lord into that black Catalogue and Muster-roll of heinous Sinners, and
odious Idolaters, whose souls shall never enter into Gods rest, Kingdom and
Glory, Amen.

Avaritia Averni est porta, pietatis Gangraena,
Honestatis Tinea, Mors Animae.

IX. Of Pleasure.
ITs an Itch that overspreads all the senses till it grow an incurable disease.
A hand which tickles us like Trouts to our ruin. A Tarantula that stings men
so, as to make them die laughing. It deprives us of our Palats, so that we
cannot taste any sweetness in the duties of holiness, and service of God. It Is
pleasing but dangerous Opium to the soul, and has a Sirent tongue, wherewith
it sings such Melodious Lullabies unto it that at length the heart is laid down
by it so fast asleep in the Cradle of security, that nothing but either the
thunder of threatening, or the lightning of flaming wrath and scorching anger,
or the fire of Hell flashing in the very face of Conscience can awaken it. All
sublunary delights, pleasures and contentments Gustata magis quam potata
delectant. Cicer. Tusc. lib. 2.
The top of the cup is honey, but the bottom Gall. It at our first
acquaintance with us, smiles upon us, and bids us welcome, but afterward it
scourges us with Scorpions. By it men and women Hackwel Apolog p. 458.
like the Jesters of Heliogabalus, are smothered with violets, and buried under
Roses, a bitter sweet death. Voluptuous persons like the Sr. Anthony Shirlies
relation.
Kings of Persia, do Hawk at Butterflies with Sparrows, their lusts make them
pursue vanities. They are like the Howel in the Life of Lewis 3.
French, of whom one says in regard of their Inconsiderateness that they are
Animalta sine praeterito and futuro, Creatures that have no respect either to
time past, or time to come. When they have tired, glutted, and turned the edge
of their lusts by a full and free enjoyment of their darling lushious delights,
and their foolish, filthy pleasures, they say of such a day or time as the
Burton melancholy.
Barbarous Prince did of that when he saw Julius Caesar and his gallant Roman
Army, that he had now seen the Gods, and that it was the happiest day that ever
he had in his life. And as the Glutton did at a great feast, sure there is no
other Heaven but this. They are like that Cardinal who said he would not give
his part in Paris, for his part in Paradise. The Alpha of pleasures is mirth,
but the Omega mourning. It Is a false fire, an Ignis fatuus, that lights, leads,
and betraies those who follow it to danger, dishonor, destruction; It Is a
soft, sweet, pleasant Gale that fills the sails of men's corrupt affections, and
wastes them delightfully, down the calm streams of carnal Joy, and sensual
pleasures into the Mare mortuum of everlasting lamentation. It Is like the
Apples of Sodom very beautiful without, when within there is nothing but dust
and rottenness. Like some pictures exceeding fair and amiable if looked upon
one way, but most ugly and deformed if beheld another way. It has a weight of
lead on the one hand as well as a wing on the other, a sting as well as a
speckled skin. And when best or sweetest, it is but honey and Aloes, wine and
water mixed together, nay many times it stings the heart so painfully, that
even while smiles sit upon the Prove. 14. 13.
face, sighs and sorrows fill and perch upon the spirit. That very day, says
Marcus Aurelius, when I triumphed in Rome openly for my Victories, my heart
wept secretly. Pleasure it strangles the soul with silken halters, smothers it
in a bed of down, throws it from a Tower of Pearl, stabs it with a Golden
dagger, kills it with a delicious banquet, and drowns it in a Sea of Wine. The
infatuated Lovers of it are like Speed Cro. p. 85.
Domitian, whose delight was, to catch and kill flies. Like Hackwel Apolog. p.
463.
Nero who used to fish with golden hooks, and nets drawn with purple colored
Lines for Gudgeons. It Is like Diogenes his laqueus melleus, delightful but
deadly. A voluptuous person is an Aetna, always burning within with foolish
and filthy desires, and often flaming out in Acts of impurity, beastialitie,
impiety; He Is an Israelite dying with Quails in his mouth. Pleasure it is like
a Favorite, both a sum and a cipher, in a very little time, all and nothing,
she serves and deludes her Lovers (as it is said the Devil has done some
witches) glving them shining leaves, instead of real Gold, and proves an empty
cloud instead of a Juno to those that embrace her. She decoys men into snares,
and dangers, and instead of a pleasant walk she proves at last a deep pit and a
narrow ditch to her lovers. For although they do prefer Dalilahs lap before
Abraham's bosom, yet they will one day most certainly find that all those
fleshly, vain, and sinful pleasures, whereon they have doted, and wherein they
have lived, will be Serpents and stones, instead of fish, and bread, and but
Thorns, Thistles, Briers, instead of Grapes, Figgs, and Flowers. Pleasure it is
like an Heylyn Geog. ex Ovidio. p. 726.
Ethiopian Lake, at which whosoever drinks, it makes him (they say) either
mad, or drowsy. It Is like small beer, or water in a fever, which does not
quench but increase the thirst; and though at first it may be pleasant, yet
afterward it is always dangerous, and often deadly. It Is that Green fruit
which breeds the worm of an evil Conscience in their souls that feed too
greedily, too long, and too much upon it.

The Prayer.
O LORD, thou know that the Devil that equally cunning, cruel and
implacable enemy of Mankind does both long and labor to take, possess, and
command that Royal Fort the heart. In Order whereunto he uses both Fraud and
Force, Arms and art, that so if he cannot conquer it by Battery he may yet gain
it by Treachery, or flattery, and if he cannot by affrighting, that then he may
by alluring have it yielded up unto him. Now to the effecting of this bloody
design upon too many, he knows that an inordinate, excessive Love of sensual
pleasure is very useful and contributory, prevalent, and successful: voluptuous
persons being never vigilant, and very seldom valiant, resolved and constant
opposers of his Assaults, suggestions, and sugared insinuations: Self-denial,
Mortification, Preciseness and Holiness being too rough, too sharp, too hard,
too uneven and too troublesome a way for their delicate, their tender Feet to
tread upon and to walk in. Be pleased therefore, most blessed God, who art the
only overflowing, everflowing Ocean of all true Joy, really-sweet pleasures,
and refined delights, to grant that all the streams of Christians affections,
may run down right, pure, and holy Channels into thee. That they may relish
that incomparable pleasantness which is to be found in thee, thy Word,
Worship, ways, and love, that so all carnal pleasures may be sour, bitter,
and unsavory unto them. Let not, O Lord, Satan poison them with candled
delights or sugared sensuality. Let him not convey their death in Honey, nor
drown them in Rose Water. But antidote them, I beseech thee, and preserve them
against his mortal potions, and his murdering Stratagems by convincing of them
that Satan though he may seem a Friend will be sound a Fiend, and that although
pleasure may by his juggling and through the bemisted eyes and deluded sight
appear a seemingly innocent Dove unto them, yet if it be immoderately prized
and pursued by them) that it will certainly be found a fiery deadly, Serpent
which will sting them with immortal, incurable, intolerable sorrow, terrors,
torments, Amen.

Voluptas obcaecat, titillat, pascit, placet, perdit.
X. Of Health.
It Is a Jewel not valued because common. It Is the solace of life, without
which all other outward mercies are both unsavory and dead, this being the soul
that both animates them, and the ingredient that gives a delightful relish to
them. It Is a Venice Glass, easily, quickly, irreparably and very often
unexpectedly cracked and broken. Pliny. Not. Hist.
It Is a Bird or flower but of one day's life and continuance, a guest or friend
that does but call or visit, not stay with us. It naturally kills fear, breeds
security, feeds to wantonness, excites to pleasure, spurs on to vice, inables
to sin, and without Grace, it is both the souls sickness and death. The want of
it, makes men impatient, discontented, unserviceable, the fruition profane. If
God deny this mercy to a man although there be a confluence of all other
creature comforts, yet he is but like one clothed with Gold, Silk, or Tissue,
adorned with Jewels, crowned with Honors, feasted with dainties, cheered with
the rarest music, comforted with Cordials, surrounded with a faithful wife,
and with dutiful, hopeful Children, attended with real friends, skillful
Physicians, obedient servants, and laid upon a bed of Ivory, in a chamber
richly furnished with all his bones out of Joint and broken. It Is usual for the
sun of health to arise clear, to shine bright in the morning, and to set in a
cloud of sickness at night. How easily, quickly, will a fiery fever devour and
consume it? An Aerie colic rack, yea ruin it? A watery dropsy float and drown
it? or an aguish earthquake shake and swallow it up? The elements are all up in
arms, and at civil wars within the body natural, as heretofore the Saxons in
the time of the Heptarchy was in the body politic of this Nation, each of them
contending for victory, and aspiring to a Monarchy, over that Microcosme, Man;
(non enim datur temperamentum ad pondus) and when any of them prevails and
triumphs over the other Competitors, Health is then both wounded, vanquished,
captivated, and commmitted either a close Prisoner, to a dark room, and a weary
languishing restless bed by sickness, or else it is condemned, and executed by
death. A thousand enemies combine, assault, beleaguer it; and either by the
furious storm of a sudden violent unexpected distemper, they force and
surprise it, or else by a lingering lasting siege of pain and weakness (as by
consumptions, etc.) they famish and conquer it. Health it is a Bibulus
triumphing in a Chariot 'ith morning and lying in the afternoon in a Coffin.

A Ca^sar now very well, on the top of the hill of honor and power, and anon
expiring with wounds in the Senate.

A Quintus Scapula while supping and feasting himself, turned into, and served
up for a Banquet to the worms.

An Aufejus while dining dying.

A Valla who as he was drinking Honey-wine, had the gall of death put into his
cup, by the hand of providence, and so departed out of the vale of the dying,
into the vale of the dead. It Is both a Conqueror and a Captive in a day, hour,
moment, It Is a Cyrus strong, secure, prosperous in the morning, and before
night slain by Tomiris, Death.

The Prayer.
O Most Merciful and most Bountiful Lord God, thou have not not only given
unto man a being, but a well being also upon Earth. Nor have thou only built
him a stately Palace this World to dwell in, and furnished every Room, every
part thereof with necessaries for his entertainment to make his abode therein
desirable, but thou have also decked, and adorned it with infinitely various,
and admirably curious delightful things to make his life pleasant. And as the
top-stone, the choycest of all outward Favors have given him health without
which he could not comfortably survey, use, or enjoy them. O let good God thy
Munificence and Mercy be so sanctified unto us, that the sense of thy goodness
and bounty may humble us that profess our selves to be Christians for our
undervaluing and abusing this eminent, sweet, excellent blessing by luxury, by
idleness, 'gluttony, drunkenness and wantonness. Engage and indear our
hearts by thy Love to thee, make us careful to employ and improve all our
Talents to thy Glory, and grant that we may both fear, scorn, and hate to
consume our precious time, to spend our marrow, to waste our strength and to
destroy our health in drudging for Satan, and in pleasing, fewelling, feeding
our vain, vile, carnal and cursed Lusts. Let our hearts be sound in thy
Statutes, that thou moist not punish us with rottenness in our Bones. Make us
O Lord sick of sin, that sickness which is the fruit and punishment of sin
may either be withheld or removed from us, or however sanctified unto us. And
be thou blessed to heal our diseased souls, and make us holy, for otherwise
healthfulnesse of Body will not be a Comfort, or Mercy, but a Cross, and
Judgment to us. Grant this for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen.

Salus et Sal, and Sol est humanae vitae.
XI. Of saving Faith, and Sincere Love.
FAith, it is a Diamond set in the Ring of the soul by the spirit of God: other
graces, and virtues enamell, beautify it, this gives worth and value to it.
It Is the uppermost link in the Golden chain of Grace, joining, uniting,
espousing a true believer to Jesus Christ. It Is the hand whereby he takes the
long white Raiment of Christ's Righteousness out of the glorious wardrobe of
his infinite merits to cloth his soul withal, which is stripped stark naked by
Adams fall, and become both ugly and filthy through actual sins, that so God
may not behold the spots and deformity thereof to loath and abhor it: And
it is the hand also which not only receives, but applies that Sovereign Plaster
made of Christ's precious heart-bloud to the soul for ease, cure, comfort. It Is
the mouth that sucks the full and sweet Breasts of Divine promises, to refresh,
feed, nourish and strengthen the inward man. One says of humane learning that
if the face^ thereof could be seen it is fairer then the morning and evening
star. Aeneas Silvius, in an Epistle to Sigismond Duke of Austria How infinitely
more amiable, delightful and beautiful then will the sight of Jesus Christ who
is white and ruddy, yea altogether lovely (Cantic. 5. 10-16) by Faith here and
for ever in glory hereafter be to a believing, glorified Soul? And says Aug.
Habet fides Oculos suos quibus quodammodo videt verum esse quod nondum videt.
Aug. Epi. 222.
It Is the eye by which a true believer sees* God through the thickest cloud of
sin, in the blackest midnight of affliction, yea in the darkest dungeon of
tentation or desertion, smiling upon him in the most amiable face of Jesus
Christ. It Is the wing that carries Prayer to the Throne of grace, and the usher
that leads the soul home (to Heaven) and there leaves it. It Is a Peter catching
hold of Christ, when ready to sink in a Sea of perplexity. It Is a Sun that may
be misted with fears, and darkened with doubtings, but can never be totally or
finally eclipsed by despair; for a Christian may lose his feeling, but it is
impossible for him to lose his Josuah 1. 5. compared with Hebr. 13. 15.
union: He may indeed want for a time the luster, but he cannot for ever be
deprived of the light of Gods countenance. Like a tree in winter he may seem to
others, yea and to himself too to be dead, yet even then his root is full of
sap and alive, his heart has saving grace in it, for his life is hid in
Christ: he has an immortal seed in him which cannot perish though (like fire
under ashes) it may be covered, and for a time not discerned, either to grow,
or burn; and therefore he will certainly (like Psalm. 1.
David's tree) be both green, well liking, and fruitful again. These being
truths to me like the Sunbeams when most radiant, equally clear and
comfortable. 1. That where true and saving grace is once wrought in the heart
by the spirit of God, it may indeed decay, but is cannot die. (For this Lamp
will always be fed with that Oil from Heaven) it may be hidden, but it shall
not be lost, it may be wounded, but it cannot be killed: For though sin may
blurre, and fully a Christians evidences, yet it cannot cancel them, nor shall
it ever pull off that seal which the holy Spirit has set unto them and stamped
upon them.

2. That those whom God once loves with his peculiar, his special love, shall
never become the eternal objects of his hatred and wrath. Because whom God once
loves, loves he John. 13. 1.
says Saint John, to the end, that is for ever.

3. And that none of those who by a justifying faith are espoused to Jesus
Christ, (though they may provoke him to frown, chide, threaten, yea punish
them) shall ever have a Bill of divorce given unto them by him. Because all
such (though they be not so sanctified as to have no roots that bear Gall, and
the bitter fruits of sin in them, nor so washed as to have no filth, stains, or
soil adhere in this world unto them) are fully acquitted of, and discharged
from that infinite debt they owed unto God by their All-sufficient surety Jesus
Christ who paid it for them, so that it will never be required of them. And
although they be not perfectly, yet they are sincerely pure and holy here, and
therefore shall most certainly be saved hereafter. Saving faith, it is the only
Receipt to cure the dead palsy of Atheism, in heart and life, the Apoplexy of
security, and the best Aqua Coelestis, the best cordial water to revive and
cheer up a Soul that droops or faints under the sad apprehensions of Gods
displeasure, and for want of a Comfortable assurance of his Love. It Is Alcinous
his tree in realitie; for it bears precious fruit continually. It Is like a Rod
of Myrtle, which (says Pliny) will keep a travailer while he holds it in his
hand from being faint or weary. It Is always attended with her cheerful Sister,
and most faithful Companion, Hope. These two are to the Soul, what Maroellus
and Fabius Maximus was said to be unto Rome, The Sword and the Buckler thereof.
They are called uniones, because they always grow together by couples Heylyn.
Goerg. p. 805.
And like those Gemms called Unions, they always grow together in it. Faith
and Hope are as it were the Breasts that nourish, comfort, and support the
Soul, affording it et tutamen et solamen (as that Masculine Martyr Agatha said
to Quintianus by whose barbarous command her Breasts were cut off) both safety
and solace in the midst of all dangers and miseries. A true believer is that
beautiful Esther 8. 4.
Esther, to whom Ahasuerus the great King of Saints God Almighty holds out the
Golden Scepter of Mercy, that he may come into his presence, enjoy his Favor
and live: for the just shall live by his faith, him God does love and will
honor, but all Vashti's Esther 1. 11.
all unbelievers shall be rejected, divorced from Christ, (though Hypocrisy,
Morality, wealth or greatness may make them like her, very fair to look on)
who is the head and Husband of his Church and people for ever. Faith, it is a
tree that bears those golden Apples, those rare, sweet, pleasant, precious
fruits, love to God and his Saints, purity and humility of heart, and
affections, peace of conscience, victory over the world, charity, joy in the
Holy Ghost, courage and constancy in the confession and profession of the
truth, etc. These are the Daughters that rise up and call their Mother blessed.
These are the Jewels that adorn, and the Royal train which attends the Kings
Daughter who is all glorious within, yea and makes that Palace (that heart)
where she resides and keeps Court all glorious too; for the God of glory, the
Lord of glory, and the Spirit of glory do all take up their abode in a
believing Soul. Faith, it is a Stephen beholding a living Christ in heaven
through a thick and violent shower of stones, when the body is dying upon
earth. It Is a brass wall, a Ephesians. 6. 16.
shield wherewith a believer both repelleth and quenches all the fiery darts of
the Devil. Hostem visibilem feriendo invisibilem vincis credendo. Our visible
enemies may be subdued by striking and fighting, but our invisible Adversary
the Devil cannot be conquered but by believing. It Is that heavenly David which
overcomes that spiritual Goliath Satan, and all those uncircumcised Philistines,
sin, the world, temptations, our carnal hearts, corrupt affections, filthy
lusts, and our disorderly, unruly passions, those wild horses which carry us
headlong into sin, and run away with the soul toward Hell. It Is a divine
Apelles that draws the Image of God defaced by sin, to the life again upon the
Soul. It Is the salt which makes all our Sacrifices both savory and acceptable,
because Heb. 11. 6.
without

We must love God above all things, Apprenative 2 Intensiv^ 3. Ad^quate
First of Love to God. Amat enim non immerito, qui amatus est sine merito. Amat
sine fine, qui sine principio se cognovit amatum. And his love to God he
demonstrates by yielding a willing, sincere, constant, and universal obedience
to all his Commandments. For, Quicquid propter deum fit, aequaliter fit. True
obedience does neither deny nor dispute Gods commands, but obeys them all
both equally and cheerfully.

2. Of charity to the poor, because he that is freely through

3. Of praying and sorrowing for those that are profane.

4. Of forgiving enemies freely, cordially, fully, since no

5. Lastly, of sympathizing with afflicted Christians. If Joseph. Certainly
then those are but dead and rotten members which are not sensible of, nor
affected with the maladies and miseries of their brethren. Love, it is the
weight, which moves all the wheels of the soul in duty: Amor meus pondus meum,
Eo feror quocunqne feror, said holy Augustine. It Is the spring of all
wel-pleasing services to God. Curtius.
Alexander the great had two Friends, Hephest^on^ and Parmento Hephesten loved
Alexander, Parmenio; the King. God has two sorts of Friends, good men and bad
men. A worldly, wicked man loves God as a King able to protect, promote,
honor, provide for him. Nam amici ficti fortunae sunt amici non sui. But a
true believer loves Christ as a Lord, Husband, Prophet, with a heart not only
willing, but resolved to be guided, commanded, instructed by him, and to be
loyal, dutiful, obedient, chaste, faithful unto him The one follows Christ for
loaves, forb^y base, low, carnal ends, aims, designs: the other, to honor,
serve, please, praise him. The one because he is great, and bountiful; the
other because he is good and holy, the one withers, shrinks, repines, forsakes
God, when he is nipt with the frost of adversity, or threatened with the storms
of persecution, being like a tree that seeds and loses both its fruit and
leaves in the cold sharp winter of trials and dangers; and like a Mushroome,
without root: But the other like a Palm Tree is not only green in the winter of
Affliction, but he will also rather then he will want, deny, or dishonor
Christ, go through flames and floods, to serve, obey, meet, enjoy him. Faith
and Love are like a pair of compasses, whilst says stands firmly fixed with
the center, which is God, (nam Circumferentia fidei est verbum dei, Centrum
fidei deus verbum) Love walks the round, and puts a girdle of Mercy about the
loins. There may be a show of charity without faith, but there can be no show
of Faith without Charity. Rainold. Orat. p. 320.
Cato Vticensis being asked by one, Quem maxim amaret? Respondit, fratrem; my
Brother Being asked the same question a second and a third time, still
answered, Fratrem, my Brother, and nothing else. Ask a true Believer whom he
most really, entirely loves, both his tongue, heart, and life will answer, My
elder Brother Jesus Christ. Socrates said often he had rather have (...). The
Kings favor, then the Kings gold or silver. A true believer had rather enjoy
the love of God, the light of his countenance, and a sweet Communion with
Christ, then ten thousand worlds, and says with Melch. Adam. in vit. Luth.
Luther, Mallem ego cum Christo ruere, quam cum Caesare stare. For Christ is
the loadstone to which the needle of his heart does willingly, constantly,
restlesly (though tremblingly) turn. Nothing can keep, dissuade, or withhold
him from him, neither enemies, troubles, dangers, nor devils, for his love is
strong as death, and love alone overpowers all powers. * Genes. 8. 9.
Christ alone is the Ark wherein his soul (like Noah's Dove in the Deluge) can
find rest. Faith and love are to the soul of a gracious praying Christian,
wherein Amalek and Israel, the flesh and Spirit, are up in Arms, and will
continue fighting all the day (during the time of this natural life) as Exodus
17. 11, 12* 13.
Aaron and Hur were to Moses the Servant of the Lord. For although Amalek may,
yea does sometimes prevail against Israel, Corruption against Grace: And
although (as Moses hands were heavy) a Christians Spirit may be faint or weary,
with so long, so sharp a conflict, yet he (like Moses) being set upon a stone,
resting, trusting, and relying upon that chief cornerstone, that precious
stone, cut out of the Mountain without hands Jesus Christ, and being also
(like Moses hands steady, fixed, and constant (being upheld by faith and love,
as Moses hands were by Aaron and Hur) in crying to and begging of the Lord both
strength, assistance, and victory until the going down of the Sun, till death,
he obtains under the great Captain of man's Salvation, through whom Christians
are more then conquerors, Jesus Christ, a comfortable happy, glorious Victory
over Amalek and his people, Satan, temptations, sin, corruptions and all its
deadliest enemies.

The Prayer.
MOST Holy Lord God, thou have not only given unto Christians a glimpse of the
Felicity and Glory of Heaven by revealing to them what it is, so far as they
are capable to apprehend it, for they can never comprehend it till they enjoy
it, and are crowned with it: But thou have also chalked them out the way that
leads to it, offered them an infallible guide to conduct them in it, and
promised, yea assured them, if they will accept thy gracious offer, to give
them both Legs and strength to carry them unto it. Thou O Lord art truth it
self, enable us steadfastly to believe thee. Thou art Goodness it self, grant
that we may ardently, entirely love thee. And since without these graces in
reality we can neither please nor enjoy thee, Crown us with them, I beseech
thee; for these are such sweet Flowers as did never grow since Adam by his
fatal fall sowed it all over with venomous Weeds in the Garden of Nature; that
so being regenerated, quickened, inflamed, and enabled by thee, we may come
boldly unto thee, rely confidently upon thee, set our Affections sincerely on
thee, delight chiefly in thee, and rest eternally blessed with thee. Grant this
for his sake in whom thou can deny thy people nothing, Jesus Christ the Son
of thy Love, Amen.

Per fidem in Christo corona in Caelo.
XII. Of Repentance.
It Is the Souls return from travailing in the foraign Country of sin. It Is a
Vagabond prodigal, Luke 15. 17.
First come to his right mind (being before no better then a madman out of his
wits) and then coming home to his Heavenly Father upon the feet of Idem. v. 21.
confession and sorrow; for it is not only far more infamous to commit sin, then
to confess it, because nihil pudori esse debet poenitenti nisi non faterl;
true penitents should blush at nothing but at the concealing of their crimes:
but it is also very dangerous not to acknowledge, or to excuse our offenses.
Quicunque enim sibi se excusat, accusat deo, because either to extenuate our
faults, or to plead our own innocence, will both aggravate our sins, and
provoke the Lord to punish us for our wickedness: Since the surest way for
transgressors to be found guilty and to be condemned; * Prove. 28. 13.
is to hide their sins and to justify themselves; for wounds that bleed
inward, and poison that is not vomited up, are most deadly. Repentance is an
Augustins, a Christians retractation. It makes the soul a Solomon (wise and
happy) living as well as speaking or writing an Ecclesiastes. It Is an 1 Kin.
20. 32. 34.
Aramite with importunity, submission and supplication begging the Life of
Benhadad (the soul) of the merciful King of Israel, God Almighty. An humble,
hearty, particular, ingenuous Prove. 28. 13.
confession of all sin; a sound humiliation and godly sorrow for all sin; a
real detestation of, and an irreconcilable hatred to all sin; a resolute
resistance, and constant opposition against all sin; an holy jealousy and
Christian vigilancie at all times, in all places, in all company, and in all
our callings and employments over our consciences, affections, hearts, tongues,
lives, souls and bodies, to fly and decline all occasions of, all temptations
unto sin; a pious care when through frailty, temptation, corruption, or
security, our souls are become black, ^oul, and deformed by sin, to Gods
children fall, but it is the property of the Devils child to lie still, Mr.
Philpot. Humanum est cadere, ^ace rebelluinum, resurgere Christianum,
perseverare in peecato diabolicum. August
bath them in, and to wash them with tears of godly sorrow til they be white
and clean, and to be afraid of fullying, of defiling them again. Inanis enim
est ista poenitentia quam sequens culpa coinquinat. A conscientious care to do
no wrong to our neighbors, or if we have willingly and knowingly injurd any
man, to give him full satisfaction, (for non tollitur peceatum nisi restituatur
ablatum, I have read of one Py^rhus that when he persuaded the Sultan Selimus
to give the wealth and treasure which he had taken from the Pe^sian Merchan S*
unto an Hospital for the maintenance of the poor; Nay rather, said Selimus,
let it be restored to the right owners: and accordingly restitution was made
thereof unto them. It would certainly be very much for the glory of God, the
honor of the Gospel, the comfort of those that profess themselves to be
Christians and the good of their posterity, if they would write after and copy
out the honest example of this Turk herein: but if this be called or esteemed
foul because a Mahomitan set it, I shall present them with one equally fair,
and necessary, written by a good Christian, I mean pious and conscientious
Zaccheus, Luke 19. 8. And also with one Royal precedent, one noble pattern of
our own, viz. King Henry 7th. who in his last Will and Testament willed that
Restitution should be made of all such Moneys as had unjustly been levied by
his Officers. Speed Chron. p. 993. Go thou then and do like these who ever thou
art that art grown rich or great by unjust gain and means, and then the Lord
will pard^n, honor, bless thee. But if thou resolvest wickedly to keep what thou
have sinfully gotten, thy sins will most certainly find thee out, the wrath of
God will pursue thee, his judgments will overtake thee, and his dreadful
vengeance will both fall and rest upon thy soul, estate, name and posterity.
Prove. 11, 7. 18. 10. 7. Prove. 3. 33, 16. 8. 28. 8. Ezekiel. 33. 15.
no restitution no remissi^n and by consequence no salvation: (now by the way,
if this rule of St. Augustine, which has been judged and esteemed Orthodox and
canonical so many ages, should be precisely observed, and exactly conformed
unto, then certainly what one said of the Roman Senators, viz. That if they
should restore to others what they had unjustly gotten and taken from them,
they must go to their ploughs and cottages again, might truly be affirmed of
and would be the condition of many thousands, yea millions of great and rich
men in the world) And lastly a real grieving for our sins, more then for our
sufferings, and that we have provoked, dishonored God more, then that we are
punished by God, are the marks, the Principia constitutiva of true repentance.
Repentance it is a setting of the soul again (it being double dyed, and twice
dead in Original, and in actual sin, and plucked up by the roots through
delight and continuance therein) in the rich soil of Grace, and a watering of
it with tears of contrition, and the blood of Jesus Christ (as Hortensius did
his Plane trees with wine, (if I may so speak without a Solecisme) applied by a
justifying faith to Revivification and fruitfulness. It Is the condition of
that Obligation, without the performance whereof the Soul cannot be discharged
from the debt of sin, but remains liable every moment to be arrested (without
all possibility of either flying, hiding, or defending it self) by that
irresistible, inexorable Sergeant Death, to be tried and cast upon that Bond in
the high Court of Gods Justice, and after a verdict given up by Gods Law, and
its own Conscience against it, to have judgment and execution served upon it,
and then to be thrown into the Prison of Hell, there to lie without bail or
Mainprize for ever. It Is a well of everlasting life, Springing up in the heart,
without which there is no possibility of being holy, no promise of being happy.
It Is a soul in travail of those spiritual Twinns, Pardon, Peace; pained and
tortured with many grievous heart-rending pangs (for Gods Children have always
their hardest labors of their choycest, sweetest, greatest mercies,) but at
length by an Almighty wonder^working hand and power, safely, seasonably,
joyfully delivered. It Is the plank on which the soul gets when dashed or wrackt
upon the rocks of sin, by the tempests of temptations and corruptions, and so
escapes perishing in the sea of despair, distraction, damnation. It Is that Aqua
fortis which both eats through the very heart of sin, and wherewith the
characters of honesty, virtue, piety, are engraven upon the inward man. It Is
the water which both quenches the burning wrath of God, cleanses a polluted
conscience, and moistens the soul till it become an Eden. It Is the daybreak of
saving mercy with a cloudy wet morning, but a bright, fair, pleasant afternoon,
and a glorious Sunset follows it. It Is one of a Christians main deeds, and
best evidences for his right and title to an heavenly inheritance. The Motto of
a true penitent may well be (like that French Ladies) a watering pot dropping
with this inscription, Nil mihi praeterea, praeterea mihi nihil. He Is happier
weeping then the wicked are when rejoicing; for there is more true delight, and
joy of heart in the sorrow of Saints, then in the mirth and laughter of the
world. Verus poenitens de peccatis dolet and de dolor gaudet. A true penitent
grieves for his sins, and rejoices in that grief, it being his exceeding great
delight and pleasure to consider that God has given him a heart to mourn and
sorrow for them. The Athenians never went to conclude a peace, but in mourning
habits; we can never make our peace with God, unless we go to him with mourning
hearts. True repentance does work wonders. It will turn a Wolf into a Lamb, an
Eagle into a Dove, a Thorn into an Olive, a Rock into a fountain, a Serpent
into a Sheep, a Tyrant into a Martyr, a stone into a Son of Abraham, a Saul
into a Paul, a persecutor into a worshipper of, and a sufferer for Christ, a
cruel Jailer into a sorrowful Confessor, and a dry stick (like Aarons rod)
into a fruitful tree. Alexander the great being asked, Quomodo potitus esset
Graecia, respondebat, Nihil procrastinans. Speedy, hearty repentance, is a sure
infallible means for us to obtain more then Greece, even grace, pardon, Heaven.
Optima poenitentia est nova vita, says Luther. He that has new and holy
principles, the new wine of Grace wrought and put into the Bottle of his
renewed heart by the spirit of God, will neither walk in his old ways,
continue in a profane course, nor hanker after, nor long for the fleshpots of
Egypt again. Ista est vera poenitentia quando quis sic poenitet ut non repetat.
A righteous Lot will run to Zoar, but he will not return any more to Sodom.
Noah was drunk but once. David was but once an Adulterer. When a grievou^,
gross sinner becomes a gracious Saint, he gives this Motto, Ego non sum ego,
and he carefully prints it in his life and actions, well knowing that they only
are sincere Christians and do truly repent, that carefully, resolutely,
constantly forsake, loath and abhor all their sins. It is then our wisdom,
and will be our happiness, to write with a pen of iron, and with the point of a
Diamond upon the stony tables of our obdurate hearts, that Golden saying, viz.
It is every man's duty to repent one day before he dies: for we are not sure to
live to morrow, no nor til to morrow, but we are sure if wedie before we repent
to be damned. And if we neglect, defer or think it too soon to repent to day,
it may be too late to morrow; for God has Micah 3. 4. Jerem. 14 12. and Psalm.
32. 6.
threatened that he will turn a deaf ear to such desperate, careless
transgressors, although they cry, shed many tears, and make many prayers for
audience, mercy and acceptance. Besides how justly do they deserve to perish,
that will neither seek, nor labor to obtain a pardon when they are reprieved,
that do not value it till they be going to the Gallows, to their graves. And
although poenitentia vera est nunquam sera, tamen poenitentia sera est earo
vera: Though true repentance be never late, yet late repentance is seldom
true. It Is very rare to see a Felon though he profess and seem to be very
sorry for his fact, pardoned and unpinioned upon the Ladder: more strange to
see a condemned Traitor fetched away from the scaffold, and carried to the
Court, to be honored and advanced so highly by the King, as not only to become
his Favorite but his Son and Heir also: But it is the greatest wonder of all,
and the highest phrensy for men to wound and poison themselves, because they
may be cured; to break their bones, because they may chance to get them well
set again; to run into the fire, because it is possible their Father will pull
them out, and not suffer them to be burned; and to love, act, live, and
persevere both in theft, murder and rebellion, in hope of being not only
pardoned, but promoted, when they come to be executed. And certainly it is no
less then the greatest folly, yea madness, and cruelty to our own Souls, that
we are capable either to invent, act, or express, to presume and expect to
obtain mercy, favor, and pardon from God at our death, when we have knowingly,
wilfully, and impenitently continued both robbers of God and traitors to God by
sinning against him all our life. For it is most just and equal that the Lord
should abhor, reject, and burn the bone, when the Devil has had all the
marrow.

The Prayer.
O LORD, under the Law those sacrifices that were acceptable to thy Majesty
were offered up with Fire, but under the Gospel those Oblations, those duties
and services are most pleasing to thee, which are presented, and tendered with
Water, with penitential tears, flowing from the bitter-sweet springs of a
saving sight of sin, and godly Sorrow for sin. Grant, O Lord, that we may both
love thee, and grieve that by our Iniquities we have offended thee. Let us
serve thee with gladness of heart, and yet be in bitterness of Soul for our
dishonouring of thee. O give us, Holy God, to worship, serve, and pray unto
thee not only with the fire of Love and zeal burning upon the altars of our
inflamed hearts, but also with the waters of contrition and remorse streaming
out of broken Spirits. Let us not seek thee, and sin wilfully against thee. Let
us not profess repentance, and practice rebellion. Let us not, O Lord, forsake
Egypt, and long to enjoy it again. But grant that we may never any more
attempt, or presume to repeat or act our former old, or any new crimes. And
since most Holy God every known sin, even the very least is a great, a
grievous, a deep, and a desperate wound to the Soul so soon as it is acted,
that festers in it by continuance, gangrenes by delight, and kills the Soul by
impenitency. O let all transgressing Christians speedily search their Souls and
sores with the Probe of serious consideration, let them behold them with the
eyes of grief, and humiliation, let them bath and wash them with Tears of
sorrow and contrition, enable them by a justifying Faith to receive and apply
unto them that Sovereign, all-healing plaster made of that most precious Balm,
the blood of Jesus Christ, let them bind up their wounded spirits with the
hands of compunction and self-abhorrency, and grant that they may keep on their
plaster both by a through reformation, and a constant conscientious care,
willingly, deliberately, knowingly, to sin no more that so they may recover,
be healed, and live. Grant this great mercy, O thou God of mercy, unto us for
the merits of Jesus Christ, Amen.

Poenitere est vere sapere, valere, vivere.
XIII. Of Prayer.
It Is that safe, careful, nimble, spiritual messenger and post, that carries
and brings letters of intelligence and love tokens, to and from Christ. It Is
the language of Canaan, A Christians Shiboleth. It Is the souls both Orator and
Solicitor in that great Court of Requests Heaven. It Is a Jacob wrestling with
God and prevailing. A Jonah (though buried alive in a swimming Sepulcher,
though shipped in a living Vessel and carried down under Deck to the confines of
Hell) crying for, and obtaining a safe landing on the shore of Life; It Is a
Moses begging and receiving cure of the souls Physician, of Almighty God for
Miriam, a leprous sinful person. It Is a Christians Forces wherewith he besieges
Heaven and takes it by storm, by violence. It Is the souls industrious faithful
factor in Heaven, from whence it brings the precious everlasting riches, and
Jewel of grace, forgiveness, comfort to the heart. It Is the key that opens and
shuts Heaven. Oration justi clavis est coeli, ascendit precatio, et descendit
Dei miseratio, licet alta sit terra, altum coelum, audit tamen Deus hominis
linguam si mundam habet conscientiam. Prayer (like Hackw. Apolog. p. 295. and
histor. of Flanders..
Dousa's Doves (when Leyden was besieged) it brings certain intelligence of
relief, supplies, assistance, coming from the Lord of Hosts, to strengthen,
succor, and deliver the soul when it is beleaguered, endangered, or assaulted
by sin, Satan, or the world. What was said of Luther, is true of prayer, It may
have almost what it will of Christ. There is a kind of omnipotency in it,
whereby it holds, hinders, and (with an humble, holy reverence be it spoken)
binds the arm of Almighty God that he cannot strike; Let me alone, says the
Lord to Moses; and get thee out of Sodom, said the Genes. 19. 22.
Angel to Lot, for (thy supplication is her preservation, thy prayers and
presence are her protection, thy company is her security, thy residence her
reprieve,) I cannot do any thing (I cannot rain down Hell out of Heaven, in a
fiery shower to consume her) till thou be out of her, and got to Zoar. As
Faith is the Emperesse of Graces, so prayer is the Queen of duties. The
Elements of effectual Prayer are,

First Faith. Vt oremus credamus, and ut ipsa non deficiat fides qua oramus, *
James 5 16. Hebr. 11. 5.
Oremus. Fides fundit orationem, fusa oration fi dei impetrat firmitatem. Faith
and prayer are like the fire and fuel: fire makes the fuel burn and flame,
and fuel feeds the fire and keeps it burning and flaming. Faithless prayers
are fruitless prayers; or rather such supplications are provocations, for God
is so far from smelling a sweet savor in the sacrifices of unbelievers, that
he loathes them, they stink in his nostrils, and therefore he will cast their
duties like dung into their faces.

2. James 5. 16.
Fervency. Qui frigide rogat negare docet, prevalency is the child of
importunity. An Luke 18: 4, 5.
Atheistical, unjust judge to the house of Jacob, seek ye my face, in vain: He
that commands us to ask, and seek, and has promised that we shall receive and
find, will certainly (for he is the God of truth) attend to the cries, and
grant the requests of his own people when they beg such things as tend to his
glory, and the good of their own souls. But yet no heat, no hearing, because
cold prayers are but carcasses, and carnal, sinful services, which the Lord
detests and will never accept.

Psalm. 118. 1. We must love God, 1. Amoreamicitiae, because he is most
excellent and lovely. 2. Amore desiderii, because he is the Ocean of our Joy,
comforts and happiness. 3. Amore complacentiae, with a love of Joy and
delight. 4. Amore benevolentiae, with a sincere endeavor to honor serve and
praise him.
Love; Favors are both the seeds, fuel, and Bonds of Friendship. Compassion
is the Spring of affection. Mercy is the Mother of Amity; Magnes amoris amor,
Love is loves loadstone. A saving sense, and a right apprehension of Gods
infinite, immutable, undeserved love to us, will inkindle the fire of love in
us. And if we once truly love God, we shall then be always careful to please,
fearful to offend, and grieved if we do displease him, Minus te amat domine,
qui tecum aliquid a mat. Aug. in soliloq.
we shall delight and rejoice in him above all things. We shall desire to be
more intimately acquainted with him, we shall esteem his favor, and prize his
presence more then the honors, treasures, and smiles of all the world; we
shall never willingly do any thing that may cloud his face, or cause a distance
between us: And then, but never before, may or can we impart our sorrows, or
discover our wants, straights, wounds, and miseries by prayer to our reconciled
God, with boldness, assurance, and a well grounded hope to be comforted,
enlarged, supplied, cured, delivered. For God will not hear those that hate,
but Prove 8. 17.
those that love him.

4. Constancy; constancy in duty is the top-stone of duty. If we would be
heard, we must persevere, and continue Romans 12. 12. Ephesians s 6. 18.
instant in prayer; no constancy, no crown: It Is so necessary and so profitable
for us to call upon God, that we are commanded to 1 These. 5. 17.
pray without ceasing: we daily commit iniquities, receive mercies, escape
punishments, and therefore we ought daily, yea hourly not only to beseech the
Lord to pardon us, but also to praise and magnify him for blessing and
protecting of us. Prayer it is both a duty and a privilege, a work and a
reward, a service and a comfort. It Is an approved, experimented, infallible
means to procure and obtain a blessing upon our blessings, a glorious victory
over the world, the flesh, and the Devil; assurance of Gods special love,
deliverance in, support under, and protection from (so far as it is good for
Gods children) troubles, afflictions, desertions, peace of conscience, pardon
of sin, sanctification of the cross, Joy in the Holy Ghost, a supply of our
wants a holy contentation of mind in every condition, and whatsoever is good
either for soul or body, here or hereafter. Oration est oranti subsidium, Deo
sacrificium, Diaholo flagellum. The Trophies, Success, Triumphs of Prayer are
eminent, glorious, infinite both in all ages and places. It Is Murus animae,
munimentum inconcussum, armatur a inexpugnabilis. It Is a cordial to the heart,
an acceptable sacrifice to God, a scourge to Satan, a brass wall to the soul.
I shall therefore conclude with the same exhortation to all Christians, that
some of the blessed Laurence Saunders, George Marsh, John Careless. Fox B. of
Martyrs vol. 3. p. 138. Col. 1. vol. 3 p. 235. col. 2. Idem p. 721. col. 1.
Martyrs did their pious, confirming, consolatory Letters to their friends, and
Relations, Pray, Pray, Pray, for the fervent effectual prayers of the righteous
like 2 Samuel 1. 22.
the Sword of Saul do never return empty: and like Jonathans Bow, they neither
turn back, nor return without success and victory.

The Prayer.
O LORD, thou have commanded all men to call upon thee, promised that they that
ask shall receive, and yet (that we may strive and resolve to be humble,
fervent, upright, pure, and holy) have assured us that if we regard iniquity in
our hearts, thou will not hear us, though we beg, weep, houl, and cry unto
thee. O enable us to pray unto thee, most holy God, with Hearts steadfastly
resolved not to provoke thee by sin^ing wilfully, and delightfully against
thee: Because it is not only a vain and a very dangerous attempt, but also an
intolerable dishonor to thee, and a most horrible, a most abominable crime
committed against thee with our Tongues to profess piety, and to beg for
mercy, when our hearts are deeply, and resolvedly in Love with hateful
iniquity. That therefore we may pray acceptably, prevailingly, give us Grace
and hearts to hate all sin perfectly, implacably; and let thine own Spirit of
prayer, O Lord, enable us powerfully, and assist us effectually to call upon
thee, that so thou may both hear and grant the prayers of thine own Spirit.
Grant this, O thou that did never say to the house of Jacob, seek ye my face,
in vain* for his sake who sits at thy right hand to make intercession for us,
Amen.

Preces prosunt, obtinent, praeliant, vincunt, triumphant.
XIV. Of Sincerity and Hypocrisy. Together with some Characters of both
sincere and hypocritical Christians, and Professors.
SIncerity it is the salt that both seasons, and purifies that muddy, stinking
spring the heart. It Is the Gardener that keeps (though it cannot utterly
extirpate nor kill) the noisome, rank, poysonfull weeds of sin, from
over-growing, and smothering the herbs of Grace in the garden of the Soul. It Is
the touchstone of virtue, the marrow, heart, spirits, life of piety. It Is a
Simeon with Christ in its Arms. Like the Emperesse Mammea's Guard appointed by
her to watch at the door, and commanded to keep out all vicious, infamous
persons from going in to her Son Alexander, lest they should corrupt, debauch
him; It stands Centinell at the gate of the heart, that so no sin may enter
into it, to pollute or poison it. An upright man is like Pliny Not. Hist.
that Assyria malus quae venenis medetur, et omnibus Anni temporibus edit
fructus, pomis aliis maturescentibus, allis subnascentibus. He is homo
quadratus, like a dye which cast high or low by the hand of providence still
falls upon a square and stands firm, as well when an Ace, or when a Cize, or
Cinque. He both really desires, and carefully endeavors (for he dares not
divide or put asunder what God has joined together, I mean the means and the
end, love and labor, prayer and pardon, hearing, doing, professing and
practicing) holiness, happiness, Grace and Glory; and therefore he has
Oculus ad Coelum, manus ad clavem, well knowing that been cogitare est been
somniare, good wishing is but good dreaming, if it be not animated by striving
and resolving to please G^od in all things, in all his actions to honor God;
and so though he shoot many Bows short, yet he both reaches, and hits the
mark, the white, because his heart aims chiefly, ultimately in all his
services, ways and works at Gods glory, who requires not of us in this world
perfection, but integrity. He Is always afraid of sinning, and that prevents
his both offending, and suffering. Probus.
Matter timidi non solet flere. Vis in timore esse securus? securitatem time.
He fears falling, and by that means stands fast upon an hill of Ice, the
world. Qui semper timet, securus, H^ will not endure a Rimmon in his heart,
because he knows that God (like Alexander) will have no Co-partner, nor
corrival. Aut Caesar aut nullus.
That inscription which the Commonwealth of Venice has politically written in
their Magazine; (c) Burt. Melanch.
Felix civitas quae tempore pacis de bello cogitat; he has religiously
ingraved in his memory and mind, and therefore it is both his resolution and
care, in health to provide for sickness, in a calm to prepare for a storm, in
Life for death. He strives and aspires to be greater, stronger, higher in grace
and Gods favor every day then other, and gives this (which was Pompeys) for
his Motto, Ego cupio praecellere et esse supremus; He can neither rest nor be
quiet till (like Saul) he be grown taller then worldly, moral, hypocritical
men by the shoulders, neck and head, in honesty, virtue, piety: And never (as
it is said of the Crocodile) gives over Psalm. 92. 13. 14. Job. 17. 9.
growing in goodness and godliness till his death. What Alexander the great
said to one of his Captains named Alexander, Recordare nominis Alexandri, see
thou do nothing that will smut, stain, or darken the fair, the illustrious name
of Alexander. He (being like the Ermin, to whom nothing is so troublesome, as
to be soul, for it will rather dye then be soyled) endeavors carefully to
observe and conscionably to perform; and therefore he labors to keep himself
unspotted from the world, to get and to keep a pure heart and clear hands, to
be undefiled in Gods Law, and to wash his heart from all wickedness. He does
as really endeavor never to commit sin, as he does unfaignedly desire never to
be damned for sin. He does think, speak, and act at all times, in all duties
and places, as under the eye, and in the presence of God, because he knows
Seneca. Epist. ad Luc 83. p. 711.
Sic certe vivendum est tanquam in conspectu vivamus, sic cogitandum tanquam
aliquis in pectus intimum inspicere possit, and potest. Quid enim prodest ab
homine aliquid esse secretum? Nihil deo clausum interest animis nostris and
cogitatiocibus nostris intervenit. And also because he knows, that although man
can make no through lights to look clearly into the heart, yet it lies
unbowelled, dissected unto his allseeing eye, to whom all things, even the most
dark, hidden and undiscernable, are both naked, opened, and transparent. He
makes God his center, and so enjoyes both rest, happiness, and stability in
the midst of all either national, or personal overturnings and shakings. Let
their money perish with them who esteem all the gold in the world worth one
days society with Jesus Christ and his holy spirit, said that noble and pious
Marquess of Vico Gealacius Caraciolus, when a Jesuit offered him, huge sums of
money to forsake his Religon, and to turn Papist again. videte jus vitam.
He (like an Eagle) disdains to pursue flies, earthly enjoyments, and sublunary
comforts, because like flies they are only to be seen, and found in the
sunshine, and summer of prosperity, but fly away and hide themselves in the
dark, cloudy days and winter of adversity, spiritual desertion, and death.
Thou art not, said Cleopatra to Mark Anthony, to fish for Gudgeons and Trouts,
but thou art to angle for Castles, and Towers, and Forts, and Cities. When the
heart of a true Nathaniel like Dinah begins to gad abroad, to hanker and thirst
inordinately after creature comforts, he considers and tells his Soul, Soul
thou were not created by an omnipotent power, nor sent into the world by an
omniscient, holy, just, glorious, and dreadful God, to fish for Gudgeons or
Trouts, for pleasure, wealth, honor, or greatness; to love and mind such
poor, contemptible, empty, treacherous, worthless things as these; burby faith
and prayer, holiness, hope, and perseverance in a constant course of
sanctification, to angle, to seek, wait and labor for the impregnable Castle
of a good Conscience, for the strong, rich, and beautiful Forts of virtue and
piety, for the City of Heaven, and for the Towers of glory, felicity, and
immortality. He desires and delights in the society of the brethren, the people
and servants of God, because he sees the superscription of Caesar upon them,
the Image of Christ lively and truly drawn and stamped by the Spirit of God
upon their souls. And also because he does experimentally find, that Socrates.
Bonorum conversatio est virtutis exercitatio, he gets good by good company. He
does with an ardent zeal, and pious care set up the worship of God in his
family, because he knows, that the prisons stink, but yet not so much as those
sweet houses where the fear and true honor of God is wanting; As that blessed
Martyr Fox B. of Martyrs. vol. 3. p. 156.
Bishop Hooper said. And he desires to serve God who is the purest of Spirits,
with spiritual purity. If the candle of the Lord shine upon his Tabernacle,
so that his riches, or honors increase; he notwithstanding both longs, and
seeks for higher and better things, and says as Luther did (when many of the
great ones of Saxony sent very rich gifts unto him) Lord thou shall not put me
off so; for he will not take, or accept outward things for his portion, or
inheritance, nor exchange Heaven for earth. He is the Epistle, the letter of
Christ, wherein men may run and read saving grace, written by the finger of the
Holy Ghost, therefore he is exceedingly, yea constantly careful to keep both
his heart and life, fair and free from the spots of vice and the stains of sin.
That King of Rivers in Germany the rhine crosses the muddy lake of Constance
with a clean course and keeps his streams both pure and clear: So a sincere
Christian keeps himself free from the corruptions, sins, and pollutions of the
world; and like Lot in Sodom he is grieved for, but not defiled with the
crimes, vices, and filthy conversation of the wicked; for though he be in the
world, yet he is not of the world, He mourns for the abominations of the land
wherein, Psalm 119. 158. idem. ver. 136.
and of the ungodly amongst whom he lives. He rejoices in the peace of Sion,
and the prospe^ity of Jerusalem: but is grieved for the afflictions of Joseph;
and above all for the dishonor done to his God; for his own worldly interest,
relations, or life are not so dear to him, as the glory of his Maker, and
Redeemer. He accounts Gods ordinances the rarest dainties, the sweetest
delicates, and with Job esteems Gods holy word, and them more then his
necessary food. He stumbles often, seldom falls, but never lies down in sin
so, as not to rise up out of it. He like a laboriqus Be, does industriously,
daily, delightfully suck, not only the sweet and beautiful flowers of Gods
precious promises, heavenly counsels, and holy commands, but also the bitter
(yet wholesome) herbs of Gods just and terrible threatenings growing in that
rare garden, or rather Paradise, the sacred Scriptures, that so he may fill the
hive of his Soul, with the honey and wax of holiness and honesty. He Is a good
Theodosius who had rather be a living member of that true Church whereof Christ
is the glorious head, then an Emperor in the World. And says with holy
Ignatius, who persuaded his friends not to dissuade him from suffering
Martyrdom, It is better for me to die in Jesus Christ, then to reign in the
ends of the earth; because Jesus Christ is the life of the faithful, and life
without Christ is death. And because (as blessed Bradford Fox B. of Martyrs
vol. 3. p. 283.
said when the Queens mercy was offered him if he would recant, and forsake his
Religion) Life in Gods displeasure is worse then death, and death with his true
favor is true life. He is one in whom the house of David prevails against the
house of Saul. And is not gilt, but Gold. He has no sweet sin nor secret lust
lapped close up within the folds of guile, or hypocrisy in his heart. He like
Qualis animus, talis oration, qualis oration, talis vita. His life as well as his
lips, his works as well as his words, do praise God, for he does not flatter,
but truly fear the Lord.
Enoch walk with God. Like Caleb and Josuah, his heart follows the Lordsfully,
while he is travailing through the wilderness of this world, toward Canaan,
Heaven. And he is an Genes. 5. 22.
Abraham a friend of God. Sincerity, it is the highest round, and pitch of Grace
and goodness that the Soul can fly, or climb to, while it is pinioned, and
laden with the flesh: Esaias 41 8. 2 Chronicles. 26. 7.
It Is the Souls cordial when fainting, its bladder when sinking, its leg when
stumbling, staff when falling, comfort while living, Joy when dying, and its
Crown after death. But without sincerity we are but light without heat, mudwals
pargetted, Rotten posts gilded, ugly wrinkled creatures painted, professors
blanched: without it we are odious and loathsome both to God, and Man, God
hates us for not being Quid tibi prodest nomen usurpare alienum et vocari quod
non es? It will be no real profit, advantage or comfort unto us, either, to be
called Saint, or to be accounted the children of God by men, if we be but
whited Tombs, but carnal, rotten, dissembling Christians and professors in the
sight and esteem of God, nay we are much more odious to the Lord for being
pious only in show and appearance.
really, and man for being seemingly religious: so that we are too bad for
Heaven, too good for earth, and therefore only fit for Hell. An Hypocrite is
like an Egyptian Temple, which was very curious, glorious and beautiful
without, but had nothing within, except a Serpent, or an Ape. Though he
professes himself to be a Temple of the Holy Ghost, yet his heart has nothing
in it, but either filthy, or foolish, venomous, or vain lusts and desires. He
is like that tree in Pliny, whose leaf is as broad as a hat, but its fruit no
bigger then a Bean. Like that Ox slain and sacrificed in Rome, the same day
that Caesar was murdered in the Senate, without an Heart, at least without a
good one; for Prove. 10. 20.
the heart of the wicked is little worth. Like that shield, which had God
painted on the one side, and the Devil on the other. He hangs like Mahomets
Tomb (or as the Papists picture Erasmus) betwixt Heaven and Hell. Like Janus he
has two faces; being intus Nero, foris Cato; Loquitu^ ut Ps^^, vivitur ut
Gallonius: audi, nemo melius; specta, nemo pejus. He is like a man with
corrupted Lungs, a bad Liver, rotten teeth, and an artificial perfumed breath.
Like a stinking carcass stuck with lillies, violets, and roses; like a rotten
dunghill covered with snow; like one clothed in white with a plague sore upon
him, and like a thiefs coat, plush or scarlet without, and cloth within, of
another color. He Is like Nebuchadnezzars Image, whose feet were clay, for his
affections (though his words be gilt with golden, 1 Camden Annal. Of Queen
Elizabeth lib. 4. p. 489.
holy expressions, and his outward behavior with a silver, civil, specious,
religious profession) are carnal, earthly vile, and sinful. (i) Squire when he
anointed the Pummel of Queen Elizabeth's Saddle with poison to destroy her,
cried with a loud voice, God save the Queen. An Hypocrite when he seems most
zealous to honor Christ, even then murders him, he cries Hosanna with his
tongue, but his heart says, Crucify him, for it loves and prefers some
Dalilah more then him, and before him He has certainly a Diana in the Temple,
a Dagon in the Ark of his heart; like those 2 Kings 17. 35.
that feared the Lord, and served other Gods. And like Speed. Chro. p. 297
Redwald the 7th. Monarch of the English men, who in the same Temple erected an
Altar for Christ, and another little altar for burnt sacrifices to his Idols.
He is like those leones Syriaci, Aristotle and Solinus.
qui primo quinque foetus pariunt deinceps quatuor, post ad singulos partus uno
pauciores, donec ad extremum omnino steriles nullum foetum pariunt. He is like
the Cypress tree, beautiful but barren. Fox B. of Martyrs. vol. 3. p. 967.
It Is reported of Castellanus an Apostate professor who persecuted the
Christians at Orleans, that he was stricken by the hand of God with this most
strange judgment, the one half of his body burned as hot as fire, and the other
part of it was as cold as Ice, and thus crying and lamenting he continued till
his death. The fire of piety kindles in the mouth, burns upon the tongue, and
blazes out in the verbal expression of an Hypocrite, but his heart is frozen,
and cold as snow for all that, because there is not so much as one spark of
true grace therein to thaw, or heat it while he lives here, nor to prevent his
sufferings hereafter, in that place where (through Gods just judgment, upon
him) he shall both freeze and fry, weep and gnash his teeth without all
possibility of ease or end. An Hypocrite then is both a self-destroyer, and a
self-deceiver. Patroclus exultabat Armis Achillis, sensit Hector nihil aliud
esse quam Patroclum. For although with his glittering shows of piety, (like a
Jugler) he may delude the eyes of men, yet he cannot cast a mist before, *
Jerem. 17. 10.
nor draw a curtain betwixt the the All-seeing eye of God and his soul; because
the Lord both searches, tries, knows and weighs the heart and spirit, and the
darkest angles, together with those darling corruptions, that lurk the closest
in them. What was said of Cicero, Linguam omnes fere mirantur, pectus non ita,
is true of an Hypocrite, most men may admire his tongue, even whilst God
abhors his heart; that may be most eloquent and pious, while this is most
unclean, and impious. Speed.
He is like Tiberius, aliud ore, aliud mente, omnia dissimulans. And like
Guicciardine.
Pope Alexander the 6th. who was so cunning a dissembler that he never spoke as
he meant. And therefore he is abominable to God, who loves and requires truth
in the inward parts being, non corticis sed cordis Deus, the God of the heart,
and not of the bark. An Hypocrite deals with Christ as Ruth. 1. 14. 17.
Orpah did with Naomi, he kisses, and leaves, professes, and forsakes him. And
therefore God will both reject him, eclipse or rather kill his Joys in Job 20.
5.
a moment, * Matthew. 22. 13, 14 15, 16.
and inflict eternal woes upon him. But a sincere Christian carries himself
toward his Savior, as Ruth did to Naomi, he forsakes all for him, cleaves
steadfastly to him, and resolves nothing shall part, divide, or divorce him from
him, and therefore God will both own, honor, and crown him with felicity and
glory to all eternity: For that with Galba the Emperor of Rome once said to
his Soldiers, may both most comfortably and truly be affirmed of Christ, and
all true Nathaniels, Zachary's, and Elizabeth's, I mean all sincere Christians.
viz. ego vestor and vos mei, Jesus Christ is and Hosea 2. 19.
will be theirs faithfully, yea everlastingly, and they are his most entirely,
cordially, constantly. My beloved is mine, and I am his, says the spouse of
Christ her Husband.

The Prayer.
O LORD since thou have acquainted those that enjoy thy Gospel wherein thy
will and their own duties, comforts, privileges and happiness are revealed to
them, that a double heart is an evil heart; Let us not I beseech thee be
contented, much less well-pleased or resolved like Solomon's Harlot to have
that Child divided betwixt thee and our Lusts. Under the Law thou did command
that the Altar upon which thy people sacrificed unto thee should be made of
whole Stones. But under the Gospel thou requirest that the Spirits of those
who serve and seek thee, be contrite, fleshie, tender, yet entirely devoted to
thee. O Let not blessed God our hearts who sit under the droopings of the
Sanctuary be stonehard, barren, senseless, dead hearts, but take them into thine
own hands O Lord, and mould, fashion, form and frame them so that they may be
soft, broken, and yet wholly, only, and sincerely thine: And that so thou may
delight in them, take possession of them, set up thy glorious Throne, and dwell
in them. O let us remember that sincerity will be our Comfort in the midst of
our sorrows, and a welspring of Joy, peace, gladness, hope, and happiness to
us has in life and death, whereas Hypocrisy will both bring us unto, and
leave us in eternal woes and horror. Let us also consider that the paint of
Hypocrisy, and the varnish of formality will not, cannot either hide our
loathsome deformity from the (...) pure All-seeing eye, or abide and stick on
when we shall appear before our God by death, and judgment who is a consuming
(...) us not therefore, O thou that requirest truth in the inward parts, to
content our selves with shows of goodness, and a form of Godliness, but
grant that we may labor to get the life and power of Religion into our hearts,
to depart from all iniquity, to walk in all the Commandments of our God
without reproof, and cordially to serve the Lord, that so living here without
Guile, we may dye in the Lord, and after death riegn with the God of truth in
Glory. Amen.

Sinceritas, pietatis est medulla, anima Gratiae,
Antidotum contra desperationem.

XV. Of Afflictions.
It Is the Esaias. 48. 10. Ier. 9. 7.
Furnace into which God casts his people to refine them, his enemies to consume
them. It Is a comfortable pillar of fire to lead his Israel toward Canaan, but
a fearful flame, like that from Heaven upon Nadab and Abihu, to destroy the
wicked. It Is a Scullion, a file to make Christians bright and clean. It Is the
gall and Wormwood that God lays upon those breasts of the world, power,
pleasure, honor, profit, to wean his children from it. It Is the hand, the
friend that pulls them out, and will not suffer them to dabble, soil, drown
themselves, in the puddles, sinks or streams of earthly vanities, carnal
pleasures, or creature comforts. It Is the Kings professor of Divinity in the
Academy of the World. It Is the Scholacrucis ^ehola lucis. Calamitas virtutis
est occasio. Seneca dedivin. provident.
School of Christ, where a Christian learns to take out lessons of patience,
humility, submission to Gods will, contempt of the World, Repentance, and
dependence upon God. It gives a tongue to the heart, and (as the extreme danger
Croesus was in by Cyrus and his enemies in the battle, made his till then dumb
Son cry out Rex est, caeve ne ^ccidas. Heyl. Geogr. p. 528.
O do not kill King Croesus) makes men and women both to break open and knock
off, all the doors, locks, bars, and obstructions of speech, and also to
Hosea. 5. 15.
cry out for mercy, acceptance, forgiveness, deliverance, safety, and
salvation, although they had never before spoken one word to God by prayer for
the lives of their endangered, wounded, dying souls. What the barren women of
Rome did foolishly conceive of, and vainly expect from the Priests of Mars when
they danced stark naked up and down the streets with whips in their hands to
keep off Dogs from biting them, namely that if they were lashed by them, it
would make them fruitful; Christians find it experimentally to be most true of
the Rod of God, for it makes them Psalm. 119 67^ 71.
bring forth fruit meet for repentance. Affliction like Aloes is bitter in
taste, but sweet in operation, for it kills sin that Cancer, that cruel deadly
worm which does so dangerously wound, so grievously pain, and so intolerably
torment the Soul. It Is to an Israelite a Jordan, but a Red sea to an Egyptian.
A child of God may say of Troubles, as Socrates did of his enemies Anitus and
Melitus, they may kill me, but they cannot hurt me; for he is like the Amiantus
stone called the Asbest, which (it is said) being cast into the fire seems
forthwith to be all on a flame, but being taken out shines more gloriously: And
like gold, which put into fire is more pure, and being cast into the water is
most radiant. Tribulation is to him as the enemies sword was to that soldier,
who being therewith wounded in his side, was thereby cured of an Impostume,
which otherwise would have caused his death. Adversity it is a Christians
Topics from whence he deduces Arguments to prove himself a Prove. 13. 1^.
Favorite in the Court of Heaven. It Is his Heraldry or Coat of Arms where by
he is able to prove himself allied to Christ, and an Heir of Glory; they being
Bastards, Esaias. 27. 9.
not Sons, who are not chastened of the Lord. Deus unicum tantum habet filium
sine peccato, nullum sine flagello. It Is the Physic that purges out the
peccant, dangerous humors of sin; it is a painful but a health-bringing
medicine.

Nulla remedia quae vulneribus adhibentur tam faciunt dolorem, quam quae sunt
salutaria, says the Orator. Corrections like Plato's suppers are best the day
after. A gale of groans and sighs, a stream of tears accompanies us to the very
gates of Heaven, and there bids us farewell for ever. M. Baxter.
A good man's drink is wormwood here, for he must not expect two Heavens.
Delicatus es si hic gauderevelis cum seculo, and postea regnare cum Christo;
Since they that would reap in joy must sow in tears, they must expect both
clouds and showers, 1 Thessalonians. c. 3. v. 3^
it being the lot, portion and condition of all Gods people to have foul
weather and foul way in their Journey toward their everlasting home, Heaven.
Rainold. Orat p 401.
Cyrus olim suos Persas libertatis dulce dinem ex labor servitutis docuisse
traditur. Si mihi tranquilla and placata omnia faissent incredibili qua nunc
f^uor laetitiae voluptate caruissem. Cicer. post reditum.
Misery gives a sweet relish to mercy, and therefore God will have his people
to be slaves in Egypt, before he makes them free denisons of Canaan.
Afflictions are the snuffers wherewith God makes his people to burn and shine
more bright.
Affliction, it is the Mortar in which a Child of God is beaten and bruised to
make his graces like sweet spices smell more fragrantly. Afflictio piorum non
est tam poenae criminis quam examen virtutis: For Gods sharpest dealings, and
severest dispensations toward his children are corrections not judgments,
chastisements but not punishments, or if they be punishments they are yet
poenae emendatoriae non interfectoriae, reforming not consuming, temporal, not
eternal, sin-killing, but not soul-killing punishments. Affliction it is the
Sive wherewith God sifts, and as it were dresseth them to make them fit grain
to be gathered into his Garner. It Is the workhouse in which he frames his
Servants like to his Son. It Is the mould wherein God casts his own people, and
forms Jesus Christ in them. It Is the Mint-house wherein the Lord stampeth his
own Image upon them with this superscription, Holiness to the Lord. There is
no greater sign of damnation then to lie in sin and evil unpunished of God,
says blessed Mr. Bradford.
It Is the mark, livery, Cognizance, of the friends, sheep, and servants of
Christ. It Is a Rod (like 1 Samuel 14. 27.
Janathans) with honey at the end of it, whereby men's eyes are enlightened to
behold their misery; most men and women being too like the Mole, who (they say)
is blind till a little before her death, but then see's. Job 36. 8, 9.
If they be bound in fetters, and be holden in the cords of affliction, then
God shows them their work, and their transgressions that they have exceeded,
says Elihu. Manasses could not see his sins so as to be humble for them, and
to repent of them, till affliction had opened his eyes. Adversity it is the
Grave of sin, and the Womb of Grace. It Is like Rainold Orat. p. 394.
the picture of Diana in Chios, which frowns when you come to it, and smiles
when you go from it. Nihil mihi videtur infelici^s eo, cui nunquam aliquid
^venit adversi. Demetrius.
Demetrius an Heathen accounted it a great unhappiness that he had no
misfortune. And not without just cause, since prosperity is usually the mother
and forerunner of iniquity, security, Prove. 1. 32.
misery. Plutarch. Apothegm.
When Philip King of Macedon had tidings brought unto him of many worthy and
prosperous exploits achieved all together in one and the same day, he cried
out: O fortune, work me but some small displeasure, I beseech thee, for these
so many blessed good turns. Camerar. lib. 1 p. 38.
And when Amasis King of Egypt heard of Polycrates his happiness, he wrote to
him, saying, I have thy great felicity in suspicion. And afterward said, that
he feared he should be forced to sorrow and lamentation because of this his
friend overwhelmed with misery. And that he feared came to pass, for not long
after Polycrates was hanged upon a Gibbet, by the Command of Oraetes the
Lieutenant of Cyrus. Miserum te judico quod runquam fuisti miser. Seneca de
divin. providentia.
Impunity is the greatest infelicitie: Prove. 2. 1^.
prosperous wickedness being the usual Harbinger of grievous calamities, for
God is most angry at the wicked when he seems (because he does not punish them)
to be pleased with them. Amongst men there is et misericordia punien^ and
crudelitas parcens. Witness Tiberius Suetonius vita Tyberii.
who constrained them to live who were willing to dye: And Camerar. lib. 5. p.
334.
Caligula, whose Command to the bloody Executioner of his cruelties was, Ita
feri ut mori se sentiat; strike so as he may feel Death. And when a poor
prisoner said to Tiberius, I beseech your Majesty that I may dye, he answered
him, thou art not yet in my favor. So the Lord (but most justly) punishes his
enemies by sparing, wounds by not striking, and plagues them by prospering of
them. For Adversity with Gods mercy is true felicity, but prosperity with Gods
wrath is real misery. Paul in a Dungeon was happily miserable, when Nero upon
a Throne was miserably happy. The way to Canaan for the Israelites lay through
a howling desert; Affliction is the Kings great road to Heaven. Don Anthony de
Guevara Dial of Princes Fol. 28.
Bias amongst others ordained this Law, That none should be a Prince of the
Perinenses but he that had been brought up ten years in the Wars. Because,
says he, he alone does know how precious a thing peace is, that has felt the
extreme calamities of War. Famine teaches us the worth of plenty, Imprisonment
indears liberty, darkness makes the light both more desirable and welcome; so
the burden of affliction felt, and the bitterness thereof being sweetened, by
being sanctified unto us, will make us both highly to prize Gods great mercy in
delivering us from troubles, and heartily to praise him for his compassion and
goodness in giving us songs in the night, solace in the midst of our Sorrows,
and support under our sharpest sufferings; since none will either so much value
the favor and felicity of a pleasant calm, or rejoice in the security of an
earnestly desired Haven, as those who have experienced the amazing distracting
terrors of a Choleric, furio^^ storm, and have been exposed to the dreadful
dangers (...) an enraged Ocean, whose angry, cruel, and remo^slesse Billows
did seem to quarrel and contend which of them should be their Executioners,
and first overwhelm, ingulf, and bury them in the liquid bosom of their
merciless Mother: Christ is never so amiable, dear, or precious to any, as he
is to them who have been sensible of the weight, height, and smart of sin,
their own nothingnesse, vileness, and wretchedness, by reason thereof, and
his infinite, undeserved Love in both freely, seasonably, safely bringing them
by the gates of Hell to Heaven. And therefore God who is not only wisdom it
self, but 1 John. 4. 6.
Love, and the father of mercies, who does not willingly afflict the children
of men, who is grieved as well as fretted at their transgressions, would not
cut and lanch his people, if their festered sores could be cured, or the life
of their souls preserved by mild, unpainfull, and merciful applications. He is
also John. 1. 15.
that husbandman, who is Lord of the Vineyard, and he both takes care of it,
and delights in it; He will not therefore cut down with the Axe of vengeance
those trees that bear good (though but little) fruit, * Revel. 3. 19*
but only prune them with the sharp knife of Affliction, Deus paternum habet
adversus bonos viros animum et illos fortius amat to, operibus, doloribus ac
damnis exagitat; ut verum colligant robur. Senec. de Divin. provident.
that so they may be more fruitful. He is not (like Tyrants) pleased with
their sufferings, for even then when his hand is whipping of them, his tender
Bowels (like an indulgent pityful Mothers) yearn toward them; while he strikes,
he loves them; yea therefore he strikes because he loves them: you have his own
word for it, as many as I love These are the Lots which all Kings from the
first that ever was to the last that ever shall be, shall most certainly draw
in their courses, Regnabo, regno, regnavi, sum st^^e Regno.
I rebuke and chasten. His blows, are Balm, his wounds cure, his anger is
favor, and his displeasure mercy to them. It Is then both the unspeakable
felicity of, and a prerogative Royal, not only peculiar and annexed unto, but
also inseparable from all the Heaven-born heirs of Christ's Kingdom, That no
condition how sad, grievous, or calamitous soever it be in this world, either
shall or can render them miserable: John. 10 28. Psalm. 103. 17.
Because it is beyond the power both of sin, Satan, sufferings and death, either
to extinguish the fire of Gods free love toward them, or totally and finally
to take away the inward, soul-ravishing, and reviving comforts of the Holy
Spirit from them, or to extirpate the root of grace out of them here, or to
keep them from, or to deprive them of, that crown of glory, which the Lord has
both promised them in this life, and prepared for them in the next, when Angels
shall carry their souls into Abraham's bosom: whereas the undoubted immediate
Heirs of earthly Princes are often either excluded, disinherited, deposed, or
Assasinated, and so do not only lose their rights, hopes, honors, lives and
glories, but become far more miserable by their being formerly so happy either
in expectation, or fruition. We need travail no further then Our age does
afford us the most bloody, barbarous and impious example of this kind that ever
the Sun beheld, viz. the horrid murder of King Charles the 1st.
England to fetch woeful instances or examples to confirm this truth. * Robert
the eldest son of William the Conqueror, King Henry the sixth, and (to name no
more) Edward and Richard the only Sons of King Edward 4. were disinherited,
deposed and murdered. The first by his younger brethren, William Rufus, and
Henry. The second by Edward the 4. The other by their uncle then Duke of
Gloucester. Thus we see that a Christians cross is a Crown, whereas an earthly
Crown is but a cross. The statue of Neptune at Messina holds Scilla and
Charybdis in chains, with this inscription, Pergite securae per freta nostra
rates. The Lord orders all his dispensations both of love and anger to his own
glory and his peoples good, so that neither prosperity nor adversity shall hurt
them, Luther.
Quicquid enim passus est Christus idem nobis sanctificavit, paupertatem
ditavit, ignominiam glorificavit, mortem vivificavit. Whatever Christ suffered
that he has sanctified. He has made poverty riches, Ignominy honor, and
brought life out of the womb of death to and for his people. (...) ^aeom. ex
Arist. lib. 2. Ethic. c. 5.
It Is an Axiom in Philosophy, Med cinae fiunt per contraria, and it is true in
Divinity: for the great Physician of our souls makes miseries medicines,
sickness health, and tribulations Psalm 119. 71
mercies to his Children, yea (...), Nocuments are Documents, corrections Psalm
119. 67.
instructions, calamities cordials, and crosses comforts unto them. Believe me,
there is no such joy in the World as the people of Christ have under the
cross, I speak by experience, said pious Mr. Philpot. Fox B. of Martyrs, vol.
3.
Guy de Brez being committed prisoner into the Castle of Tournay, he was
visited by many persons of quality, and amongst the rest by the Countess of
Ren, who coming into the Prison, and beholding the iron chain to which he was
fastened, Mr. Guy, said she, I wonder you can either eat, drink or sleep in
quiet, for were I in your case the very terror thereof would go nigh to kill
me. Madam said he, the good cause for which I suffer, and that inward peace of
conscience wherewith God has endued me, makes me eat and drink with greater
comfort then my enemies can which seek my life, yea my chains and bonds are so
far from terrifying me or breaking my sleep, that I glory and delight
therein, esteeming them at a higher rate then chains and rings of gold or any
other precious Jewels whatsoever, for they yield me much more profit. Yea when
I hear the rattling of my chains, me thinks I hear as it were some sweet
instrument of Music sounding in my ears. Job 34. 29.
Thus when God gives quietness, who then can make troubles? when he comforts,
speaks peace, and gives Joy to his people, who, or what can make them sad,
unhappy, or disconsolate? It Is true, Gods jewels may, yea often do lie in a
black Cabinet, in a mournful condition for a time, yet like diamonds in a dark
night they do then sparkle and give a resplendent luster; for their graces like
Sunbeams dart and shine through the thickest clouds of grief and misery. Like
Ball^ they rise the higher by being stricken down with the hand of Correction:
And although they be laden or pressed with a laden, a very ponderous burden of
inward or outward troubles, yet they make good that impresse which the noble
family of the Columni gave when they were banished by Pope Alexander the 6th. A
bending branch with this inscription, Flecti potest, frangi non potest. They
are Oaks, proud, stubborn, obdurate sinners, not Osiers, meek, humble, penitent
Saints, that are torn, blasted and consumed by Thunder and lightning, by
judgments, vengeance, and fiery wrath from Heaven. The worst evils that befall
them cannot hurt them. Marsil. Ficin: Epistolar. lib. 4.
Mala non patitur nisi malus. And which is more, they do them good, for God
takes the venom out of them, and so makes them not only safe, but healthful
also, and necessary for them. Christians therefore should, yea must be,

Not only patient, submissive, and contented under ut fiat voluntas Domini
quotidie oramus, cum facta est voluntas Domini feramus.

But Joyful also, as the blessed Apostles, and those Placent mihi dolores per
quos nihil in mundo placet.

They should be thankful, and say with Job when all Job 1. 28.
Blessed be the name of the Lord.

Christians should labor to be soundly humbled for Lamen. 3. 2^. 30.
provoking, procuring cause of all their sorrows and sufferings, their
transgressions.

Egyptians, their sins, in Gods wonderful mercy, and the infinite merits of
Jesus Christ, and so by a lively faith keep their souls both from despairing
and mourning.







Psalm. 76. 11 10.
to perform those vows and promises which they made to God when they were
tossed and distressed in the Sea of adversity.

Lastly, Gods people must adore and admire the wisdom and goodness of that
God, who both can and does make the Lion of affliction to afford, and give the
honey of spiritual consolation, and the sweet meat of saving grace to the
souls of his people; it being a most sadly experimented truth, that if man
should enjoy a Paradise all his days in this World, he would then seek no
further, but sit down contented, and say of it, as Peter once did of Mount
Tabor, It Is good for me to be here. Because that if our lives be not made
bitter and sour by tribulations, neither Holiness, Christ, nor Heaven, will be
either dear or desirable to our souls. And though the Lord do afflict his
Children, yet the sharpest, the longest calamities and sorrows which they can
possibly endure on this side their graves, are but a drop, a moment of pain,
distress, trouble, misery, and grief, to that Ocean of Joy, and eternity of
Bliss which they shall surely enjoy after their death. 2 Corinthians. 4. 17.
* Our light afflictions which is but for a moment works for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory, (^) ^ips. Epist. 63.
says blessed Paul, O felices inter omnes miserias hoc uno Christiani, quod
via nobis per haec ad aliam vitam, in qua nec gaudiorum nec modum ullum esse
scimus nec finem. Adversity sanctyfied is a sharp, but a sure way to felicity
and glory: Like honey it both purges and heales a Christian. And as affliction
has a sting wherewith it pains and wounds, so like that Serpent the Scorpion
(such is the compassionate goodness of the Lord) it has also in its own
Bowels an antidote wherewith it does both ease, preserve, and cure a Child of
God, and so becomes his Balsam, not his Bane.

The Prayer.
O LORD, thou art both Wisdom, Love, and Goodness it self. It Is pity
therefore as well as anger, compassion as well as indignation, that moves thee
to strike, chasten, frown upon and afflict thy people. Thou know that even
the best and most dutiful of all thy children are apt to become wild, wanton,
forgetful, stubborn, unthankful, sickly, and diseased, if thou lay up thy
rod, and feed them fat with Mercies. And thou see that prosperity makes them
to gather dust, and to grow both moldy, and rusty, but that Adversity makes
and keeps them fair, bright, and clean. O let the consideration therefore of
thine infinite Wisdom, make us quietly, willingly, contentedly, silently, to
submit unto all thine angry dispensations, to bear thine indignation, and to
kiss thy correcting Hand* And let, O Lord, the serious meditation of thy
wonderful Love and Goodness make us both joyful, and thankful, for those
sharp, but safe, yea necessary Corrosiv^s, the soundest hearts having some
proud flesh in them, and for those painful, but purgative, healing,
comfortable potions and pledges of thy fatherly care, and tender compassions
toward us. Let us all when we are afflicted, consider and remember, that it is
for sin we suffer, and that our transgressions are the source of our
punishments, that so when we are chastised for our faults, we may not murmur,
but mourn; repine, but repent; nor be peevish, but patient, submissive,
penitent. And let O Lord all thy chastisements be so sanctified unto us, that
our understandings may be enlightened, our judgments rectified, our souls
humbled, our corruptions mortified, our consciences purified, our lives
reformed, that thy dreadful wrath may be appeased, thy unsupportable judgments
removed thy tender mercies evidenced, and thy loving kindness which is better
then life, vouchsafed, and continued unto us. Grant this O Lord for Christ his
sake, Amen.

Afflictio illuminat, decet, purgat, eurat.
XVI. Of Patience.
PAtience it is a Job 1. 21.
Job blessing God for the loss of blessings; an 1 Samuel 3. 18.
Eli kissing the Rod that drew blood from him with that sharp lash, that heavy
stroke, the threatened ruin of his house and posterity, with the mouth of
submission, saying, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. Cedrenus
in vit. Mauritii. and Camerar.
It Is a holy, good Mauritius who when he was not only deposed from his Empire,
and succeeded by one of the worst, yea basest of all his subjects, Phocas; but
also compelled to be a sad and mournful Spectator of the bloody butchery of
all his five sweet innocent Children, he meekly and joyfully kissed the hand
that beat him, saying, Righteous art thou O Lord, and just are thy Judgments.
It Is a Lamb that will be both shorn and killed without crying It Is a grace that
keeps the soul in a calm, holy, contented frame in every condition. It Is an
Isaac bound and ready to be sacrificed without murmuring. A stone-wall that
both blunts and repels the piled arrows of the sharpest sufferings. It Is a
fountain without mud, and clear though stirred or troubled with the hand, and
rod of affliction. A face without a srown and peevish tear in the greatest
pain, disappointment, grief, torment. It Is a writ of restitution, when
distrust, frowardness, coffeehouse, or rash anger, have ejected a man out
of his right mind, and Christian behavior, whereby he is again peaceably and
quietly restored unto himself: In your patience possess your Souls. It Is a
stream that keeps within the banks of Psalm 39. 9.
silence with David, and Philip. 4. 11. 12.
an holy contentation of mind with Paul, when the stormy impetuous winds of
affliction, poverty, sickness, or persecution do blow upon it. It Is cooling
Physic that preserves the soul from falling into the dangerous fever of an
angry murmuring against Gods crossing providence. It Is one (like the Camel)
kneeling down to take up his burden. It makes a man like wheat fall down in a
silent submission, and a willing resignation of himself to the will and
pleasure of God, when he is winnowed with the fan of adversity. It Is a clear
Sky in the worst weather. An Anvile unbroken with the hardest strokes of
injury, calamity, or Tyranny. Et non sentire mala sua, non est hominis; et non
far, non est vir. Seneca.
It Is the golden* mean betwixt the extremes of stupidity and repining. It Is
Jonah in a Whales belly without fretting. It Is the Cradle wherein passion is
rockt asleep. It Is the earnest, the bond of a liberal remuneration: Hug.
Grocius of the Law of War and peace, ex Ter^ul.
For so bounteous a rewarder of patience is God, that if you commit your injury
to him, he is a revenger; if you grief, an healer; if your death, a reviver.

How great is the power of patience, to have God himself a debtor to it!
Patience, it is a Joseph relieving, maintaining, providing for the soul in the
Egypt of this world, when afflicted with the forest famine. It Is a child
descended of a Royal family, being the Daughter of that Queen mother
Meekness. It Is an Abraham prepared, resolved, contented to forsake and want
all, country, friends, land, if God will have it so. It Is a Dove without Gall;
A tree without knots; A spirit even and planed; A fresh spring, and sweet water
in the saltest sea of tribulation; A But that receives all darts without pain,
hurt, and death; A bush burning, yet not consumed. Patience 'twill make a man
like Esaias 39. 8.
Hezekiah willingly consent, and (as it were) set his hand to Gods Deed of
gift, of all his, yea and his posterities temporal mercies to enemies, and
aliens, with a Good is the word, and righteous is the work of the Lord. It Is a
Christians Sandale and shoe wherewith he both can and does tread upon the
nettles and briars of injuries and reproaches without either smart or hurt; and
also wherewith he walks upon Gravel and thistles, indureth crosses, losses and
troubles without fainting, * Prove. 3. 15.
fretting, or tyring.

The Prayer.
O LORD, if thou were as prone to revenge as we are to rebel; Or if thou
should be as ready to destroy us, as we are forward to displease and
dishonor thee, showers of Fire and Fury instead of dews of Grace and Mercy
would daily, yea hourly fall from Heaven upon our heads. But such, O thou God
of Patience, though thou art angry with the wicked every day, is thy wonderful
Long-suffering toward us, though we daily vex and grieve thee, that thou art
graciously pleased to warn us, to wait on us, to woo us, to strive with us and
to offer both favor, and forgiveness to us. O let us resolve and endeavor to
learn of Christ, to imitate him, and to transcribe into our own actions and
behavior that Golden Copy which our blessed Savior has set us by being (like
him) meek and lowly in heart. And since thy holy Word assures us that a froward
mouth and heart are hateful and abominable unto thee: O let us never give thee
any rest till thou have adorned us with the precious, the glorious Ornament of
a meek and quiet spirit: That so we may lie silently under thine angry hand
when corrected, bear injuries, affronts, revilings, petiently and Christianly,
when they are done or offered unto us, wait without fretting contentedly the
Lords own time and leisure, for comfort and deliverance, when we are afflicted,
distressed, oppressed. And though we should be wrongfully, or suddenly
deprived either of all our sublunary mercies, or of those which we most value,
affect, and desire, that so we may possess our souls in patience, and not be
angry or froward at Gods sharpest dealings with us, because how great or many
soever our miseries are or may be, they are less and fewer then our iniquities
deserve. Grant this O Lord for Christ his sake. Amen.

Patientia tacet, adjuvat, exonerat.
XVII. Of Baptism.
It Is a Moses leading and carrying Infants out of Egypt into the Canaan of Gods
true Church. It Is the hand that ingrafts them into the true Vine Jesus Christ,
that so they may become living and fruitful Branches, and escape everlasting
burning. It Is their Matriculation in the Acadamy of Christianity. The Oath of
Allegiance which they take to be loyal Subjects to the King of peace and
righteousness Jesus Christ. Don Anthony de Guevare. Dial of Princ. Fol. 9.
When the Romans created any Knights, they caused them to swear,

1. That they should spend all the days of their lives in Wars.

2. That they should never through fear, poverty, for riches or any other thing
take Wages but of Rome only.

Lastly, that they would rather choose to dye in liberty, then to live in
Captivity. In our Baptismal Covenant (which is an honor and happiness
infinitely beyond that of being a Roman Knight, for thereby we are made
members of Christ's body, and (as I may say) Peers and Nobles of his Kingdom, we
do solemnly and faithfully promise and engage

1. To fight the Lords battails under the great Captain of our Salvation Jesus
Christ against sin, temptations, the World, the flesh, and the Devil until
Death.

2. That we will not be hired, corrupted, allured, nor prevailed withal,
either by pleasure, power, credit, profit, or any thing to serve the Devil or
our own Lusts against Christ.

And Lastly, that we will neither willingly suffer our selves to be pinioned or
manacled by our spiritual enemies, nor live in cursed slavery, or captivity
under them, but that we will (as Hannibal solemnly swore to Amilcar that he
would be an irreconcilable enemy to Rome) both live and dye in a Christian,
courageous, constant, implacable hatred against them, and opposition of them.
Baptism it is the brand whereby we are known, being thereby brought within the
pale of Christ's visible Church; and also whereby we are distinguished from
Heathens, and Pagans. Certainly then those parents are very unwise, unnatural,
yea cruel to their Children, who will not suffer the covenant of Grace, nor
that Deed of an heavenly inheritance which God has drawn, and is ready made to
be sealed by this Sacrament (to which they have an unquestionable right by
virtue of Gods promise which is made unto, and entailed upon them as well as
their Parents) unto them. But instead thereof do without all both pity and
affection not only keep those Lambs out of Christ's fold, In Baptismo Cyprianus
seatit omnia peccata deponi, diabolum opprimi, spiritum sanctum accipi. Idem.
Cent. 3. p. 247.
but also expose them to Wolves and wild beasts, Heretics and Seducers to be
devoured: And rather choose to have them continue foul and filthy, then to have
them Not per illud sacramentum ablutis delictis nostrae cacitatis, in vitam
aeternam liberari, inquit Tertul. de Baptismo. lib. de Baptist Hist. eccles.
Magdeburgens. cent. 3. p. 239.
washed in the laver of Regeneration. Besides they do grievously sin against
their own souls in slighting, opposing and despising so sacred an institution.
For although the want, and in some cases, the neglect of Gods ordinances be
not, yet the contempt of them is damnable.

Woe to them, Et Origin, docuit peccati fordes per Baptismum deponi^ and omne
genus delictorum auserri. Idem. Hist. Ecclesiast. Magdeburg. Cent. 3. p. 253.
says a learned man, that in the Administration of this Sacrament of Baptism
deny their duty to dying infants, under pretense of I know not what discipline.
And woe ('it is sadly to be feared) will pursue and overtake those who will not
suffer Ministers to perform their duty to Infants, neither living nor dying,
through their dangerous delusions, and under both vain and ungrounded
pretenses. For the administration of this Sacrament of Baptism has both the
best foundation and text, the Mark 1. 4. Acts ^38, 39. Genes. 17. compared with
Coloss. ^, 11. 12.
word of God to warrant it; and the best, clearest, and safest comment (to wit)
the practice of the Apostles, and also both the judgment and practice of all
Christian Churches in the world for some hundred of years to confirm it.

The Baptism of Infants was not derived from the authority of man neither of
councess, but from the tradition or doctrine of the Apostles, says S.
Augustine contra Donatist. lib. 4. cap. 23. and 24.
Baptism has its beginning from Gods word and from the use of the primitive
Church, says Mr. Philpot. (d) And the Ecclesiastical History and others
acquaint us that Auxentius who was an Arrian, with his adherents, was one of
the first that denied infant Baptism, and next after him that Heretic
Pelagius: And then the Anabaptists. These are the spoysoned springs and muddy
channels, from which, and down which this dirty, unwholesome, dangerous stream
of Antipedo baptism did flow and run into this vertiginous, truthsick, and
truth-despising, if not loathing age: into which the former times have conveyed
and emptyed their dregs, froth, and filth; and wherein gray headed errors and
Heresies are not only grown young again, but vamped, furbished and new gilt on
purpose to vent them unto such, Mr. Simpsons History of the Church, Mr.
Philpot, etc.
either ignorant, inconsiderate, or profane chapmen, as without care, or
conscience will sell their souls to purchase their Lusts. For now it is become a
gainful trade to retaile those damnable and dangerous Heresies, and principles
that are sent by wholesale out of Italy by the Popes Factors, and which is
more, all that will, may set up and be free of any Company they like best. It Is
no wonder then that Gods Temple and Table have but a few guests, when the
Devil is permitted to revell and keep open-house for all comers, or that truth
should be opposed when the Father of lies has liberty to speak against it.
Infant Baptism being heretofore questioned after so many years quiet enjoyment
of its undoubtted Right as enabled it to plead prescription for it, It was
Defendent in the cause, and produced such clear, strong, and good evidences,
that it got both a verdict and judgment upon it, which still hangs upon record
in the Court of antiquity against the adversaries thereof. But of late time it
has been forced through the unjust disturbance of some turbulent spirits to be
Plaintiff also; And through the good providence and the divine assistance of
him who has given That pious and learned Divine Mr. Baxter, cum multis a^iis,
and amongst them that emnently learned Dr. Hammond pract. catech.
some of his Servants such a mouth and wisdom as none of its enemies are able
to resist. It has again cast the most cunning, active, and irreconcilable
enemies thereof to the glory of God, the vindication of truth, the comfort of
his people, and the everlasting both shame, and silence of those whose either
passion, or interests have blinded their Reasons, or corrupted their affections
so, as that they either know not, or love not the truth. For Cypr. Epist. 59 ad
Fidam.
A baptismo post Christum prohiberi non debet infans recens natus, says
Cyprian, and with him agree so many both pious and learned men, * Vide Dr.
Hammond pract. catech. p. 212. to 219.
that but to name them, their arguments and sayings would swell this Subject
into a Volume. where you will meet with abundant satisfaction in this
particular.
In short therefore (for it is not my design to be Polemicall herein) to me it
seems to be a very safe and good rule which Arist. Ethic. lib. 10. c. 3. That
rule also of St. Augustine is very sat and good, viz. Quod universa tenet
ecclesia, nec conciliis institutum sed semper retentum est, non nisi
authoritate apostolica traditum rectissime creditur. Aug. Baptis. contr.
Donatist. lib. 2. c. 7.
Aristotle lays down, sc. That whatsoever has been affirmed by almost all,
should not hastily be denied by any; because Vincent. ^yrinensis.
Quod ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus tenetur Ecclestis, id demum
Catholicum. It Is a Merldian shining truth, that all new ways are false ways,
and therefore they must be carefully declined by all those that really desire
to walk in that good old way of life, that leads to bliss and glory. And it is
as true that they must needs wander, stumble, and fall, that resolve to walk in
crooked, uneven, blind and slippery foot-paths of their own making.

The Prayer.
O LORD, it is no less then a signal, a singular and a very great Mercy to thy
Church and Children, that thou have provided and given them a remedy for
Infants against the danger, the poison, and the pollution of Original Sin,
wherein they are born, and thereby come into the world both defiled, and
spiritually deformed: In that thou have set open the door of Baptism for them,
at which they enter and are admitted to come within the pale of thy visible
Church. Lord still continue this great Privilege nnto them. And as then and
there they are listed under and Covenant with the great, the glorious, the
victorious and invincible Captain of our Salvation to fight under him against
the implacable Enemies of their gracious both Savior and Sovereign, and their
own immortal Souls, the World, the Devil, and the flesh; O let them be
conscientiously careful to pay their Vows, to discharge their solemn
engagements, and to express their fidelity, piety, and loyalty by continuing
Christ's faithful Soldiers and Servants unto death, Amen.

Baptismus janua est Vitae, Christianitatis Ostium,
Regenerationis Sacramentum.

XVIII. Of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.
It Is the Souls Banqnet. It Is one of those Certainly then those Ministers are
very not only unkind but cruel and injurious to their flocks and people that
either cut off this breast by absolutely ^^susing, or dry it up by deferring
and neglecting to administer this necessity food, this holy and comfortable
Sacrament unto them.
Breasts wherewith our Mother the Church nurseth and nourishes the Children of
Christ. It Is both the food and fuel of Grace. Jesus Christ is in this
necessary Holy Sacrament a Pelican in deed, and reality; for he feeds his
faithful ones with his own Blood. It Is a lively representation of Christ
crucified to the eye of faith. It Is spiritual glue which joins and cements
Christians one to another in Love and Unity. It Is a Christians
commemoration-day of his best and greatest Benefactor. It Is the last Will and
Testament of Jesus Christ, whereby he bequeathed the precious, ineftimiable,
everlasting Treasures, comforts, and blessing of his Death and passion to all
worthy Receivers. I acknowledge the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ
administered according to Christ's institution to be one of the greatest
treasures and comforts that he left us upon the earth, Fox B of Marty 5, vol.
3. p. 556. col. 1. Those Ministers then do rob, defraud, wrong their people
that either take away or keep from them this precious treasure.
faith Mr. Philpot. It Is a deed of Gift, A Conveyance from Jesus Christ of
himself and all his merits both sealed and delivered, with livery and seisin to
all true Believers; whereby they have a just right, an unquestionable title
unto, and a saving interest in the Lord Jesus, and all the sweet, blessed, and
glorious benefits of his death, resurrection and intercession. Camerar. lib. 1.
p. 64.
Darius King of Persia had in his Bedchamber a vine all of Gold which was
enriched with precious stones, and did bear grapes made of pearl of an
inestimable value. And yet this Vine was but a barren figstree, and its orient
Gemms but dry and withered leaves compared with that Jo^n 15. 1.
true vine Jesus Christ, and the most precious fruit thereof. For if all the
Gold, Jewels, rarities, and wealth of the whole world were put into one scale
of the balance, and but one drop of that invaluable blood which flowed from
this vine when it was cut, (when Christ was crucified) upon the cross in the
other Scale, all those would be but feathers, chafe, or moss, light, vain,
and worthless things, in respect of the excellency, and necessity of this:
Since it is only the blood of Christ that cleanses us from fin, and makes the
soul beautiful in the eyes of God, and redeemeth it from eternal damnation.
For it is not in the power either of all the glorious Angels, and blessed
Saints in Heaven, or of all the Christians upon earth to satisfy the Justice
of God for one Soul, much less then can stones or clay reconcile an angry God,
and free a sinner from everlasting misery. To neglect this holy Sacrament then
wherein this precious blood of Christ is freely offered to us to purge and save
us, is both dangerous and sinful, to contemn it (without repentance)
damnable. Si qui Sacramentorum usum ac si opus iis non (...) erent
aspernarentur, non modo arrogantiae summae sed etiam impietatis in Deum merito
damnari debent: quum non suae tantum infi^mitatis subsidia, sed et Deum ipsorum
authorem contemnant, ipsius gratiam respuant, et spiritum quantum in ipsis est
extinguant, says one. ^^akwel Apolog. p. 417.
Aesops Son at a Feast which he made dissolved Pearls in Vinegar, and gave to
each guest one to drink: And yet his bounty was but parsimony, his pearls below
pebbles compared with the love and excellency of this true Magarite, this pearl
of infinite price and value, the Lord Jesus Christ, which every rightly
qualified and prepared communicant, both drinks, and eats also at this Supper
of the Lamb. And Cleopatras draught when she swallowed an Exchequer, and drunk
an Indies, was but puddle, muddy water to those pure, refreshing,
life-preserving streams which flow into the Soul from that Rock of living-water
Jesus Christ, through the golden conduit-pipe of this blessed Sacrament. ^on
Anthory de Guevara Dial of Princ. Fol. 417.
(d) When the feast of the God Janus was celebrated in Rome, none were suffered
to go into his Temple, but those that had new apparel. That day also the
Emperor put on his imperial Robes, and all the Captives who could with their
hand touch them were delivered: prisoners for debt were discharged, all
transgressions pardoned, and exiled persons were recalled. Whoever comes to
this holy Sacrament clothed with the new and rich apparel of Christ's
righteousness, and can with the hand of a justifying faith touch Jesus Christ,
shall be sure to find and receive comfort, favor, acceptance; a discharge from
the debt of sin, liberty, and enlargement from the slavery of his own Lusts and
from the captivity of Satan; communion with Christ here, and admission into the
Kingdom of Heaven (out of which man was justly excluded, exiled, for sin and
Rebellion) hereafter: For when by death a true Christian does put off the Rags
of his mortality, God will invest him with the Robes of Glory to all Eternity.

The Prayer.
EVer blessed God, such are thy tender mercies, unspeakeable Love, and
matchless Bounty to thy Children upon earth, that as thou have prepared and
provided for them both Mansions and a feast, a Supper of Glory with the Lamb in
the Kingdom of Heaven, so have thou also provided a spiritual Banquet, and
furnished thy Table with most exquisite, curious, precious, and delicious
dainties, to refresh, nourish, comfort, strengthen and unite them in their
journey, and whilst they are upon their way thither, this Blessed Sacrament. O
Lord, let not I beseech thee this Soul-feeding, heart-chearing,
Grace-strengthening and increasing communion, and Supper be neglected,
undervalued, contemned, or denied through the corruptions, contentions,
differences, carelessness, or ungrounded scrupulousness of Men. ^ut let
Ministers, O Lord, carefully obey thy command, and conscientiously discharge
their own Duty, in rightly and frequently administering of it to their people,
that thy bitter, thy bloody Death, O Blessed Savior, may be constantly and
thankfully remembered, thy wonderful, unparalleled, undeserved love, pity,
goodness acknowledged, and thy great Name praised, and glorified. And let
Christians O Lord come to this Holy Sacrament, so qualified, and prepared, that
their Graces may be strengthened, their Souls as with marrow and fatness
satisfied, their interest in Christ cleared and confirmed, their joys and
comforts multiplied, their Affections inseparably united and their mutual love
to one another mightily increased. Grant this O Lord for his sake who is both
the maker of the Feast and the Feast himself, Jesus Christ, Amen.

Coena Domini cibus est Animae, alimentum Gratiae,
Nutrix pietatis, solaminis canalis, pignus amoris,
condonationis sigillum et corroborationis
Sacramentum.

XIX. Of Preaching.
THE sacred word of God, purely, rightly, and powerfully preached, is that
Bethesday, wherein Mephibosheths souls, lamed in their feet, (their affections)
by the fall which they had out of the arms of Adam and Eve, are cured; and
thereby enabled to run the ways of Gods commandments. It Is the Cantic. 4. 16.
and 7. 5.
Garden, the Gallery, where Christ meets, speaks to, and walks with his
people. It Is the mount of blessings, conduit of faith, Golden Scepter of mercy,
and the spiritual seed of Grace and Life. It Is the Chariot in which Christ
rides triumphantly into the Soul. It Is the hammer that breaks open the iron
door of the heart, the key that unlocks it. It Is the fire that consumes all
Satan's strong holds in the spirit. It Is spiritual eye salve, that gives a
blind Bartimeus his sight. And it is the voice that awakens the most drouzy,
deaf, secure sinner. Rainold. Orat. 1. p. 41.
What the Orator says de Oratione, is true, de praedicatione: Morbis, inquit,
animi medicinam facere debet (praedicatio facit) comprimendo quae tument,
roborando quae languent, quae inflammant leniendo, coercendo quae diffluunt,
expurgando quae redundant. It Is an Ark always bringing blessings with it.
Nathan which will rouse, convince, and humble David's, relapsing Saints. It Is a
Peter pricking the hearts of great and gross sinners to their conversion,
sanctification, Salvation. It Is a messenger sent from God, and bringing with it
those three wonderful, glorious, instimable Jewels and blessings to the soul,
sense of sin, assurance of pardon, and a through reformation both of the Heart
and life. Its the means which God has promised, commanded, owned blessed and
sanctyfied (by the inward, powerful and effectual operation of his holy Spirit
speaking home to the conscience, stirring those healing waters of the
sanctuary, and accompanying the outward administration of the word) most
ordinarily, and efficaciously to instruct the ignorant, confirm the weak, to
warm the cold, mollify the hard, melt the frozen, comfort them that mourn, to
awaken those that are drowsy, resolve those who doubt, encourage and quiet
such as fear, guide them that err, bind up the broken hearted, and to quicken
those that are dead in trespasses and sins. It Is a Corn^copia of all those
excellent, spiritual mercies and comforts. It Is the granary of celestial food,
and Manna; the silver trumpet of peace, and the white flag of mercy to a
people. It Is a Nilus that softens, refreshes and fructifieth barren, hard, and
languishing hearts. It Is a Mary with Christ in the womb of it, an Angel
instructing a Philip; a light in the thickest, saddest darkness, and a
comfortable seasonable rain in a drought. It Is both meat to the hungry, water
to the thirsty, physic to the diseased, milk to the weak, a Lamp to them that
wander, and wine to the sorrowful. In Asia it was a custom, that the Child
which was not nursed by his mother, should not have the goods of his Mother.
Those who are not nursed by that Mother the true Church of Christ, with the
breasts of Gods word and ordinances, faithfully and duly administered, are never
like to have God for their Father nor to be heirs of the Churches estate, I
mean the love, promises, protection, grace, and blessing of the Lord, nor to
enjoy the glorious inheritance of her Children eternal felicity hereafter.

The Prayer.
O LORD, thou art so far from desiring or delighting in the eternal
Damnation of the vilest, greatest, grossest sinners, that thou have commanded
the Gospel of Salvation to be preached to every creature both to Jews and
Gentiles. Yet since even this word of Life is both a dead, and a killing
Letter, without the quickening, sanctifying influence and efficacy of thy holy
Spirit: Grant blessed God that the Holy Ghost may both teach and speak
effectually, convincingly, convertingly, savingly to the ears and hearts of
unregenerated Sinners, that so the dead may both hear and feel the voice and
power of the Son of God, and live. And be thou pleased most merciful God so to
own, bless, and prosper thine own Laborers in thy vineyard, that the
Consciences of those who are enemies to thine own ordinances and Ministers may
be convinced, their spirits grieved and humbled, their mouths stopped, their
sin and errors discovered to them, hated by them, and forsaken of them: And
that the understandings of those who hear and enjoy them may be savingly
enlightened, their hearts graciously changed, their Lives thoroughly reformed,
and their souls everlastingly saved. Let him who is the Word Jesus Christ be
ushered into their hearts by the preaching of thy Word. Let not Christians
spill the potion or throw away the plaster that should heal and cure their
sin-diseased, Sin-wounded Souls by neglecting or despising this
Soul-converting, and this Christ-conveying Ordinance. But grant that we may
both love, prize, and hunger after this Heavenly Manna, thy word preached, that
so our souls may not be famished, but fed, and nourished unto eternal Life.
Grant this for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen.

Evangelii praedicatio eternae est vitae promulgatio,
Pietatis semen, virtutis pabulum, consolationis vehiculum,
Cordis fulcrum, Imber gratiae, pharmacon Animae,
Mortuis tuba, caecis Lux, Dux errantibus,
Titubantibus baculus, esurientibus cibu^, ignorantibus
fons Scientiae, Oceanus gaudii parens Fidei.

XX. Of godly, learned, and of ungodly, unlearned Ministers.
PIous Ministers they are the brightest stars in the firmament of the Church.
Tully.
Diis proximi sunt Deorum sacerdotes. They are the pillars on which it
stands. The Spokesmen that woo the soul with heavenly Rhetorique, that court
it with Divine Oratory to love Christ, and the paranymphs that lead it to marry
him. They are Celestial Ambassadors sent by the Lord Jesus to treat with
sinners, and to conclude an everlasting peace betwixt him and them. They are
the chariots, horsemen, watchmen, and (as Saint Ambrose was said to be of
Millaine) et ornamenta, and munimenta urbis and ecclesiae: The beauty, safety,
blessing, honor, and bulwarks both of the Nation, Cities, Towns and places
where they live. Dr. Arrowsmith. Tact. Sa.
Nequit Hippo devastari ante obitum Augustini, nec ante obitum Parei
Heidelberga. Dr. Stoughton.
Like the heavens they enlighten, comfort, fructify that Microcosme, Man, with
their heat, light, influence with the light of saving knowledge, the heat of
well grounded, well guided zeal, and the influence of an exemplary pious
conversation, without which Ministers are like those Physicians that give an
Antidote with one hand to their patients (their people) and poison with the
other. And at best they are but like that Act. 27. 22.
Ship wherein St. Paul was, that perished it self though it saved others.

Such Ministers are like Cooks that labor and sweat to dress meat for others,
but eat none of it themselves.
Or those carpenters that built the Ark wherein Noah and his family were
preserved, and yet themselves were drowned in the deluge. When they are wicked,
that may be said of them which was objected by Cato unto Tiberius, concerning
the Dalmatian commotions, scl. Camden Annal. of Q. Elizabeth.
That their flocks are committed not to shepherds but Wolves. Such Ministers
are praedatores non praedicatores, seductores non doctores, peculatores non
speculatores, raptores non pastores.
For such men do not watch, but worrey; they do not teach, but tear; they do
not feed, but kill and flay their sheep. Ah Lord! how black and terrible will
that Bil of indictment appear, which will be both preferred and found at that
great assize, the day of Judgment, against such Ministers as do either poison
or pine their flocks! That either kill them (as Henry the first King of France
is said to be murdered with consecrated wine) with the deadly, flesh-pleasing
muskadine of erroneous or Heretical doctrins and principles: or famish them for
want of the sincere milk of the word through their ignorance or idleness: or
lead them out of the narrow way of life, and not only encourage and persuade
them to, but harden them in sin by their profaneness, worldliness, Si quid
injungere inferiorive lis, id prius in te ac tu os si ipse stotueris facilius
omnes obedientes habebis. Liu. l. 26.
vicious lives, and scandalous examples. Certainly all such blind, seducing,
dumb, ungodly Ministers, will inevitably, irrecoverably (without repentance and
reformation,) sink under the insupportable weight of the blood, ruin, and
destruction of their wandering, miscarrying and everlastingly undone people to
the very bottom of Hell. O Lord let them fear it here, that they may not feel
it hereafter. There was (as I have read (a Woman in England who believed there
was no God. A Minister came to her to convince her, and demanding of her how
she became an Atheist, she answered: That the very first thing which caused her
to question the Deity was the seeing of himself to live so wickedly; for says
she, I know you to be a Learned man and a good Preacher and the beholding you
to live so impiously, to be a Swearer, a Liar, a Drunkard, and a Profaner of
the Sabbath, this made me to question whether there was a God in Heaven or no,
seeing he did let you run on in your wickedness still unpunished. Methinks
this sad story should make the hearts, eyes and and ears of all scandalous
ungodly Ministers to bleed, weep, and tingle that either do or shall know,
read, or hear of, and I heartily beseech the Lord it may.
But this is not all. For besides the danger and misery to which they render
their own souls obnoxious by their wickedness; they do also both bring a great
Thou therefore that teach another, teach not thou thy self? Thou that
preachest a man should not steal, do thou steal? 1 Rom, 2. 21. 22, 24. Turpe
est doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum.
scandal upon the Gospel, and give their people just cause to complain of
them for being a heavy burden and a grievous scourge unto them; and most
deservedly to account them the unworthiest men in the world. That saying of
Seneca is most true here, Nullos pejus mereri de omnibus mortalibus, quam qui
aliter vivunt, quam vivendum praecipiunt. They are also wens and spots upon the
fair face and beautiful body of the Ministry, and which is yet more,
ignorant, profane, bad pastors are the very worst of men. Dr. Arrowsmith. Tact.
Sa.
Perussima creaturarum visibilium est homo degener, pessimus hominum
pseudo-Christianus, Christianorum vero pessimus nequam verbi Minister. They
live without Love, honor, and doing good, and they dye without comfort.
Gospel Ministers should resolve to do like him who said, Ita literarum illud
Nectar hauriam, ita auditores m^os instruam tanquam parum victurus ita vivam
tanquam semper docturus. P^tean. Orat.
He alone (said that Tyrant Phalaris) may be called happy, of whom it may be
truly said, he gave good Doctrines to live, and left a good example to dye.
Facile est monere, said Thales, that is but the body, pie vivere that is very
difficult, but it is the soul of a true Gospel Minister. Because the way for
Ministers to do good is to be good. Nisi praestes quod praedicas, mendacium non
evangelium videbitur; It Is no peculiar conceit, but a matter of sound
consequence, that all duties are by so much the better performed, by how much
the men are more religious, from whose abilities the same proceed, says
learned Hooker. For without all question their Sermons are most convincing and
succesfull, who carefully Optima exempla exhibemus, et liberi nostri etiam si
velint non facile male evadent, quum nihil quod turpe sit vel visuri vel
audituri sunt, sed in virtutis et honesti studio totos dies conterent. Cyrus
R^x.
write upon their own hearts and conscienciously practice in their lives those
truths and duties which they preach unto, and press upon others. But pious,
gracious Ministers are the porters of Paradise. They are Romans 10. 14.
King-fishers, that in the Halcyon days of peace do build, and breed,
begetting many sons and daughters unto God. Their absence, or silence is a
sluice pulled up to let in miseries. When Ambassadors are called home in anger,
it presageth War. The Romans sacked, and levelled to the ground the City of
Corinth for a small affront offered to their Ambassadors. God is very jealous
of his own honor, and also very tender of these his Servants; he will
therefore most certainly punish and revenge the abuses and injuries done unto
them. Besides those upon record in Gods word, and many other Authors, I shall
instance in one example only, the severity and justice of God against an enemy
of a Godly Minister. 1 Fox B. of Martyr.
(i) John Martin boasting every where that he would cut off the Ministers nose
of Angrongue in France, was soon after set upon by a mad Wolf, who did indeed
eat his nose from his face dying mad thereof himself, and yet it was never
observed that this Wolf had ever hurt any before. Godly Ministers do make a
Nation, while it prizeth and enjoyes them, a Mount Gerizim; without them the
richest and most flourishing Kingdom is but an Ebal. They are the Mines that
enrich us; Christ calls Ministers the salt of the Earth; for sal: serves to
preserve the people from being Fly-blown with every corrupt doctrine un to
putrefaction, says Mr. Vines in his Sermon upon Ephesians. 4. 14, 15. called the
Impostures of seducing Teachers discovered. p. 3.
the salt that seasons us; the earnest, and pawns of prosperity; the pledges of
peace, mercy, and felicity to a people; the fountains which water and refresh
us; the Advocates who solicit for us; They are the Hammers of error, the Maules
of sin, idolatry, and heresy; the springs of knowledge, and holy counsel, and
the Aqueducts of Grace and comforts to us. They are Physicians, when we are
weak, infected, or sick, to strengthen and cure us; Shepherds that feed, lead,
watch and keep us in the green, safe, fruitful, wholesome pastures of Gods
holy Ordinances: And guides, when we go astray, to direct and reclaim us.
Honor sacerdotis, est firmamentum imperii. Tacit. de Judaeis. hist.
Honor, love, reverence, obedience, charity, maintenance, If we had been
thankful to God for the good Ministers of his Word, we had not been so soon
deprived of it and them. John Careless in a Letter to Mr. Bradford. Fox Book
of Martyrs.
thankfulness, hearty prayers for a blessing upon their labors, and a
conscientious care to conform our lives to all those heavenly Doctrines, holy
admonitions, sacred truths, and serious, seasonable, pious reprehensions which
they preach unto us, are the duties we owe them; the tithes we must pay them,
and the encouragements which we are obliged to give them. Their calling ought
by us to be honored, their persons highly esteemed and respected. I have read
of one who said that if he should meet an Angel and a Minister together, he
would first salute the Minister, and then the Angel. Their 1 Cor. 9. 9*11-14.
maintenance ought to be certain, competent and comfortable.

First, Because if men were at liberty and might choose, whether they would
contribute to their Ministers subsistence or not, it is more then probable that
(like Camelions) they should be fed and maintained with little else besides the
thin diet of aerie promises and fair speeches.

2. Because indigency, and necessity are very strong and (too often) prevailing
Temptations with them to a scandalous, sinful compliance, with debauched,
infamous, impious persons, and to live as they do because they have their
livelihood, or relief from them.

3. Because poverty compells them to mind the world too greedily and eagerly,
distracts them in their studies, and hinders them from growing and thriving in
Learning, and Abilities.

4. Because the meanness and wantfulnesse of a Ministers outward condition and
estate does not only invite, animate, and persuade worldly minded men, profane
persons, corrupt and seduced professors to deny them their dues, to vex,
oppose, affront, revile, and insult over both their persons and callings; but
also to undervalue, disregard, and comtemne sound, precious, and necessary
Truths, because they are delivered by such poor men unto them. The Jews did so
by Christ the King, and the Gentiles have and will do so too unto his
Ambassadors and Servants in all ages.

5. Because scandalous livings are one great cause why there are so many
scandalous preachers; for if their maintenance were augmented and ascertained,
it is very likely their lives would be reformed; since if piety did not, yet
policy would then restrain them from being notoriously vicious and profane.

Lastly, because contempt treads usually upon the heel of want. Plutarch.
Apothegm.
A certain Laconian seeing a Collector going about to gather men's devotions for
the gods, said; I will now make no more reckoning of the Gods so long as they
be poorer then my self. Heylin. Geogr. p. 69.
And King Aigoland who did a long time make Charlemaine believe that he would
be baptized, the time being now at hand in which he should fulfill his promise,
he very gallantly accompanied came to the French-Court: where seeing many
Lazars and poor people expecting Alms from the Emperors Table, he asking what
they were, was answered, that they were the messengers and servants of God. On
these words he speedily returned, desperately protesting, that he would not
serve that God which could keep his Servants no better.

The Abderites sent unto Hippocrates to come unto them to cure Democritus who
(as they supposed) was mad: And promised if he would come to give him all the
gold they had: yea if all the Ciy were Gold, they said he should have it. It is
a thing, yea crime not only sad and shameful but also lamentable, prodigious,
and worthy with tears of blood to be bewailed; That Christians should not love,
encourage, prize and reward Orthodoxe, learned, and pious Ministers (the
Physicians of the soul) so much as Heathens did a Physician for the body: That
these Bristow stones should be desired, or preferred before those precious
Diamonds. And which is yet more vile, monstrous, sinful, dangerous, detestable
and deplorable; that Christians, yea forward and seemingly zealous professors
should choose and esteem Mountebanks, and murderers (seducers and Jesuits) more
then gracious pastors and before them; such are very strangely, if not
irecoverably distempered and sick. Heu quam pericul^sus est iste morbus quum et
infirmitates suas amat, and medicos suos odio habet aegrotus! Certainly that
malady is mortal which makes the patient love his disease, and hate his
Doctor. And thus to disesteem, oppose, and hate the faithful Ministers of
Jesus Christ, is a sin in the highest form of those crying crimes which will
shorten the life of our peace; cloud, if it do not totally eclipse, the
glorious sun of the Gospel amongst us, 2 Chronicles 36. 16.
and * provoke the Lord to consume and destroy the Land with the Inhabitants
thereof. Let us then if we will not love them nor be liberal to them, and
thankful for them, for Gods, their own, nor our souls sake, yet be just to
them, and pay them their dues for very shame, Levit. 72 30. 1 Cor. 9. tithes
are the Lords. He has reserved them to himself, and therefore man cannot
either lawfully or safely alienate them. Nor did ever any man yet that
purchased a Lordship or Lands, except the Estate he bought were impropriate,
the rise and age whereof (I mean of Impropriations) is known almost to every
man, claim or pretend any right or title to the tenth part of what he bought.
And yet further, Tithes have been settled upon the Ministers of England, and
confirmed unto them by sixty Acts of Parliament, says Mr. Prynne, and which is
yet more, they were confirmed and paid unto them before the Conquest by the
Saxons, and all along since the Conquest down to these times, wherein the
malice and power of Satan, the avarice of some self-seeking Christians, and the
both envy and subtilty of Jesuits those implacable enemies to, and restless
underminers of the Gospel and Ministers of Jesus Christ have stirred up some
seduced people to declaime against them as a burden and grievance, and to
petition the Magistrates to take them away; notwithstanding their undoubted
right unto them. See for your fuller and better satisfaction herein the 8th
Chapter of Mr. Seldens History of Tithes. p. 195. And yet further, Tithes were
instituted and paid both before the Law, under the Law, and under the Gospel
too. See D. George Carletons Tithes proved to be due by a Divine Right. D.
Will. Sclater his Ministers Portion, Mr. Prynns Gospel plea, etc.
since the Labourer is worthy of his wages: Since Tithes is their
unquestionable right both by the Laws of I know it is either hellish malice,
or pernicious baseness, or ignorance of the work and burden of Ministers that
makes their maintenance so generally incompetent and their very livelihood and
subsistence so envyed and grudged at. M. Baxter Saints everlasting rest. p. 91.
God and men, and since riches gotten by sacrilege, are always put into a bag
with holes. And therefore it was a saying among the Jews, Decima ut dives fias.
Let then all such as have or do so defraud their pastors, always remember and
seriously consider, That it is unpardonable Felony to rob Ambassadors. And let
them frequently and impartially view and weigh what God himself says in
Malach. 3. 8.
Malachi the last of the Prophets (who is therefore elegantly styled Fibula
legis and Evangelii, the button or claspe of the Law and Gospel) ye have
robbed me, says the Lord: wherein, say they that were guilty of Sacrilege
have we robbed thee? God himself is pleased to answer and resolve them thus, In
Tithes and offerings. And if the conscience of their duty cannot persuade them
to hate this crimson crime, yet let the fear of Gods fierce wrath and heavy
curse dissiwade and deter them from being guilty of it: Since it is most
certain that God will both apprehend, and arraign all such Sacrilegious
thieves: and also that without true repentance, they are then sure to be cast,
to be denied the benefit of their clergy, and to be condemned without mercy.

Lastly, let such cankers and caterpillars of the Ministry consider that that
dangerous, odious felony will not enrich them, nor will that unjust gain be
enjoyed by them, for others will be as ready and resolved to require, yea to
compel the payment of their Tithes to them, as they are willing and desirous
not to pay them to their Ministers whose just dues and rights they are. August
Sermo, 219. de tempore.
If thou will not give thy Tithes, Dabis impio militi quod non vis dare Deo,
and Sacerdoti; Hoc tollit Piscus, quod non accepit Christus, says St.
Augustine. Thou shall be sure to give that to an impious Soldier which thou will not give to God, and a religious Minister: The Exchequer takes that away
which Christ has not received. And what greater folly or madness can there be
in the world, then for men to sin, ruin, and wilfully to pull down Gods anger,
judgments, and curses upon themselves to please, or profit others?

The Prayer.
O LORD, it is thy sweet, gracious, and precious promise that thou will be with
thy Ministers to the end of the World: Be pleased therefore, I most humbly,
earnestly, and heartily beseech thee, to own, honor, bless, multiply*
protect, and continue them in spite of all opposition both from earth, and
Hell. And as thou have assured us that the gates of Hell shall never prevail
against thy Church; So neither suffer, O Lord, the Agents* Factors, and
Emissaries of Satan, the implacable enemies of truth, holiness, reformation,
ordinances, and righteousness to ruin, or root ^ut thy Ministers, lest thy
Church lie buried under the rubbish, filth and straw of Atheism, idolatry,
heresy, ignorance, and profaneness. Preserve and shield them, good God, from
contempt, opposition, and persecution. Let their feet be beautiful in our eyes,
their voice melodious to our Ears, and their message most welcome, pleasant,
acceptable to our hearts, that bring, publish, and preach the glad tidings of
Salvation unto us. Bring not a fatal, dreadful eclipse upon us by causing the
Sun to go down upon our Prophots. Let not, O Lord, those stars fall out of thy
right hand, but let them be as the Signet upon thy finger, and as the Apple of
thine eye, near and dear unto thee. And since in the darker times of the Law
thou did require and command that thy Priests should be holy, and without
blemish: O grant that in these brightest days of the glorious Gospel thy
Ministers may be holy, heavenly, harmless, and blameless. Make them O Lord,
careful to feed their stocks both with holy doctrines, and with religious
examples, that so they may be not only preachers, but patterns too of virtue
and piety to their people. Grant this inward purity and outward Beauty to our
Pastors, O Lord, for his sake who is the great^ Shepherd both of their and our
Souls, Jesus Christ, Amen.

Sacerdotes pii sunt dotes preciosissimae.
XXI. Self-calling. Of Self-making preachers, or rather Praters and Seducers.
THey are bloody Empericks, whose Medicines murder, whose potions poison their
credulous, distempered patients, Romans 16. 1^.
simple-men, silly women who are laden with diverse lusts, and 2 Timothy 3. 6.
unstable Souls. They are the worst of Lepers, whose disease having seized
their heads, their understandings; (for say 2 Pet. 1. 24.
some, errors in judgment are more both dangerous and deadly, Mr. Hildersham
upon Ps. 51. Lecture 146. p. 779. etc.
then errors in practice) it is there so deeply rooted being either set in the
fruitful soil of 2 Pet. 2. 14.
gain, or Romans 16. 18.
fed with the peccant humors of Lust, or both, that nothing (without grace) but
either the Rod of discipline, or the Sword of justice can cure them. They are
spiritual Traitors to the King of Heaven; for they take upon them to be his
Ambassadors, without his letters of credence, having neither legation, mission,
nor commission from him to warrant their actions: since they are neither called
immediately by God, nor ^mediately by men, I mean by such men as are lawfully,
and according to the use, and practice of all rightly constituted Churches
invested with authority and power to depute, and ordain them to dispense the
mysteries of Salvation to the people, and to wait at the Altar: Not the first,
because they cannot work miracles, nor speak with Tongues, unless it be with
lying, corrupting, deluding, slandering, bewitching or betraying tongues. Nor
the second, because they have neither (...) nor (...), Ability nor authority,
Dr. Arronsmith. Tact. Sac.
both which together with piety are necessarily required to the constituting or
making of a right Gospel Minister. They are thieves and robbers, because they
come not in at the door of Ordination; but either climb over it by pride, or
creep under it by Avarice, or pick the lock by Hypocrisy, or get the door to
be opened and widened by Sophistry, subtilty, or policy: And when they are once
got in, or admitted, instead of saving, or curing them that hear, like, and
embrace them, and their Doctrines, they do always endanger, and too often not
only wound, but destroy them. Luther in suo comment: super. Epist. ad Gala^as.
Non satis est habere verbum and puram doctrinam; It Is a Maxim in Law, That no
man can do an Act to himself. He cannot present himself to a Benefice, nor make
himself an Officer: much less then (for a minori ad majus valet consequen^ia)
can be legally make himself a Minister or Preacher. Sir Henry Finch^ Discourse
of Law. Lib. 1. p. 91.
Oportet etiam ut vocatio certa sit sine qua qui ingreditur ad mactandum et
perdendum venit. It Is observed and affirmed that Knate, Eagles, Ravens, and
carrion Crows, can and do kill Lions, Staggs, and silly sheep, by these
stratagems or means. The Knats do muster, draw themselves up into Battalia, and
then with a winged speed they assault the King of Beasts, employing all their
natural strength, weapons, and artillery against his eyes, upon which they
resolutely settle, and there continue until they have made his eyelids so
sore, that pain, anger, and disdain do not only inrage him, but also make him
run furiously either into some river, or pit, where he is drowned, or killed.
The Prince of birds burdens his pinions, with as much dust, sand, or gravel,
as he can gather into his wings by basking himself and fluttering with them
either upon the seashore, or upon some other place where he can take up his
lading: and then he carries it away, and sits in Ambush upon some convenient
Rock or tree, till he spy a stagge his welcome and designed prey, to whom he
nimbly, eagerly, and courageously flies, settles upon his head, and then beats
him on the eyes with his dusty wings till through fear, and blindness he does
hastily seek his death either by falling down some precipice, or by running
himself against stones or trees, and so becomes his own Executioner and his
enemies prize. Ravens and Carrion crows they also when once they discover a
faint sheep, do carefully watch for an opportunity to destroy it, and effect
it by pecking, and pulling out the eyes thereof, for then it can neither see to
escape their Tyranny by going from them, nor yet behold the cruelty they act by
digging without opposition, resistance or relief with their black beaks dyed
scarlet in its blood into the bowels thereof, for that treasure (its flesh)
they so greedily hunger after. And these men (as if these winged, feathered
creatures had been their Masters and Tutors) do use the same method,
well-knowing that if the eye of knowledge be once misled, wounded* or lost,
their work's done: Because it is as easy to abuse, mislead, or destroy the
blind, as it is to attempt it. And therefore we do, or may at least clearly,
and should sadly see, that those the eyes of whose minds are either dusted and
sanded with Avarice, and worldly or fleshly aims; or gravelled with abstruse,
dry, and unprofitable notions and opinions; or made fore by errors; or are
quite pecked out by damnable Heresies, do either hastily run, or else will be
securely led into dangers, snares and miseries, not only temporal and
spiritual, but also (unless the Lord do manifest and express his power and
mercy at once, in restoring them to their fight again, or in opening their
eyes, who have been blind from their birth) eternal, to the everlasting ruin
of their immortal Souls. These active impudent impostors are Satan's engineers,
and pioners, wherewith he endeavors to undermine and subvert both the
foundation and Bulwarks of the Church, Gods word, his ordinances, and religious
ministers. They are (while such) listed soldiers under the Prince of
darkness: And although (like an Army consisting of the people of many nations)
their opinions, manners, habits, qualities, and designs be both numerous,
diverse, and opposite one from, and to another, yet they all They know too well
the truth and Success of that saying of Plato, (...). That Community of
interest^ couples and unites men, but privacy distracts and divides them. For
the Children of this world are wiser in their generation then the Children of
light. They do therefore unite themselves, that so they may distract, undermine
and destroy others
unite, combine, and resolve as one man to fight for him they serve against all
others: And like lines though drawn from all the parts of the circumference,
they yet all meet in one Center, viz. the opposing, hating, disgracing,
declayming against, and at last persecuting of Godly and rightly ordained
Ministers. In hoc uniformes esse solent errantium deformitates* quod recte
sentientes odio habent. For they too well know that the most will take things
by show and number, not by weight. And that it is not only easy, but ordinary
and common for sheep to scab, stray and rot, when the Shepherds are blind,
ignorant, idle, scattered, or slain: They are not only wandering and falling
Stars, but fiery, and prodigious Comets equally terrible, ominous, and
mischievous to a Commonwealth. They are Satan's saeds-men that sow Gods field
the Church with Tares and Cockle, Heresies and Errors. They care not how
sinful their principles or practices be, so they be but Pietas obtenditur,
Aurum qu^^ritur.
gainful. For they prefer thriving, fat, time -- and Romans 16. 17.
flesh-pleasing errors before lean, displeasing, and dangerous Truths; Garlic
and Onions before Manna. They deceive not only Romans 16. 18.
others but 2 Timothy 3. 13.
themselves too. Nam putant se spiritu repletos, cum inani vento distenti sunt
et turgidi. That pretended plausible and ungrounded liberty, or rather True
Liberty is a power to do what we ought, not what we will. Mr. Vin^. in his 2
Sermons on 1 Pet. 2. 15. 16. p. 12
licentiousness which they so zealously idolize, and so earnestly contend for,
is a most sad, real, miserable slavery: And besides it is the Moth, canker,
destruction, and grave of order, peace, unity, amity, justice, honesty, safety,
and When the Independents were first at work and endeavoring to set up
themselves, the Parliament in their Manifesto concerning Professors amongst
other things did declare 1643. That nothing can be more destruct ^e against the
cause of Religion then to be divided amongst themselves And is it not as true
now as it was then?
piety. For the hope of impunity (much more then the assurance) is the spring
of iiniquty and all Impiety. Because when sin is not prohibited, nor pu^ishd by
Magistrates, it is not only commanded and protected, but the Actors thereof are
i^couraged therein by them. Qui non vetat peccare quum potest jubet. These
Seducers are at first but like little eggs out of which serpents are hatched,
that in a short time grow to be both Omnis error immensus, Senec.
monstrous and mortal. They have no warrant from the word of God, nor can they
find any footsteps in the purest times, or best reformed Churches for men Ever
since Christ had a Ministry on earth the constant (ordinary) way of their
admittance has been by Ministerial Ordination. Mr. Baxter 5 disputes of (...)
Government and Worship. p. 261* See this truth by him there both abundantly and
most clearly proved.
ordinarily and when they please to run without a call, or to lay their hands
upon that sacred, honorable, and terrible calling the Ministry, till by the
Tim. 4. 14 14. Tit. 1. 5. Acts 18. 17. 1 Timothy 5. 22.
laying on of the hands of others authorized and empowered so to do, they be
set apart for that great work. And therefore it is very great both presumption
and danger to launch into this Ocean, and to sail in the Lighters and
Cock-boats of our own light heads against both the wind and tide of Scripture
and Antiquity, without both Pilot, Sails, Stern, and Ballast, as all such
self-calling teachers do now adai^s. For they have neither the spirit nor word
of God for a P^lot; nor the Sails of learning and piety; nor the Stern of a
lawful calling; nor the Ballast of humility, or saving knowledge. It is then
no wonder that they are either wrack't upon the Rocks of error, or swallowed up
in the quicksands of Heresy. Physicians tell us of a complication of diseases
in the body. Suetonius et Plutarch.
Historians tells us that Sylla, who was the chief man of that faction in Rome
which opposed Marius, said of Julius Caesar who was then but a young Child,
Caesari multos Marios inesse, that there were many Marii in that one boy. And
we find by woeful experience that not only the youngest errors are born
big-bellied with more and greater then themselves, A minimis vitiis incipiunt
quae in maxima proruunt.
(as the greatest oak grows out of an Acorn, and the most violent torrent
issues at first out of a little spring) but also that these deceivers have a
Covey of sins which juke and sit in their hearts together: Since sins (like
birds and beasts) do usually flock and herd together, For

First, they sin See Dr. Saundersons fourth S^^mon ad populum p. 463. 46. in
Quarto.
leaving those callings which they ought to follow (unless they be either
commanded or disabled by God so to do) viz. those that they have been bred up
in. Let every man abide in the same calling wherein he was called. And if they
have no calling, that is concluded a great sin both by Christians and Heathens.

2. Such do sin in taking up, and following that calling with which they ought
not to meddle. Vae negligenti quod debuit; and arr^ganti, quod non debuit.
Besides, God is a God of order, and Paul (inspired by the spirit of God)
commands that all things be done decently and in order. It Is equally sad,
sinful, shameful and intolerable, that every man that will, though ignorant,
proud, p^ofane or drunk with the sugared yet poisoned cups of Heresy and Erro,
should be suffered to leave his calling, to reel being made light and giddy
with whimsies, falsehood, and self-conceitednesse, into the pulpit, and then
both freely and impudently to vomit up his unsavory, u^wholesome opinions, and
to bespatter both the Ministry and the Ministers of Christ. Tertullian says
of his times, Ordinationes ^^rum ^emerariae, leves, inconstantes, ^unc
^^^ply^os, nunc seculo obst^^^es, nunc Apost^tas nostros ut eos gloria obligent
quia veritate (...) possunt: Nusquam faci^^^^ ^r^^^ciscitur quam in cast^is
rebellium, ubi ipsum esse illi^ promereri est. Itaque (...) h^d^e episcopus,
^^as alius, ^od^e d^aco^us, qui cras (...); hodie presbyter qui cras laicus;
Nam and Laicis sacerdo^alia Mun^^a injungunt. Tertullian de p^^scriptione
advers: Hae^et. And is not this a true and a too lively picture of our times?
But this self-calling and self-making is the inlet of all division,
distraction, and the Mother of confusion. For how is it possible, that
Religion, peace, justice, or piety should either continue, increase, or
flourish, if any one, or every one may create, and commission himself to be a
Judge, Justice, or Minister, when he pleases?

3. Such do twist a threefold cord of iniquity wherewith they are so strongly
bound that (without Gods ^^ercy and grace) they cannot get loose from their
crimes, dangers, and miseries. For they are guilty of being a stumbling block
to Idem. verse 12. That Christians must not offend their brethren in lawful,
much less unlawful things.
weak, 1 Cor 10. 32. 1 Cor. 8* 9.
An offense and grief to confirmed, and a s^are to unsettled doubting
Christians. Lips^us Epist. 97.
Non satis est ne ipse errem, sed ne alteri sim erroris causa.

4. Such do sin both in leading the blind out of the way (abusing, corrupting,
and poisoning the ignorant, with false and wicked principles) and in hardening
them by their examples, counsels and doctrines, whom they have caused to wander
from the way of truth and life.

Lastly, to name no more, if God permit such men to get power into their hands,
they do often (if not always) persecute with extremest rigor, and
remorselesse cruelty those of contrary Judgments, though they be most innocent,
Orthodox, and holy. Witness those scarlet Theaters on which they acted in
Germany, which are and will be crimson monuments of their fury, tyranny, and
impiety till time shall be no more. The Church of God in St. Augustines time
before his conversion used to pray, Ab Augustini logica libera nos Domine.

And for my part I am fully persuaded that it is the Duty of Gods people,
heartily and fervently to join together in this Petition to the Lord: From a
toleration of, an indulgence to, or a connivence at, all or any men that will
to make themselves ministers, and preachers, Good Lord deliver us. Because it
will be high time for Religion to make her Will; for the Gospel to take
shipping to land in another Land, and for Christians to provide an Arc to save
themselves from perishing either in a deluge of superstition, profaneness,
Atheism; or else in a Red sea of persecution, when it may be truly said of
such men,

When Galba came first to the Empire there was great confusion and
licentiousness in the State, whereupon a Senator said in full Senate. It were
better to live where nothing is lawfu^l, then where all things are lawful.
Leigh. Choice Observat. p. 120.
Quod libet, id licet. his etc. The Jews did highly esteem, (accounting
barrenness a curse) and the Romans did liberally reward those parents who had
many Children. Camerar. lib. 6. p. 415.
And it is said that the chief reason why the Electors chose Rodolph Emperor of
Germany, was his plenteous offspring. So the Lord does also both love, honor,
and crown those spiritual fathers (pious and rightly ordained Ministers) that
beget with the immortal seed of the word, quickened by the spirit of life,
Sons and Daughters unto God: for they shall Dan. 12. 3.
shine for ever and ever in the firmament of Glory; And he does bless their
labors: But as for these (...), Luther super Epist ad Galatas see also Jerem
23. 32.
Nunquam fortunat Deus laborom eorum qui non sunt vocati, and quanquam quaedam
salutaria afferunt, tamen nihil aedificant, says Luther. Perphyr. in ^jus vita.
Pythagoras when any of his Scholars deserted his School, in eorum usitatis
sedibus (...) posuisse dicitur, quo significaret eos moraliter obiisse. When
those who have formerly professed themselves to be the Scholars and Disciples
of Christ, do not only desert his School, the Temple, but also inveigh
against, and abandon both his ordinances and Ministers their spiritual
teachers: well may Christians set their Coffins in their seats, for it is much
to be feared that they are spiritually departed and dead: but however it is most
certain that they are fallen into a dangerous swoon of Apostasy. I shall
therefore conclude with these hearty and fervent petitions.

The Prayer.
EIther convince, revive, convert, and reclaim all such O Lord, and suffer
them not is keep any longer a splint in their wounds to hinder their cure by
adding Mall^^ s^mp^r errarc, quam semel errasse vide i.
obstinacy to errou^, perseverance in evil to ignorance, impiety to iniquity:
or else never suffer, most gracious God, the wall of thy vineyard,
Church Government according to the pattern in the Mount (thine own Word and
Will) to be broken down, by fraud, or force, for Foxes or wild Bores ( Pictos
agnos adorant, vivos devorant.
Jesuits, Apostates, Hypocrites, Persecutors, seducers, and temporizers,) to
have free ingresse into it, to root up the Vines therein, or to pull off the
Grapes thereof: Nor the door of Christ's Garden to be thrown off of those
hinges, orders and Ordination by the hands of power, or policy, for wild
beasts, Heretics, and popish Priests to enter therein to tread down thy Roses
and Lillies, or to crop, or kill thy best fruit trees, Godly Ministers, and
truly gracious Christians. Nor that Crystal, pure, sweet, healing Fountain,
that spiritual bath, and Spaw which cures all the maladies, and diseases of
the Soul in that Garden, the Holy Scriptures, to be muddyed, defiled,
corrupted, or poisoned, by those, nor any other unwashed, diseased, beleapered,
inven^^d hands or feet, till the stream of time shall fall into, and lose it
self in the boundless Ocean of Eternity. Plat^^ Timeo.
And since there are two diseases of the Soul, (...), madness and ignorance;
and that by woeful experience it is found that the most of these Leaders, and
teachers, and also their Favorites and followers do labor under, and are
distempered either with both, or one of them: be pleas^d, blessed God, who art
the great and good Physician of the Soul, and do see their ways, either to
heal them, by giving repentance to them and making them wise to Salvation: or
else according to thine own 2 Timothy 3. 9.
promise let their folly be made known to all men, and let them proceed no
further, that so the banks of truth and piety may never be broken down, nor
over-flowed by the furious, filthy, and deadly streams of error, idolatry,
heresy, and profaneness.

And Lastly, since Distraction is the inlet of Destruction, Division, of
Desolation, to the greatest, richest, most flourishing and most prosperous
Nation; For he that is Wisdom it self Jesus Matthew. 12. 15.
Christ, has told us so; and the spirit of Truth has also assured us, that
their ^ames. 3. 14, ^5.
Wisdom, who love contention and delight in strife is earthly, sensual,
devilish; So that carnal policy makes such men like Children to stand upon
their heads, and to kick with their heels against Heaven, and also seriously,
cunningly, and unweariedly both to contrive, plot, and endeavor their own as
well as others ruin; witness Haman, Absalom, and many others.

Let O Lord piety (for this is the best yea the only real prudence and policy)
sit at the Helm of that Royal and impregnable Ship, thy truly catholic
Church, and of this sinful, shaking, divided, unsettled, reeling, and
rebellious Nation in particular; once a beautiful Rachel, but since a
blear-eyed Leah, once a fair and lovely Sarah, but since a foul and leprous
Miriam, yet still (blessed be thy Name) a true member thereof: Let truth and
righteousness (as her hands) guide and steer her by the Compass of thy Holy
Word; Let O Lord peace and unity be her sails; and let the sweet and pleasant
Gales of brotherly l^ve, tranquillity, and Christian charity fill them: Let
whatever Jonas (whatever abomination, or accursed thing) it is that raises the
overturning Tempests of thy wrath, and fury against her, or any part of her, be
cast over-boord by her vigilant and valiant Pilots, pious, orthodoxe and
zealous Magistrates O qu^m beati erunt in illo die judcii Magistratus illi qui
subditos non modo honestis legibus, judiciis and disciplin^ rexerunt: sed etiam
omnium maxim in hoc studium incubucrunt, ut incorrupta Religio apud suos
exculta sit; doctrina coelestis per fidos, eruditos et constantes Ministros sit
tradita, and ingens hominum multitudo per spiritum et verbum renata in
conspectum Christi prodeat, quae tali Magistratui aeternas gra ias agat! E
contra quam infelices qui etc. Religionem per var^as corruptelas passi sunt
adulterare, says one. And an Heathen could say, In nau^ragio Rector laudandus
quem obruit more clavum tenentem. Senec. ad Petil. c. 6.
and Ministers, that Pirates, strangers, and enemies, (the professed* cruel,
subtle, and secret adversaries, opposers, and underminers of thy Glory, Gospel,
ordinances, and Ministers) may neither be enriched by her woeful wrack, nor
pleased with the birth and sight of those grievous miseries, and overwhelming
calamities, which too often proceed from her contentious, and disagreeing
Children; but let the desires, and designs O Lord of Sions enemies be blasted
and frustrated. And let, blessed God, all those spiritual Merchants, those
heavenly Mariners (thy Saints thy faithful Soldiers, and Servants) that are
resolved, or shall resolve, to venture all their treasures, their souls, lives,
and worldly interests in that Arc, thy Church, and to imbarque themselves in
her for a voyage to the Holy Land, to that new and glorious Jerusalem which is
above, Let them, dear God I once more humbly beseech thee, be crowned with a
calm, with quietness, serenity and safety in their passage over the brackish,
boisterous, dangerous Ocean of life; and when they shall put into, and cast
Anchor in the port of Death, then let them find that they are safely arrived at
the Isles of Paradise, the Kingdom of Heaven, Glory, and Felicity, Amen.

Qui pugnat sine mandato, poenam accipit non mercedem;
Qui praedicat sine vocatione, peccat non prodest.

XXII. Of a good and a bad Conscience.
A Good Conscence it is the suburbs of Heaven. It Is the Sanctuary of the Soul
when it is pursued by sin, Satan, fear or temptation. It Is Heaven in hell,
riches in poverty, honor in disgrace, health in sickness; in bonds liberty;
and light in darkness. It Is Balm that heals all wound^. A medicine
infinitely more precious then all the Benedicta Medicamenta of Physicians: for
it cures all spiritual maladies, and antidotes the mind against all temporal
miseries. It Is the best Mithridate to expel all troubles from the heart. It Is
Gods temple, Christ's Bedchamber, and the Spirits Mansion; for the highest
Heavens, and the humblest, purest, holiest heart, are the two places of Gods
most glorious Esaias 57. 15.
Residence. It Is the souls soft Bed whereon it rests quietly and sweetly,
with a pillow of Gospel promises, and the left hand of Christ under its head,
his right hand also embracing it, when it is either troubled, dejected, or
distressed. It Is an admirable Sovereign Balsome against the stinging, perplexing
fears and all the dreadful dismaying apprehensions of sin, Gods wrath, Satan,
Death, judgment and Hell.

It Is an Ark that keeps the Soul safe, and preserves it from sinking under
the heaviest burden of sin, or sorrow in the greatest deluge of inward, or
outward troubles. It Is a ship with Christ in it; Heaven in a little volume.
It Is divine love, and special mercy printed usually upon the soul by the
Spirit of God in the press either of Gods ordinances, or afflictions, in great
and golden characters with notes of choicest favor, tenderest mercies, and
free grace upon it. It Is a Kingdom of fortified, rich, safe, and happy; it is
the daughter of faith and repentance, and the Mother of all real, ineffable,
endless Joy, comforts, pleasures. It Is a serene sky with the Sun and Moon of
Faith and repentance, fixed and shining in the ^irmament of the Soul together
with the brightest sparkling stars of all other saving graces, which beautify,
bespangle it, and make a glorious constellation therein. It Is a feast in a
famine, an haven in a storm, life in death. It Is an invincible fort in a
Leaguer, when the outworks, City and Castle of health, riches, liberty are
taken. It Is a Paradise with a tree of Life in it. It Is the Vialactea in
Laetitia bonae conscientiae paradisus est ^nimarum, gaudium angelorum, hortus
deliciarum, ager benedictionis, templam Sclomonis, aula Dei, hab^tac ulum
spiritus.
heavenly heart. The vena porta of 2 Corinthians. 1. 12.
gladness, joy, and a consolation to the spirit here, and the beginning of
that matchless felicity, which will outlive time, and run parallel with the
longest line of eternity. It Is a Dove that brings an Olive branch of peace to a
Noah, a righteous person in the greatest inundation of perplexity and sorrow of
heart. It Is the way to a life without fear or trouble. It Is a John lying in the
bosom of Jesus. It Is a transcript, a true copy of eternal felicity. It Is a
consolatory epistle written with the blood of Jesus Christ by the finger of the
Holy Ghost, sent by love, and read by faith to a languishing, mourning,
drooping, bleeding Soul. It Is ipsum coelum, says Augustine, a continual
feast, says Solomon, Yea it is a Goshen in Egypt, an Angel in a Dungeon, an
harbor in a Tempest, an Heaven upon earth, and the day star of Glory. It Is an
immarcescible Crown; A treasure which once got can never be lost: for what that
Cicere, par^d^x. ad sinem*
Prince of Orators says of virtue, is most true of a good conscience. Nec
eripi, nec surripi potest ^nquam: Neque naufragio, neque incendio amittitur:
n^^ tempestatum, nec temporum permutatione mutatur. But a bad conscience it is
the souls inquisition, and strappado, It Is the epitome or abridgment of
eternal torments. It Is the gloom^e evening to the black day of Damnation. It Is
the terrible Harbinger of that dreadful, furious, cruel train, and troop of
dismal, intolerable, unconceiveable woes, and plagues which are marching, ^ay
at the door, to take up their everlasting Quarters and abode in the miserable
Soul. It Is secretum ftagellum: an hell in the soul before the Soul be in Hell.
It Is the lightening of those horrors which the thunder of that confounding
^^ntence, Goye cursed into Hel-fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels, etc.
will suddenly inflict upon the for ever undone, impenitent sinners. Perillus
his brazen Bull when hottest was a Down-bed warmed to the scorching anguish of
an evil Conscience. Nam urit, caedit, lancinat, et eo gravius quia sine morte.
The stinging of the most venomous Serpent is pleasure and delight to the
agonies of such a wounded Spirit.

That poor wretch who was flayed alive, and then laid upon a bed of Salt till
he expired by the barbarous command of Solomon, ^elt no pain, and rested upon a
soft couch-chair compared with him or her that hangs upon the gibbet of an
evil conscience. Yea the greatest, sharpest, deadliest pangs and throws of
that woman who has the hardest labor in childbearing are not only ease and
refreshments, but cordialls in respect of the horrible, unavoidable,
insupportable tortures, lashings, bitings, and gnawings of the whip and worm of
a bad conscience. An evil conscience is the outward court of Hell. It Is the
earnest and foretast of those torments which are easelesse, endless,
remediless. It Is like that Ezck 2. 9, 10.
Book in Ezekiel wherein was written both within and without, lamentation and
mourning and woe. Weigh them seriously and hearken attentively to the God of
Wisdom and truth, who assures us Prove. 18. 14. The spirit of a man
willsustain his in^irmities, but a wounded spirit who can bear?
That a Spirit wounded with the sense of its guilt and misery is insupportable:
(for by putting the question he puts it out of all question that it is so) And
also to that doleful echo of the damned souls in Hell. See the life of Spira.
Francis Spira that complete map of misery, that so you may both judge
impartially what it is, fear it, and carefully, timely, resolutely, oppose,
hate, decline, and fly that which will bring you unto, and hang your souls upon
the same rack on which all his bones were broken, viz. Sin against convictions,
covenants, promises, profession, love, light, knowledge, and conscience,
committed, relapsed into, and unrepented of. I now feel, says he, Gods heavy
wrath that burns like the torments of hellfire within me, and afflicts my
soul with pangs unutterable.

And again the gnawing worms of an unquenchable horror, confusion, and (which
is worst of all) Desperation continually torture me. My pangs, faith he, are
such that the damned wights in Hell, endure not the like misery. O let us then
hear and fear: yea let us be instructed, warned and persuaded by his and Cain,
Judas, etc.
others sufferings to pray and labor to get good consciences, and to keep them
void of offense both toward God, and toward men, that so we may never feel
and endure the exquisite, the insufferable torments of a double Hell,
Desperation, and Damnation. And since unicuique liber est propria conscientia,
and ad hunc librum discutiendum and emendandum omnes alii inventi. Since every
man's conscience is his book, and that all books are written for the reading,
correcting, and expunging the errata's thereof: It is therefore the great duty
and concernment of every one vigilantly, conscientiously, constantly to take
heed that it be neither interlined with sin, nor blotted and blurred with
crimes and vices, nor defaced with foul and filthy lusts: Because if it be not
kept pure, fair, and undefiled, God will one day command it to be burned by the
common hangman, the Devil, in the fire of Hell. But if it be preserved
unstained, God will then love and delight in it. For facies animi est
c^nscientia: sicut in conspectu hominum gratiosa est facies pulcra; sic in
conspectu Dei speciosa est conscientia munda. The face of the mind is the
conscience: And an unspotted conscience is as beautiful in the sight of God, as
the most renowned and celebrated Beauty either is, or ever was amiable in the
eyes of men* If then thou would be free from the anguish, agonies, and
miseries of an evil Conscience; do thou in this case, what one advised
Domitian to do in another, who being asked by Domitian how he might so rule as
not to be hated like many of his predecessors, answered him, Tu fac contra, do
thou contrary to that they have done. Do thou confess, repent, hate, and
forsake every known sin, and take heed of relapsing into wickedness, for sin
is both the root and fuel of outward troubles, inward terrors, temporal
punishments, spiritual Judgments, and eternal torments.

The Prayer.
O LORD, thou have not only forbidden us upon pain of High Treason, Death, and
Damnation, to commit the least sin, and acquainted, yea assured us that all
things are naked and opened to the eyes of that God with whom we have to do:
But thou have also placed a comptrouler, a Register, a Notary (conscience) in
every Child of Adam, to observe, record, and remember all our thoughts, words
and actions, whether good or evil. And thy great design in all this is to make
us afraid of acting any either open wickedness, or secret filthiness, since
even all our closest iniquities, impurities, villainies, and our midnight
abominations are perpetrated upon a stage at noonday, and in the sight of the
Sun, not only in respect of thine all-seeing eye to whom the darkness and
light are both alike; but also in respect of that impartial witness, that
all-observing Sentinel which thou have placed within us, that will most
certainly reveal all those hidden, hideous, horrible and loathsome crimes we
are guilty, of which the eye or ear of Man never saw, nor heard, accuse us to
God of them, and both evidently and undenyably to the Lord, and our own selves
proves us conscious of them. Give us therefore, O Lord I beseech thee, Grace,
care, and resolutions to live, walk, and behave our selves, to think, speak,
and act, as under thine eye, and in thy presence at all times, in all places,
in all company, in all conditions, in all our callings, duties, services,
recreations, and employments, that so our consciences may acquit, and not
condemn us, Let us prize, seek and keep the happiness, peace and comfort of a
good conscience more then pleasure, plenty, prosperity, liberty, yea then Life:
And let us fear the plague and torment of a bad Conscience more then Death. And
since O Lord thou will most certainly bring every work unto Judgment, with
every secret thing, whether it be good or evil, O give us Grace to fear thee,
and to keep thy Commandments, that so we may both enjoy the peace of God here,
and the God of peace hereafter. This grant for his sake who is the Prince of
peace, and dyed to make our peace with thee, thine only Son and our alone
Savior Amen.

Conscientia est index, judex, vindex; Bona, coeli est
Porta and primitiae: Mala, damnationis Prodromus
Et Gehennae miseriarum principum.

XXIII. Of Life.
IT is the seed-time both of Grace and Glory. It Is a short, craggy, thorny,
narrow way, to a sad, or joyful, to a blessed, or cursed eternity. It Is a tree
from which some blooms do fall in their infancy, on which some buds are
blasted when but just set in their childhood, from which some green fruits are
snatched off in their youth, upon which some hang till Manhood, and then are
violently stricken down, or pulled off by the hand of death; and some continue
thereon, until they be full ripe by old age, and then drop down into their
graves. Man has as it were two Sepulchers; One in the warm belly of his
natural Mother, and the other in the cold Bowels of the common Mother of all
both men and women, the Earth. By life he is put into a Jail, by Death into a
Dungeon. So soon as we are born we cry; as if because we then want language to
speak them, our eyes did weep elegies, and by those tears at once
prognosticate, express, and lament our future troubles, sorrows, sufferings,
Funerals. The Mexicanes thus salute their Infants coming out of the Womb:
Infant thou art come into the World to suffer, endure; suffer and hold thy
peace. Our Mothers are living Tombs to us before our birth; and so soon as ever
we do but peep, or step into the world, every thing not only minds us of, but
also preaches and reads Sermons, Lectures, and Lessons to us of our
departure out of it again. For what are our swaddling clothes, but winding
sheets? What are our cradles, but Coffins? What is the ringing of the Bell
before our being Christened, but an antedated passing peal? What are those arms
which carry us to Church to be baptized, but a Biere? What does our being first
undrest signify, but the putting off of our mortality? What is our being laid
down to sleep, but an emblem of our Burial? And what is our first sleep, but
the Image and elder Brother of Death? Life it is a weak twig, and a slender
thread upon which frail man hangs over both his Grave, and Hell. It Is a
Tragae-Comedie whose scenes are health, sickness, strength, weakness, joy,
sorrow, mirth, and mourning: The Prologue tears, the Epilogue groans. Rainold.
Orat. 185.
Romani duas angorum and voluptatum deas Angerioniam and Volupiam ita colebant,
ut Angeroniae pontifices in sacello Volupiae, et Angeroniae simulacrum in ara
Volupiae collocarent, quo significarent, angores voluptatibus, dolorem gaudiis
humana vita semper temerari. In this world there is no day without clouds. The
door of this natural life is always turning upon the hinges of mutability,
and variety of conditions. Winter, Summer, Autumn, Spring, prosperity,
adversity, sadness, gladness, black and white days ( Godwin. Romans Antiq.
as the Romans distinguished them) make chequer-work in our lives. Our
complexions (our outward estate and conditions) are sometimes fair and ruddy
with joy, comforts, mercies, and sometimes they are black, wrinkled, pale, and
wan with sorrows, crosses, and miseries. Man has neither Psalm. 102. 11. Job
14. 2.
Solstice, nor rest here; and therefore the Romans built the Temple of Quies
without the City, to signify that the lower Region of this Life is subject
unto, and disquieted with storms, and showers, Lacrymae nobis decrunt antequam
causae dolendi. Sencca de brevitate vitae.
troubles, and afflictions. The Womb of Life is always pregnant with both
consolations, and tribulations, which struggle therein, and the one (as Genes.
25. 26.
Jacob did Esau) usually takes the other by the heel. Plin. Secund. Panegy. ad
Trajan.
Habet enim has vices conditie mortalium ut adversa ex secundis, ex adversis
secunda nascerentur. Like ship-boys we stand sometimes upon the top of the mast
of Prosperity, and sometimes we are put down under^ deck by Adversity. Our life
is a Sea wherein these tides are always ebbing and flowing; Dolor and voluptas
se invicem succedunt. No man was ever yet so happy as to enjoy all those
mercies which the hand of God has liberally scattered and divided amongst all
men. Nor was there ever yet any man so miserable but he had some comforts. And
though the line of calamity be often, if not ordinarily to the godly longer
then that of felicity in this Life: yet it will be but very short (even in his
own judgment that is most miserable) if it be measured, or compared with the
endless line of eternity. And this consideration will make the waters of Marah
sweet to a Child of God. Our Life is an Irish, a troubled, dangerous,
tempestuous Ocean; we take Shipping at our Birth with tears, we ^ail over it
with care, fear, sorrow, and we land at the port of Death with sighs, sadness,
unwillingnesse. The thread of Life is so short and rotten, that it is often
(yea alas too often) spun out by the wheel and broken off by the hand of
providence, before it leads us out of the Labyrinths and maze of sin and
misery; many millions being carried to their graves, before they consider why,
or for what they came out of the Womb into the world. For they do not consider
that Man was not made and born to imbase his Soul with the allay of sin, which
alone renders it capable and makes it fit to receive the impressions of
temptations and all real evils. To fuel and feed his filthy Lusts, or to
gratify and comply with his vile and vain desires. To burn himself in the fire
of uncleanness, anger, or malice; or to drown himself in the waters of
drunkenness, and intemperance. To choke himself in the dirty puddles, and
muddy Fennes of sensuality and Epicurisme. To lie grovelling upon, or to spend
his time in rooting in the earth by wilfully diseasing his Soul with the
falling sickness of Avarice, or to entertain a dumb Devil into his heart, not
only to hinder, but disable him from either praying to the Lord for grace, and
pardon of sin, or praising him for his great and undeserved mercies. And yet
it is too true that with the most of these devils some men and women are
possessed, and the most with some of them. It Is most certain that God did not
give man's soal brave wings to pursue the poor quarrey of pleasure, profit, and
honor, or to fly unto hell, but that by holy meditations, and a religious
conversation it should with them mount up to Heaven. The Lord both gives us our
beings, and continues us in them, to trust, love, serve, obey, honor, and
delight in him. He has assured us we must dye, and yet concealed from us how
long we shall live, that so we might every day and every where expect death,
and by a holy life and faith in Christ escape the torments of an everlasting
death in hell. We read of many that had always some memento's of their
Original by them. Agathocles who was but the Son of a Potter, when he became a
King, had earthen pots brought up and set in his Presence chamber, to immind
him of his low extraction. Camerar. lib. 1. p. 48.
Willigis from a base condition, (for he was but the Son of a Carter) being
advanced to so high a dignity as to be made Archbishop of Ments, caused these
following words to be written in great Letters in his Lodging Chamber:
Willigis, Willigis, remember from whence thou came. And certainly if Men and
Women (even the most Royal, Noble, Rich, who have the most Talents to account
for, as well as the poorest and meanest) would but either frequently view, and
seriously reflect upon their pedigree which they may find and see if they will,
Job 17. 4. I have said to corruption, Thou art my Father, to the Worm, Thou art
my Mother and my Sister.
Job. 17. 4. Or if they would but diligently hearken unto, and meditate upon
those Lectures and Catechisms of their own frailty, and mortality, which God
not only reads to their ears, but presents also to their eyes in the
sickness, and death of others, certainly they would neither be proud nor
profane: And they would also learn rightly to know both the brevity and the
uncertainty of this life, which is indeed so uncertain, that for ought thou
can tell how great or good soever thou art, that art now looking upon this
dark picture, this unlively description of it, death may have an Attachment
against thee, or an Habeas corpus, to remove and carry thee out of the Land of
the living, before thou have read one line, nay one word more, and serve it
upon thee without warning, respect, and all possibility of being either
rescued, concealed, bailed, or protected from it. We are all pilgrims and
travail toward our long home before we can go. Every day is a step, every
week a walk, every month a stage, and every year a long Journey toward our
Graves. Life it is a swift Race; we are making ready for it in our conception,
our Birth is the starting post, the time of our so journing in this World is
the Green or course over which we gallop with a winged speed, and our death is
the Jail or end of it. Orimur and Morimur. Childhood is both the death and
Tomb of infancy; Child-houd lies buried in youth; Manhood interr's youth, and
old age is the Sepulcher of them all. And when these five pages which are all
the leaves that Nature, or rather the God of Nature has bound up together in
the book of Life, are turned over by the nimble hand of flying Time, Death
claspeth it up, and then carries and lays us all down in the University
Library of the Grave, where the greatest, best, and the most curiously (with
honor, wealth, power) gilded and embellished Folio's, as well as the worst,
least, and plainest pamphlets, and Decimosexto's (high, low, rich, poor,
learned, ignorant, good, bad, young, old, men and women) are deposited and
locked up, until the Author, the creator of them all, God Almighty at the day
of judgment shall open the door (raise them all out of their graves) take them
up and peruse them, to burn or preserve them according to the Contents of every
one of them; the actions of their lives good, or evil. How much then does it
concern us to live innocently, uprightly, purely, piously, unblameably, since
every letter, word and line in the books of our lives and consciences, (all our
thoughts, words, and actions, how darkly, secretly or cunningly soever they
have been either conceived or committed) will one day be read by all the world.
And since at that last great day of Judgment, they Mr. Bolton Quatuor Novis^t
p. 92.
will be as legible as if they were written with the brightest stars, or the
most glistering Sunbeams upon a Wall of Crystal. Besides an holy life is the
hand that writes a Christians name in the volume of honor, that hangs it on
the File of Fame, and that sets the best, and the most glorious Crown upon his
head. Triasunt coronarum genera, Goronalegis, Corona sacerdotis, Corona Regni,
A good name is better then precious ointment: Cant. 7. 1.
sed corona bonae famae omnes superat. And this Diadem all that truly fear God
shall wear for ever. Psalm 112. 6.
The righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance. Their names will be
fresh, fragrant, and flourishing to all posterity. Camerarius
Some of the West-indians had this custom, They used to deck with Jewels of
Gold and with precious stones dead bodies. And we know that in England and
other Countries the bodies of Noble persons are usually imbalmed. Let us who
profess our selves to be Christians do that for our souls which these do unto
dead bodies. Let us carefully and speedily labor both to enrich, adorn, and
perfume our souls and memories by getting and gathering the Gold, Gemms, and
sweet spices of grace, godliness, virtue, and honesty; because if our lives be
vicious, and impious, our souls will not only burn in Hell, and our bodies
yield an unsavory stench in the Grave; but our names too will Prove. 10. 7.
rot in the World. Weigh and judge then which of these ought to be preferred,
immortal Glory, or eternal misery: And whether it be not b^^ter to be coffind
up in silence, and buried in oblivion, then to live, (though dead)
everlastingly infamous. Life it is an Interlude; the womb is the attiring room
wherein we are dressed; the world is the Theater whereon we act; our birth is the
curtain drawn, to let us out upon the stage; our life is the part we act; death
is our exit, and the plaudit, if we perform our part well, if we live
religiously, and persevere in piety, will be Matthew. 25. 23
Euge, Well done good and faithful Servant, enter thou into thy masters joy. Lo
this honor, this happiness have all the Saints. This is the portion, the
Crown of a Ridley, not a Roscius. Life it is an hedge of thorns, upon which we
must not only tread, but walk to our Graves. It Is a boule of Gall with a few
drops of Rose Water in it. It Is a Garden full of nettles, and briers, not
flowers, Tricae et spinae haec omnis vita, et falleris si quaeris in ea
gaudiorum Flores. To conclude, since every man may truly say, and ought
practically to speak, (to live like one that both knows and believes the truth
thereof) with him, Lips. Epist. 330.
Quid natus sim scio, imbecillum corpus, fragile morbi pabulum, mortis victima.
Since the strongest, wisest, greatest, richest, yea the holiest of mere men is
but Aristotle.
imbecillitatis exemplum, temporis spolium, inconstantiae imago, invidiae et
calamitatis trutina, reliqua vero pituita et bilis. And since it is better to
improve, then pourtray it; to spend our time holily, then to speak our life
elegantly, I shall say but this: A good, gracious, godly life, is a near, sure,
strait way to a comfortable, peaceful, blissful death. And a good death is
the birth-pay of a blessed, glorious life that shall never end. Although then
the morning of a pious Christians days may be tempestuous, and lowering, yet
his evening will be calm and bright: whereas the life of him that is
impenitently wicked, though Nun quam tristiorem sententiam Domitianus sine
praefatione clementiae pronunciavit, ut non aliud jam certius atr^cis exitus
signum esset quam principii lenitas. Suctonius.
like the heavy, bloody, and condemning sentence of that cruel Emperor
Domitian, it do begin with a preface of Clemency, with pleasure, and outward
prosperity, yet it (like his merciless Judgment) will be sure to have a
woeful, horrible, and most miserable Conclusion.

The Prayer.
O LORD, thou have acquainted us with the vanity, frailty and uncertainty of
this natural Life in those lively, real, teaching resemblances and
comparisons of it in thy Word of Truth to a Post, a Race, a Shuttle, a Vapor,
Span, Bubble, Flower, Grass. And thou have also informed us, that as short,
brittle, mutable as it is, we must either whilst our Souls so journ in these
houses of Clay, (our bodies) whose foundations are in the dust, both make our
peace with God, and get our Pardons sealed, or else we shall lie under thy
dreadful intolerable, yet unavoidable vengeance for ever. O Grant therefore
most gracious God that we may not ravel out those Golden Skeans of precious
opportunities, offers of Grace, and means of Salvation, which thy mercy,
bounty, patience have both given and continued unto us to make our callings and
elections sure. Suffer us not, holy God, to play, loyter, sin, or sleep away
our precious Time, seasons of Grace, our Talents, Gifts, Hopes, Comforts,
Promises, lest while we live those days come upon us, wherein like Pashur thou
in wrath and justice make us a burden to our selves. Lest thou make our lives
so bitter and grievous that we shall dig for death as Riches, and seek it as
for hid treasures, even count, crave, court it, and yet not be able to find it
or prevail to be taken out of our Misery by it. And lest after all these
terrors, sufferings, sorrows, agonies, and languishings our sinful Souls be for
ever separated, divorced, banished from the God of love, light, life, and cast
into utter darkness and eternal death amongst cursed Reprobates, and damned
Devils, when we go hence and shall be seen no more. Amen.

Vita vere religiosa optimum est medicamentum contra
Timorem, Terrorem and Mortis Stimulum. Bonus semper
Vivit; Abit enim* non obit; Asbconditnr, non abscinditur;
Dormit, non perit; Mutatur, non moritur.

XXIV. Of Death.
It Is the Souls convoy to Heaven or Hell. It Is the Porter that lets a true
sanctified, mortified Christian into Paradise, through the narrow Gate of Life;
The Pilot that steers him over the rough, raging, troublesome Sea of this
World, and lands him safe at the Haven of Happiness, Heaven. It Is the first
statute in Magna Charta; A Law made Primo mundi, which can never be repealed.
Hebr. 9. 27.
For it is appointed, (It Is inacted, ordained, in the High Court of Parliament
in Heaven) for all men once to dye. It Is to a Child of God the Souls
Coronation day, gaudy-day, its glad day, as Mr. Fox B. of Martyr. vol. 3 p. 431.
Wolsey, its wedding day, as Idem vol. 3. p. 502. Bishop Ridly the night before
he was to be burned being at Supper he was very cheerful and did bid Ms. Irish
his keepers Wise and the rest of the company at Board with him to his Wedding.
For says he, to morrow I must be married.
blessed Bishop Ridley called it, and its year of Jubilee. But it is a sluice
pulled up to drown the wicked. It Is an impenitent sinners shipwreck. It Is the
death, burial, and period of his prosperity, delights, pleasures; The funeral
of all his comforts, and the nativity of his eternal torments. It Is the B^kers
going out of Prison to execution, a Joseph's enlargement and promotion, a Queen
Elizabeth's Exaltation to a Throne. It Is a good Man's Spring, a Reprobates
Autumn; a Nu^c dimittis to a pious Simeon; a Take him Jailer, bind him hand
and foot and cast him into utter darkness to an impious Soul. A quietus est, a
writ of ease to the godly; a warrant signed and delivered for the destruction
of the Wicked. It Is an Ahimaaz bringing good tidings to the righteous, but the
last and worst of all Jobs messengers to him that is unholy; relating his sad,
his irrecoverable, irreparable loss of all soul, body, goods, riches,
pleasures, friends, children, house, lands, honors, mirth, hopes, offices,
power, earth, and Heaven unto him. It lets that Dove (the Soul) out of the
Cage, the Ark of the body. It knocks off those bolts, mortality, and frailty,
and sets it at liberty. It Is the taking up of Jeremiah (the Soul) out of the
dark, filthy, noisome, irksome Dungeon of the flesh; and the safe delivery of
that Daniel from those hungry, cruel, terrible Lions, sin, Satan, Hell. Christ
has disarmed death, and now to the Godly, Mors nomen est tantum; Owen Epi^.
Introitus, non interitus. So that what Camerarius appointed by his last will
should be written on his monument; may also most truly be ingraved upon the
Tomb of every one that dies in the Lord: Vita mihi mors est; mors mihi nova
vita est, Life to me is death, and death to me is a new, a true, a blessed, a
glorious Life. Death, it is both unavoidable and certainly uncertain. (d)
Apollonius Thyaneus, who had travailed over the greatest part of Europe, Asia,
and Africa, being asked at his return, (n) Dial of Princes.
what wonderful things he had seen in those Countries through which he had
travailed, answered; That he wondered most at two things. 1. That in all the
parts of the World where he had been, he had seen quiet men troubled by
seditious persons, the humble subject to the proud, the just obedient to the
Tyrant, the cruel commanding the merciful, the igno^ant teaching the wise, and
above all, That he had seen great Thieves hang the innocent on the Gallows. 2ly
That the other thing at which he marvailed was, that in a^l the Countries, and
places, where he had been, he knew not, neither could he find any man who was
immortal, but that at length both high and low had an end. And as Death is
inevitable, so it is also in it self terrible. For groans, sighs, tears,
convulsions, cries, palenesse, blacks and Funerals, are the Harbingers,
Heralds, and the train thereof. And yet to the Godly it is but like a Kings visit
to his beloved Subjects in his progress, acceptable honorable, welcome, and
comfortable. Nam pompa mortis magis terret, quam mors ipsa. Augustus Caesar
died in a complement, Vespasian in a Jest, Galba with a Sentence, Septimius
Severus in dispatch, etc. Bacon Ess^ys 2. p. 8.
The very Heathens entertained it without fear, and embraced it without sorrow.
The H^rodotus lib. 5.
Thracians or rather Thrausians, wept at the birth of their Children, and In
the primitive times C^ristians were wont at Funerals to sing Psalms of
Thanksgiving Kinet Cathol. Orthod. Quest.
rejoiced at the death of their Friends. Solon could say to rich Croesus, Ante
obitum nemo beatus, No man is happy till he be dead. And we ought not to lament
our death, but the wicked lives we lead, says Bruxellus. How much more then
should Christians receive it, both with courage, and Prove. 14. 32.
gladness; Since Pagans knew not what should become of them afterward.
Animula vagula, blandula, hospes, comesque corporis, quae nunc abibis in loca,
pallidula, nudula, frigida, nec ut soles dabis joca, said Hadrian in his
Sollioquy on his Deathbed.
one of them. But the Children of God know that as they have an unquestionable
right and title to a glorious inheritance, so they cannot possibly enjoy it
until they be put into quiet possession thereof by that high Sheriff Death.
It Is true death was the most ugly, frightful dreadful thing in the world. It
was the King of Terrors, yea of all terrible things the most terrible, being
the firstborn of that most deformed, monstrous, loathsome, hateful Mother
sin: But when Christ had put his precious blood into its pale, ghastly,
ill-favored face, it then became, and so continues, beautiful, amiable,
desirable. I desire, says blessed St. Paul, to be dissolved and to be with
Christ. Pontanus, lib. 4.
Libenter ecorporis vinculis evolaudum est. Quid enim hic est quod quenquam ad
diutius vivendum invitare possit? an labores assidui? an diurnae nocturnaeque
solicitudines? an quotidiani angores? an fortunae ludibria? an morborum
varietas? an mill casus, mill incommoda? vere melior est dies mortis quam
natalis! Ille siquidem quietis and beatitudinis: hic autem miseriarum
dolorumque initium est. Therefore many of the Martyrs courted, importuned,
longed for, and begged of their most bloody persecutors a release from that
debt which they owed, desired, yea thirsted, and rejoiced to pay unto nature.
Why do you not give me that gold chain, and create me a Knight of that Noble
Orde? said Ludovicus Marsacus, a French Martyr when the rope wherewith his
Fellow were to be executed was put about his Neck. (9) Fox B. of Martyr. vol.
3. p. 891.
And (h) one Priest's wife being condemned to be burnt at Exceter, when that
cruel Sentence was pronounced against her, she lifted up her voice, and
thanked God, saying, I thank thee my Lord my God, this day have I found that
which I have so long sought. Death is not now a Thorn, but a Crown. It Is not a
wound, but a plaster to a good Christian, who like the Sun shines brightest
usually when setting. This cruel Serpent has now lost his sing, so that the
greatest hurt which it can do a Child of God is to free him from misery,
dangers, troubles. It Is the bridge over which he passes to Glory. It Is a soft
bed of down, a sweet bed of Roses, as holy Bainam styled it when he was riding
in a fiery Chariot of Martyrdom to Heaven. It Is the Gate of Paradise, the
Messenger of Bliss, the Usher, and Harbinger of Glory. Though it kill, yet it
cannot hurt, nor conquer a Saint.

Hoc posteris dicite, hominem Christo deditum posse mori, non posse superari.
And therefore the Motto of a good Christian may well be the last words of Aemil
Probus in vita Epaminoned.
Epaminondas, who being mortally wounded by the Beotians in a bloody Battle,
and ready to expire, it was told him that his Enemies were overthrown; which
pleasing, happy news, he no sooner heard, but he concluded both his Speech, and
Life with these words, Satis inquit vixi, invictus enim morior. I have lived
long enough since I dye unvanquished; For Christians are Romans 8. 37.
more then Conquerors through him, that loved them. Death, it is a springtide of
Euge Deo sit laus and gloria quod jam mea instet liberatio and horula
gratissima, said pious Graserus when he perceived his legs to swel with a
Dropsy. Melch. Adam. in vit. Graeseri.
joy and pleasure to the godly. It Is the Souls Gaole-delivery. It Is Gods
Servant sent in love and mercy to invite them to come to that Feast of Felicity
and eternal Glory which the Lord has prepared for them: And therefore the
people of God have gone merrily to meet death when their friends have followed
them with sorrow and mourning to see them embrace and suffer it. Fox B. of
Martyrs vol. 3. p. 176.
When Doctor Tailor (being condemned) was carried out of London to be conveyed
to Hadley where he was to be burned; he was all the way as merry and cheerful,
as one that accounted himself going to a most pleasant Banquet or Wedding.

We see then that although Death be the Mother of misery, and so terrible to
the wicked, that even the very thoughts and fear of dying is a death to them:
witness Lewis the 11. King of France, who when he was sick commanded that none
should so much as name that terrible word Death unto him: Yet to the Godly it is
neither hurtful nor horrible. But yet as I said it is both Hebr. 9. 27.
unavoydable, for the chief Law that the Gods have given to humane nature is,
That none should have perpetual Life, says Pliny; And also most uncertain
Senec. lib. 3. Epist. 29.
Incertum est quo loco mors te expectet: Tu vero eam in omni loco expecta,
says Seneca. It does and must needs therefore infinitely concern all men and
women, as they desire to save their S^uls, and fear to shed their own blood and
to become their own murderers, butchers and executioners, seriously, timely,
yea daily to Praecogitati mali mollis ictus. Senec. Epist. 77.
consider the mortality of their bodies, and the immortality of their Souls,
that they must dye but once; That if they dye wickedly they are undone, yea
cursed eternally: Since if the fire of Hell be once kindled upon them, neither
Rivers of tears, nor infinite Oceans of Blood, nor prayers, nor cries, though
never so importunate, or lamentable, will ever be able to cool or mitigate,
much less then to quench it. And also to have some Monitors, and remembrancers
of their approaching, inevitable dissolution always before the eyes of their
minds, because forgetfulness of Death makes life sinful, and death most
dreadful. Camerar. lib. 6. p. 420.
Philip King of Macedon appointed one of his pages to come into his Chamber
door every morning, and to speak these words, Memento te esse mortalem. Neither
did he ever come out of his Chamber, or admit any man to speak with him, till
the Page had proclaimed every day thrice, Philip thou art a man. The Emperor
Maximilian the first, two years before his death, whithersoever he went carried
a Coffin with him to immind him of his end. Dial of Princes.
The Thebanes had this custom, No Thebane might build himself an house to
dwell in, before he had made him a Sepulcher to be buried in. The Grecian
Emperors upon the day of their inauguration in Constantinople, had several
sorts of stone presented to them by a Mason; out of which they was to choose
one to make them a Tomb to be buried in. Joseph of Arimathea had his Tomb in a
Garden; and so had their great men also. Mat. 27 60. 2 Kings 21. 18.
The Jews had their Sepulchers in their Gardens, that so in the the midst of
their delights, they might remember their mortality, And others have had a
Deaths head served up to their Tables, that they might in that perspicuous,
mortifying glass behold their own frailty in the midst of their mirth,
pleasures, jollity. And certainly, serious, frequent, and pious meditation of
death, will beget in us, a vigilant, continual expectation of death;
expectation of it, will Vivere in in tota vita discendum est. Quod magis mirum
est in tota vita dissendam est mori. Seneca de brevitate vita ad Paulinam.
persuade and spur us on to preparation for it, so that we shall be able not
only to look it in the face with comfort, but triumphingly to say; O Death
where is thy sting, etc. It being nothing to such as have the Lamps of their
Souls filled with saving Grace, and their Garments washed white in the blood of
the Lamb, but the Death and period of all their sins, sorrows, fears, dangers,
troubles, enemies, yea and of death it self. Mors and vita duello conflixere
mirando. Rex mortuus; regnat vivu^. In hoc duello mors et vita in arenam
descenderunt, sed tandem vicit vita et gloriose exiit e sepulcro de morte
triumphans. Irrideamus ergo mortem, and cum Apostolo dicam^s, Vbi mors
victoria? For (q) Quid ipsa mors quam timemus? (g) Lips Epist. p. 75.
Requies, gaudium, et vera vita, aut siquid in ea mali, malis tantum. What is
that death which we so much fear, and at the very name whereof we tremble? It Is
rest, joy, and life, or if there be any evil in it, it is only so to those that
are evil. And indeed it is very sad, yea woeful to all ungracious persons who
have this punishment: In dying they forget themselves, because in their life
time they forgot God. But besides this grievous punishment, and heavy judgment
most justly inflicted by the Lord upon them because when he came to them in
their health, prosperity, life, and offered them mercy, they refused (with
equal madness and cruelty to their own souls) to hear and embrace the tenders
of love and salvation: when their Life is lost and ended, all hope, comfort,
help, all means of Grace, and seasons of mercy, all possibility of pardon,
together with the society of the Glorious Angels, and glorified Saints, the
beatificall vision, and blessed fruition of the thrice blessed Trinity, and
those ineffable pleasures which are prepared for all that love God, will then
be lost for ever, Deus amissus est mors animae, anima amissa est mors corporis.
The Death of the body is but the body of death: therefore disce non metuendum
existimare quae metuenda finit. But the death of the Soul (the loss of God and
his favor) is the Soul of Death. Fear therefore by sin to provoke that God who
can, and for sin unrepented of, and continued in, will inflict eternal death
both upon the body and soul, and make all impenitent transgressors ever living
objects of his never-dying wrath. I shall conclude all with presenting and
commending the Lord Gabriel Simeons Glass to your view and perusal. Beauty is
deceitful, money flies away, Rule-bearing is odious, victory doubtful, peace
fraudulent, old age miserable, the fame of wisdom everlasting, Life short,
death (to the Godly) Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end
of that man is peace.
happy. Psalm. 37. 37


The Prayer.
O LORD, Man has but one Door to let him into the World by Life, but there are
a thousand Posterns, Wickets, and Passages to let him out of it by Death. We
are born both Mortal and Miserable; O give us blessed God so to live, that at
the end of our days we may be immortally happy: we came into the World
Sinners, O grant that we may go out of it Saints. We were unclean at our birth,
O let us be pure and holy at our dissolution. The hand of every moment winds
off some of the little clue of Life. The string and plummet of our days creep,
and descend every minute nearer and nearer to the ground, our Graves. The Sun
of this natural Life never stands still, but moves, or rather flies from the
East and morning of our birth and infancy, to the South, and noon of Youth, and
Manhood, and then hastens to the West, the evening of old Age. Grant therefore
holy God, that when this Sun shall set in the night of Death, our Souls may
rise and shine with the Sun of Righteousness in Glory; That as we grow older
we may grow holyer every day then other; That we may pass the time of
sojourning in these Tents of flesh in thy way and Fear, that so the Conscience,
Evidence, and Comfort of a wel-spent Life, may both Antidote and Arm us
against the Sting and Power of Death before it comes, and free us from the
Horreus and Misery of it, when it does come. O let it be no Stranger to our
thoughts, and then it will be no terror to our Hearts. O let us get death into
our minds, and that will put life into all our Actions. O grant good God, that
our Lives may be pious, and then our Death will be peaceable, joyful, welcome
unto us and precious in the sight of the Lord. And give us I beseech thee most
merciful Father some clusters of Grapes of the good Land of Canaan here, even
the Graces of thy holy Spirit, and some fore-tasts of thy special Love in
Christ while we continue in the Wilderness of this World, that when we die our
Souls may enter into, and for ever possess the spiritual Canaan of Heaven.
Grant this O Lord for Jesus Christ his sake, Amen, Amen.

Diu vixit qui pie moritur.
Fructus est laboris and finis operis placere melioribus.

FINIS.
Soli Deo Gloria.
THE CHARACTERS OF A True Believer, IN PARADOXES, AND Seeming Contradictions.

AN ESSAY.

By THO. GODDARD Gent.

Vetera legendo et metitando nova invenimus, Quintil. Placere cupio, prodesse
precor, and laboro. LONDON, Printed by E. C. For Thomas Williams at the Bible
in Litle-Brittain: and William Thompson, at Harborough in Leicestershire. 1661.

THE CHARACTERS OF A True Believer, In PARADOXES, AND Seeming Contradictions.
1. HE believes that which he cannot comprehend, because it is above reason.
That there are three distinct Persons in the Godhead, yet but one God; that God
is the Father of Christ; that the Holy Ghost proceeds from them both, and yet
that they are all three Coeternall and but one in substance.

2. He believes that Christ who was before all time, and created the world,
was yet born in the fullness of time, and became man in the world. That he who
fills both Heaven and earth, and can neither be included, nor excluded any
where, was shut up and confined within the narrow womb of a Virgin. That he who
is the Omnipotent, and can do whatever pleases him, could neither go nor
stand. That he who is Wisdom it self, could not understand. That he who is the
Word, could not speak. That Christ was killed before he was alive, and slain
before he was born. That he who is Almighty, was held in the Arms, and bound in
the hands of a weak Woman. That the Mother of Christ was both his Daughter,
Creature, Spouse, and a pure Virgin even after her Son was born. And that if
Jesus had not been slain for her from the beginning of the World, Mary had not
lived.

3. A true believer is both a Pebble and a Diamond, a Pillar and a Troubler of
the World. He is both the honor and scorn, the love, envy and hatred of men.
In the Arithmetique of the wicked he stands but for a Cipher, but in the
account of an holy God he is a Sum. In the scales of the World he is dross,
but in the Balance of the Sanctuary Gold.

4. A true Believer is a merry mourner, one cheerfully sorrowful. And as
sometimes the clouds and Sun do rain and shine together: So while Rivers of
penitent grief and tears spring up in his heart and run out at the floud-gates
of his eyes, celestial beams of unknown joy, comfort, gladness, dart upon,
irradiate, and revive his dark, troubled, drooping Spirit.

5. He rises by falling. Humiliation is his exaltation. He goes to Heaven by
Hell. And is never so high and precious in Gods eyes, as when he is vilest and
lowest in his own.

6. A true Believer is cured by sickness, being never so well as when he
faints and is even ready to die of love for Christ. Affliction is his
physic, Julip, happiness. He is saved by shipwreck, landed by storms, and
deeply rooted by winds and shakings.

7. He beeleveth God to be most just, and yet that the Lord from all eternity
decreed, that the innocent should be condemned and suffer to acquit the guilty:
And also that the greatest sinners should be saved by one should dye for sin,
and yet never committed any sin. He believes himself to be freely pardoned,
and yet knows that a price was paid for his redemption worth more then ten
thousand Worlds. He believes God to be most merciful, most loving, and yet
knows, that God delivered up his own, his only Son, and suffered him to suffer
not only the most bitter, painful, and cruel, but also the most shameful
Death. And likewise that the Lord poured out upon him the fullest vials of his
fiercest wrath, and that all this was done, endured, and suffered for those who
were both Enemies and Traitors to God and his Son.

8. A true Believer hates all the World, yet is no man's Enemy. He is
implacable, yet without malice; inexorable, yet easy to be persuaded. He
prays for, and heartily forgiveth his very Murderers. His worst enemies are
friends to him and do him good. He sins least, when he is most angry; Takes
revenge on no body but himself; And never pleases God more then when he is
most offended and displeased with himself.

9. A true Believer is the most ambitious man in the World, For nothing can
satisfy or bound his aspiring mind but a Kingdom, and Crown, yet he is the
most Loyal Subject and the greatest contemner of all sublunary things. He
wageth and maintains with courage, resolution, delight and constancy,
perpetual Wars, and yet he is the greatest lover of peace, lives in peace, is
the most quiet man, and dies in peace. He is victorious, yea invincible, yet
fights without men against both men and Devils. And though he be plundered,
beggered, and lose all, yet he grows rich and great by wars without pay or
pillage.

10. He is born both alive and dead. He dies twice, and lives a threefold life
of Nature, Grace, Glory. He has one resurrection before another after he is
dead.

11. He studieth with delight and diligence to know that which he is assured
will both grieve and trouble him being known. He is never so wise as when he
knows himself to be a Fool. He is never so likely to get safe to shore, as
when he is most fearful of being cast away. He is never beautiful until he
see, and acknowledge himself to be ugly, and deformed: and the more he loathes
himself, the more God loves him.

12. He is born of mean and base Parents, and yet he is the only truly noble
Man: For he has the Royallest blood, greatest alliances and relations, highest
titles, choycest honors, honourablest Attendants, and the best estate of any
man. For God is his Father, Christ is his Husband, Heaven is his mansion,
Saints are his Brethren, Angels are his Servants, and Glory is his inheritance.

13. A true Believer is born both a Beggar and an Heir. He often lives poor,
yet is always Rich, and dies wealthy, though without Lands, money, goods. He
keeps his estate by sending it away, and increases it by spending of it,
when others not only lessen but lose theirs by sparing, and saving it. And he
takes his treasure with him to his Grave, and beyond it.

14. He is never whole till he has been broken. He is never rightly, thoroughly
cured until he has been deeply wounded. He is never on earth more really
happy, then when he seems to be truly miserable. Injuries are favors to him;
losses, gain; calamities, mercies; afflictions, consolations. The breaking of
his bones sets them, and makes them both straight and strong.

15. A true Believer lives in Heaven, whilst he sojourns upon Earth, he
speaks in company without being heard, receives answers which no man can
either intercept, demurre, or perceive, enjoyes the best company though alone.
He walks while he lies still, and is not there where men behold him.

16. He has a continual feast without flesh, and eating: A Banquet without
sweet meats, melody without music, and Joy in the midst of sorrow. He is
dear, beloved, owned, when he thinks himself despised, rejected, hated. He
believes he shall find pleasure in pain, honey in gal, life in death, and does
so.

17. He has all things in the midst of his extremest wants, yet is beholding
to the World for nothing; for he fetches his meat, drink, clothes, mercies,
comforts and whatever he possesses from Heaven. He sends by faithful,
frequent, fervent prayers to Christ for them, bids patience wait, and appoints
hope to bring him an answer, which believing he shall receive, it comes indeed
either according to his desires and expectation, or beyond them. He always
speeds and obtains even when his suit is denied. He has what he will, because
he will have but what he may, and therefore he sits down both contented and
thankful though he be crossed.

18. A true Believer is afraid of that which with zeal, courage, sincerity, and
constancy he is resolved to do, to serve God. He delights in it, yet is
grieved that he can perform duty no better. He seeks diligently for that
which he knows he shall not find, and beggeth that importunately which he is
assured will be both denied and granted in this world unto him. He is what he
seems to be, yet is not what he seems, being like Solomon's Tents, black
without, but adorned with precious things within. He is both black and white,
weak and strong, contemptible and Honorable, sick and well, at Liberty and in
Prison, a Sinner and a Saint, fearful and yet bold as a Lion.

19. He leaves the dirty broad way of the World, and by crossing that, he goes
on directly in the right way toward Heaven. Though he be far from home, and
from his friends in a strange Country, yea in the darkest night, yet he can go
to his Father almost in a moment without wandering. Though all the men in the
World should lie armed in Ambush to surprise him, yet he can pass either
safely by them, or victoriously through them. For although he may be taken, or
killed, yet he cannot be kept or overcome.

20. A true Believer loves Gods Words and Ordinances as dearly as his Life.
Because by them he was wounded to his healing, humbled to his raising,
enlightened to the beholding of his Blindness, emptiness, nakedness,
nothingnesse, filthiness, and because without them (though he had been the
sole Monarch of the whole world) he had been everlastingly undone, and a very
beggar. He trembles at the good, the holy Word of God, yet both rejoices in
it, and finds transcendent sweetness, spiritual, yea soul-ravishing joy and
gladness by it.

21. He honors highly, loves dearly, and obeys willingly his natural
Parents, yet prizeth, and affects his spiritual Father, a Godly Minister,
above, and beyond all men, though he be not at all akin to him: Because he
knows that it is better never to be, then to be everlastingly miserable, and
never to be Borne, then not to be Borne again.

22. He will not, he dare not spare his own Flock, and take another only Lamb.
He therefore dedicates and consecrates the Sabbath Day which is none of his
own, wholly, cheerfully, joyfully, thankfully, heartily, and religiously to the
Lord. And by so doing he gets six for one to himself, together with a
promise of Gods guidance, favor, protection, and blessing upon him, his, and
his Labors in his calling in them. And so by serving God he serves himself
too, and by giving God his due, he both keep's his own, and gets more then
he had.

23. A true Believer increases his estate by giving it away, gathers by
scattering. By clothing others he adorns himself with Robes, by relieving
others he supplies his own wants, and by sowing Charity he reap^s Mercy.

24. He saves his Life by confessing his guiltiness, whereas others condemn
themselves by concealing their crimes. He Is the only happy man, for nothing can
make him miserable. Because he is comforted when afflicted, he is at Liberty in
Bondage, at home when Banished, sed when famished; full though empty, satisfied
when hungry, advanced though degraded, safe when most cruelly persecuted, and
when killed crowned.

25. He is naturally heavy and droffy, yet ascends; and the nearer his body
comes to its Center, the earth, and its long home, the Grave, by age and
sickness, the faster and the higher his Soul mounts toward Heaven. And at
length his Soul is divorced from his Body, both with joy and grief, exultation
and mourning.

26. A true Believer is never satisfied, yet always contented. He fears
continually, yet seldom wants Hope. He doubts, yet steadfastly believes; he is
not worldly minded, and yet he is so covetous, that he never thinks he has
enough. He is most temperate and sober, yet is always thirsty. He is a modest
Suitor, yet is resolved to take no denial. He knows and confesses himself to
be unfit to ask, and unworthy to receive either a gracious answer, or any
mercy, and yet he will not cease begging till his prayers be heard, and his
petitions granted.

27. He never sits, stands, nor lies, but is always walking. His motion is
neither retrograde, nor circular, but progressive, yet the longer, faster, and
further he travails, the stronger, and fresher he is. All things ^re become new
in him, yet the old man is not destroyed. He is very pitiful, and tender
hearted, yet so merciless and implacable an enemy to sin, that he is never
quiet or pleased till it be mortified, crucified and dead in him. He is both in
the world, and out of it at the same time. He is willing, yea desirous to keep
his estate, yet freely parts with it, if God will have it, and accounts the
loss of all for Christ, the greatest, the truest gain.

28. He injoies that which he doubts he wants, loves unfainedly that which he
fear he does not care for, and prizeth above all things that which others
trample under their feet. He is assured of his Salvation, and that he is an
Heir of Glory, yet questions his evidences, and by Nulla sunt sirmiora quam
quae ex dubiis facta sunt certa.
doubting makes them firm and good.

29. A true Believer matters not his life, nay he desires to dye, yet strives
more then any man to save himself. He is terribly afraid of Hell and Damnation,
yet would not knowingly and with delight and perseverance commit, or live in
any one sin to obtain Heaven.

30. He is diligent in his calling, yet does not mind earthly things. He alone
has a true comfortable and religious right to the Creature, yet accounts
himself an Usurper, till his Title be confirmed by his interest in Christ.
Though he hold his Land in free Soccage, yet he acknowledges, it is but in
Capite. Though his Tenure be in Fee-simple; yet he confesses himself to be but
a Tenant at Will. Though his goods be his own, yet he knows and believes
himself bound freely, and liberally (if he be able) to dist^^bute and
communicate them unto others. He be^eeveth all things without Christ are
nothing but va^ity and ^^^^tion of Spirit, and that Christ alone is all things
without any thing else.

31. That which others fear, fly and abhor, he courts, desires, and
welcomes. That which is their Funeral is his Nuptials; For death does not kill
but translate him, it does not execute but remove him. He dies daily, and so
does not die at all but depar^; His sleep is a short death, and his dissolution
is but a long sleep. Death which is a destructive deluge to the wicked, is only
an Ark to him, preserving and carrying him safe to Mount Ararat, Heaven, and
there it both lands and leaves him.

32 A true Believer anticipates the last day. He accuses, arraigneth, and
condemns himself, and so is both acquitted and discharged by God at his
death. He is no Incendia^y, yet desires nothing so much a^ to see both Heaven
and earth on fire. He trembles at the presence of God, yet longe^h for, and
will both rejoice and triumph at his glorious appearing, because then he shall
meet Christ as a Savior and husband, not as a dreadful confounding J^dge He
believes his mortal body, though it be burned, drowned, devoured by wild
Beasts, or buried in the earth and consumed to dust, and although that very
dust should be scattered and lost, s^al yet be collected, raised again entire,
and beautiful (though before it was deformed) and be made a glorious Body. And
that both his Body Soul, though they have been absent and strangers unto one
another for many hundr^^s, ^ea thousands of years, shall meet again, be married
in joy and bliss, and enjoy one another without all fear, or possibility of
ever being separated any more, in felicity and glory to all Eternity.

S. D. G.

FINIS.
A little Box of safe Purgative and Restorative Pills to be constantly taken by
all those that desire either to get their Souls into, or to keep them in, an
healthful, holy, heavenly Frame, and Temper.
1. HE that does not love God above all things dethrones him, and sets up the
Prince of Lies and darkness above the God of Truth, Light, and Glory.

2. He that refus^th to take Jesus Christ for his husband, shall one day find
him a dreadful condemning Judge. And his condition will be woeful that refuses
to love and embrace Christ, that woo's him, and would free him from his woeful
condition.

3. He that shuts the Holy Ghost out of his heart, lo^ks the narrow gate of
Life against his own Soul, and sets the door of hell wide open for himself to
enter thereat into everlasting, ever-tormenting sorrows.

4. He that commits sin with delight, does delight sinfully to murder at once
his Savior, his Soul, his Neighbor and his Companions in evil, who have been
his evil Companions.

5. He that makes no conscience to honor God by sanctifying the Sabbath Day,
will make no scruple to dishonor the Gospel, Religion and himself, or to
wrong others all the week after.

6. He that accounts any sin little, is a great sinner, and without great
sorrow, for so doing, he will be a great sufferer.

7. He only is a Christian indeed that is a Christian in his deeds.

8 He that preaches well, and lives il, persuades men to profaneness, and
disswades them from piety.

9. He that does not hear the word of God to his humiliation, Reformation,
Renovation, shall hear God the Word pronounce the sentence of eternal
condemnation against him for being an unfruitful, an unprofitable hearer of
Gods word.

10. He that sees not his own blindness, is blind thou^h he sees: And
therefore he can neither find the way to true happiness, nor be truly happy in
his ways.

11. He that does not mourn for sin while he lives, shall burn in hell for his
sin when he dies. For as a Saints Sorrow is his real unspeakable Joy, so a
sinners Joy will be his eternal Sorrow.

12. He that is not Gods Servant, is a slave to the worst of Masters, the
Devil.

13. He that is in League and confederacy with his Lusts, is a volunteer under
Satan, in arms, and in open not only hostility but Rebellion against the Lord
of hosts.

14. He that prays not daily to God for grace, mercy and pardon, provokes God
to punish him for his neglect of prayer, and is liable (being out of Gods
protection) every moment to become a prey to that roaring Lion, the Devil, who
seeks daily his destruction.

15. He that is content to want Christ, is sure to want content. And he that
thinks to deceive God and the world with a show of holiness, God will make it
appear to the world and himself, that his holiness was but in show.

16. He that was never humbled for the sins of his prayers, has great cause to
pray, that he may be humbled for that as well as his others sins.

17. He that does neither care nor fear to appear evil, will neither be
afraid, to be really evil, nor to have his evil appear.

18. The surest way to conquer sin, is to fly from it.

19. He that does not resist temptations, invites Satan to besiege him, and
has given him Hostages that he will without striking or fighting surrender up
the sort of his heart unto him.

20. The Soul of true Religion is to be truly religious in Soul: And a pious
life, is the life of piety.

21. He that makes this world his God, shall have his portion in Hell, with the
God of this world.

22. They of all other persons are the most ill-favored, and deformed, that
have fair faces and ^oul hearts. For the beauty of the body is but the body of
beauty: But a soul deformed by sin has in it the very soul of Deformity.

23. He is in Gods account a good Christian, that sincerely endeavors to be
good, and grieves heartily that he is no better.

24. He ^ulfils the will of God, whose will and heart are fully fixed, and
willing to do it, though he cannot perfectly keep the Commandments of God.
Because the Lord will never impute the unwilling failings of his people unto
them.

25. He runs the race that is set before him, who walks uprightly in the way of
holiness.

26. They are the Devils Cocks, not Christ's Doves, that crow when they have
enjoyed their Lusts, that boast of, or glory in their sin and shame, and in
their shameful sins.

27. He is a bad man that is only good, that he may get goods by bad means, and
by seeming to be good. For he that serves God only for gain, makes gain only
his God.

28. Heaven will never be fit for him, that does not labor to fit himself for
heaven.

29. He must needs love sinfully that loves sin: And both his care and crimes
must needs be very great, that cares* not how great his crimes are, so he be
but great.

30. He is the worst of fools, that never as yet became a fool that he might be
wife.

31. He that delights in his iniquities kisses his chain, huggs his bolts,
rejoices in his fetters, and is well pleased to be led by the Devil in triumph
to hell.

32. He that despises the means of grace and comfort, has little cause to
expect any grace, or comfort by the means.

33. He can never miscarry, or be cast away in the harbor or Death, that
carries the ballast of a good Conscience, and keeps the Anchor of a lively
saving hope both sure and steadfast whilst he sails over the Sea of life.

34. He that feels not the want of Christ while he lives, shall be sure to find
the want of Christ when he dies.

35. He that is a true Child of God, will be truly grieved and afflicted for
the afflictions of Gods Children.

36. The only way for Christians, never to repent hereafter that they have
committed any Sins, is ever while they live here, unfeignedly to repent of all
the sins, that they have committed.

37. He that runs from Christ's color (that great Captain of m^n^ Salvation) to
serve Satan, has no color why he should serve Christ so treachero^sly as to
run from him to be Satan's Servant. For Christ shed his blood and died to save
him, but Satan does both restlesly and implacably plot and desire to kill and
damn him.

38. His breath stinks the worst, and is the most offensive, infectious, and
unsavory, that smells of lies, oaths, obscene, filthy, and rotten speeches,
instead of being perfumed with prayers and praises unto that God who gives him
his breath.

39. He that never tasted the bitterness of sin, did never relish the
sweetness either of Grace, or a Savior.

40. The way for men to please God when he is offended, is to be displeased
with themselves for offending God. And the way for them to offend God, is to
please themselves in doing those things that they know do displease God.

41. He that does not fear continually, has just cause to live in continual
fear.

42. He that does only profess Religion, for vain and sinful ends, will in the
end be found to have been only a vain and sinful professor.

43. He that refuses to draw nigh to the God of Mercy in duty, will find that
the God of Justice will draw nigh to him in vengeance and fury. For he that
does not pray to God to pardon and love him, provokes God to hate, plague, and
damn him.

44. He that Rebels against the God of peace, deprives himself of that peace
of God which passes all understanding. And without being wise, penitent, and
Loyal, he shall never enjoy the consolations of that God, who is the God of
all consolations.

45. Never envy the wicked though they be great, rich, and prosperous with a
wicked envy. Had not they need to have a few Holy days here, that must never
rest hereafter? Had not they need to have a few warm gleams of mirth, and
pleasure while they live, that when they die must live without all possibility
of dying in devouring fire and everlasting burnings?

46. His condition is very fearful that never feared his condition: For their
danger is certainly the greatest, that never was sensible of, nor affected with
the greatness of their danger.

47. Every sincerely pious Christian find experimentally that to be most true
of God which Varius said of Caesar, viz. That they who durst speak to him were
ignorant of his greatness; and they who durst not speak to him, were ignorant
of his goodness. He knows that the Lord is Almighty and most dreadful as well
as most loving and merciful: he therefore comes into his presence and prays
unto him both with faith and fear, reverence and confidence, joy and trembling.

48. He that loves God truly hates all sin implacably, because he knows that
the God of love, hates all sin perfectly.

49. Jesus Christ never was nor ever will be either precious or gracious to
any, but those only, to whom all things in the World in respect of Christ are
vile and contemptible. The way then for Christians to be liked, and beloved of
Christ, is to love and prize Christ above all things, and to strive to be like
unto Christ.

50. He to whom wickedness is sweet and but like cork or feathers in this
life, to him his most pleasant Sins will one day be bitter as gall, and the
lightest, the least of them will then be found in finitely heavier then lead,
milstones, and mountains.

51. A Saints outside is course and dark, but his inside is very rich and
glorious. In the eyes of carnal men he is but like an unpolished Jewel, which
to the ignorant seems no better then a despicable stone. But in the sight and
account of God, he is even then both amiable, orient and precious. It Is better
to be plain and pious, then ^gorgeous and vicious. And to be beloved and
honored of God, and hated and despised of the world, then to be beloved and
honored of the world, and hated and despised of God, who created the world.

52. He that is false and treacherous to himself, will never be true or
faithful to another. He may really desire the goods of his friend, but he will
never desire really his friends good. He will love a man till he needs him, but
when a man has need of his love, he will rather betray then bestead him: Only
he is a good friend that is really a good Christian. For piety is the right
root of Amity, and holiness is the only spring of faithfulness both to God
and man.

53. Nothing can satisfy the godly desires of him that is Gracious and
heavenly, but the eternal fruition of that gracious God in Heaven that gives
him those godly desires.

54. It Is very both easy and ordinary to censure others for their ^aults. But
it is very hard and rare to avoid and hate in our selves, the faults we censure
in others.

55. He that dares commit sin without all fear of damnation, but dares not
profess Christ for fear of disgrace or danger, is the veriest, the maddest,
the cruellest coward in the world: and yet he dares do more then a Saint, who
is both bold as a Lion, and the only true valiant man, for he dares not
knowingly, and willingly commit one sin for all the world.

56. He that will be of any Religion to please the Time he lives in, will live
in time to be of no Religion at all.

57. He that makes no Conscience of being a dwarf, will quickly grow up to be
a Giant in wickedness. For if his face be not red with blushing at his
whispering provocations, he will not be ashamed, nor afraid, to die his soul
scarlet with loud-crying abominations.

58. Not only those sins that are of the first or second magnitude, but even
those also that are of the least size; are in their own nature both great and
mortal. Jaels nail will kill as sure as Goliahs Sword. A little halter will
strangle a Felon as well as a Cable-roap. And it is well known that little Boys
have often let in great Thieves to rob the house, and murder the Master.

59. His heart cannot be good who never mourned under the sense and misery of a
bad, nor servently begged of God that changes the heart, to have his heart
changed, and to give him the great mercy of a good heart.

60. His doings are well pleasing to God, that is well-pleased with Gods doings.

60. He was never athirst for grace, that did not thirst for more grace then he
had.

62. He that would have God to bless him daily in his calling, must both have
a clear, a lawful calling to his calling, and call daily upon God to bless
him, and his Labors in it.

63. He that prays to God in anger, wrath, or malice against others, provokes
God to wrath and anger by his prayers. And in stead of prevailing with God for
the forgiveness of his trespasses, he does trespass yet more in asking him
for givenesse, because he sins willingly, even at that very time, when he seems
earnestly to beg of the Lord the pardon of his sins, and so does not please or
serve, but mock God. For the God of love and life does infinitely hate, and
will not hear those that love hatred, and live in it. But he will avenge
himself severely upon all those that desire and delight to revenge themselves
implacably upon others.

64. It Is midnight with an impenitent transgressor when he has the brightest
noontide of prosperity; And it is a serene, a shining Noontide with a Saint,
when he is in the cloudiest midnight of adversity.

65. A Saint is a great gainer, though he lose all that he has in the world.
But a wicked man is a great loser, though he gain all that the world has in it.

66. He is mercifully cruel to his own Soul that spares the lives of those
Amalekites his Sins. But he is both cruelly merciful, and merciful without
any cruelty to his soul, that kills them all without mercy.

67. He that would live when he dies, must kill (by mortification) all his
deadly sins in his life. And he that would never die Mortibus vi^imus, Senec.
must die daily.

68. The sins of others will increase his sorrow, that does not sorrow for
others sins.

69. He that would be married to Jesus Christ, must get his heart divorced from
an inordinate love of worldly things, because Christ Jesus will give him a Bill
of Divorce that loves the things of the world inordinately. For he that makes
earth his Heaven, or Paradise by suffering a sinful love thereof to enter into
his Soul, his Soul shall never enter into the Paradise of Heaven.

70. He that has a saving interest in Christ, shall be full and rich, even
when he is empty, wantful, and deprived of all creature comforts: But he that
wants a saving interest in Christ, will be poor, and empty in the midst of his
fullest enjoyments and greatest plenty.

71. His Soul is sick to death that neither is nor ever yet was heart-sick with
grief for the sins of his Life, which will be (without true repentance) the
death of his Soul: nor love sick for the great and good physician of the soul
Jesus Christ, who is both lovely and loving to those only that are sick of love
for him.

72. His sins are most both odious and heinous that after he has repented of
them, returns again with delight to the commission of his heinous sins.
Because he has laid God in one, and put the Devil into the other Scale of the
balance, and suffered the Devil to weigh down the Lord. He has also heard
God and the Devil argue and plead, and after a full hearing he does
deliberately (by wilful relapsing) decree for Satan against his Savior. And so
he does both undervalue, dishonor and provoke God, and also repent that he did
repent. God will therefore most certainly judge him for his sins without mercy
that gives so sinful a judgment against the God of mercy.

73. It Is reported that when Caesar saw M. Brutus come running upon him amongst
those that murdered him he said, (...), And thou my son! The sins of Gods
Children do grieve and offend Christ more then the iniquities of his Enemies.
Because a contempt, or an injury from a friend does both dishonor him more
highly, and wound him more deeply then an affront, or an abuse from a professed
Adversary.

74. He is a bad Magistrate that is not good for nothing. And as pious
Governors do clothe a Nation with the Rob^^ of Joy and gladness: So wicked
Rulers do put it into Sackcloth and mourning.

75. He that undermines the Church of God, does at once labor, sweat, and
weary himself to dig a hole down to hell for his Soul to fall irrecoverably into
the bottomless pit. And he that persecutes the people of God, by shedding
their innocent, crying blood, pulls up a sluice to let in a crimson deluge to
drown him.

76. Never did any wicked men attempt to pull down God from his Throne by
setting up themselves, their lusts, interests and idols above him, or his
glory, but the God of glory pulled or rather tumbled them down headlong for
that wicked attempt; Either by humbling their proud, presumptuous hearts, or
else by destroying their persons, or blasting their cursed designs, or (which
is yet more dreadful) by damning their rebellious Souls. It Is then a fearful
thing not to fear falling into the omnipotent Arms, and the angry hands of that
terrible God, who both can and will with one irresistible blow kill and confound
the offender, and with one frown, or stroke send him at once both to his Grave
and H^ll.

77. A pious Christian, though he hates no man's person, is yet the worst, most
inexorable, and invincible enemy of all mortal creatures to the ungodly whose
works and ways his Soul does loath and detest. For by his faithful prayers he
can prevail with God, to infatuate their Counses, dispirit their stout hearts,
blast their designs, wither their flourishing hopes, to break the Arm of their
power, and to rescue himself, and those that fear God out of the Jaws of
Enemies, dangers, and death. It Is therefore a stupendous astonishing madness
in wicked men to hate those whom God loves, to destroy those for whose sakes
themselves are preserved, to hope to build themselves houses upon earth by
pulling the pillars thereof, to condemn them that shall one day be their
Judges, and to plot and presume to plant themselves or their Posterities in the
World by supplanting and rooting out the upright Prove. 2. 1.
who shall dwell in the Land, whereas the Prove. 3. 33.
wicked (* in whose house the curse of the Lord is) shall be cut off from the
earth. Prove. 2. 22.
For if Cedars, vin^^, olive, and orange trees be cut down, then brambles,
briers, and barren Fig Trees will certainly, suddenly, miserably be cursed,
burned, and consumed.

78. He is the worst malignant and Incendiary in a State that is a wicked man,
For he not only hates goodness and good Christians, but he also both kindles
the fire of Gods wrath against it, and keeps it burning and flaming by casting
continually the oil of sin upon it.

79. Those Governors and great ones who are so bewitched with the fading,
dying, and killing glories of this World, as for the Love of them to slight
Heaven, neglect the great Salvation offered them, and to reject Jesus Christ,
their pomp will end in pain, their honor in Infamy, and their Glory in eternal
misery.

80. He that slights, opposes, robs and wrongs the Ambassadors of Jesus
Christ, Gods faithful Ministers, does dishonor, displease, and bid defiance to
their Master, the Lord of Hosts. He must therefore (without repentance,
restitution and submission) expect to receive neither peace, pardon, nor
quarter, but death without mercy, that steals from, or fights against the God
of bounty, Justice, and Mercy, and rejects both the offers, and the offerers of
peace.

81. He is an intolerable Traitor in and to a Commonwealth, that hates, and
persecutes the Children of God. For as it is Treason by the Laws of men, not
only to murder a Prince, but also to stab or maliciously to deface his picture;
So it is spiritual Rebellion too, not only to fight against God himself, but
also wilfully to wound, and to destroy those that bear his Image, his holy
Servants.

82. He that would have his shameful sins for ever hidden, must not be
ashamed, but resolved to lay them open, and fully to discover them; For
concealing reveals, but confessing covers them: And he that desires never to
be accused, arraigned, or condemned for his guilt, must freely acknowledge
himself to be guilty, and most worthy to be eternally condemned. An open
bosom, an unbared breast is a sure shield, and Armor of proof against the
deadly Arrows of the Lords most dreadful wrath.

83. He that will lose his Soul to preserve his Life, shall save neither; But
he that is willing to perish to save his Soul, shall save his Soul from
perishing.

84. He that is undone for Christ is truly rich and happy. But he that is rich
and prosperous without Christ is really undone* poor, and miserable.

85. He that does not in the time of this Life make Gods glory, and the
enjoyment of Heaven his chiefest ends, shall neither enjoy the God of Glory,
nor the joys of Heaven, at his end.

86. He that would never want must be poor in Spirit. And he that would always
rejoice, must mourn daily; for he that did never grieve shall ever lament.

87. He that is rotten at core, that has an unsound, a^ unsincere heart, will
like an Apple be speck'd without. For a Leprous Soul will have some spot or
other upon the Face of the Life; And an Hypocritical Spirit will have foul
hands, which at one time or other will work Wickedness, ^lain its seeming
purity, and discover its artificial, its borrowed paint, and its real deformity.

88. He that desires never to leave God, nor to be left and finally forsaken of
God, must not only resolve, but seriously endeavor both to depart from evil,
and to do good. For sincerity is the root of courageous constancy, but
Hypocrisy is the true Mother of timorous Apostasy. And it is most certain,
that he who will not leave his Rimmon, or Mammon, his sweet sin and his
secret Lust to please Christ, will never lose or lay down his Relations, Lands,
Liberty, or Life, to enjoy and glorify Christ.

89. He that opens the door of his heart to let in sin, or Satan, shuts it and
turns the key against his Savior and Sovereign, whose power made it, whose
Love prevailed with him to let his own heart be pierced on the Cross to unlock
it. If then a Sinner will not suffer the hand of mercy to unbolt it, the arm
of wrath will most certainly break it to pieces. If the fire of infinite,
unexpressible Love cannot melt it, the flames of endless, intolerable Anger
will burn it. If the precious blood of Christ do not soften this Adamant, it
will sink it to the bottom of Hell: For those whom goodness does not win,
vengeance will destroy.

90. The Life of a Saint is a public Mercy, his Death a common Calamity. The
end of his days is the Autumn of all his misery, and the Spring of his
endless Glory and felicity. So that what Suetonius says of Titus Vespasia^
may more, yea most truly be said of him when he is cut down with the Sithe of
death, viz. That he was taken away to the greater loss of Mankind then of
himself.

Optima Eloquentia est bona vita. He is most eloquent whose Life is most Holy
and Innocent.
FINIS.
Soli Dea Gloria.
The Table.
1 Of God, page 1. 2 Of Jesus Christ, and a Christians Duty unto Christ, 7. 3 Of
the Holy Ghost, 19. 4 Of Sin and sinners, 23. 5 Of the World, and the brightest
Jewel in it is Crown, Sovereignty, 24. 6 Of Loyalty, and Rebellion, 42. 7 Of
Riches, 46. 8 Of covetousness and covetous persons, 51. 9 Of Pleasure, 61. 10
Of Health, 65. 11 Of saving faith, and sincere Love, 67. 12 Of Repentance, 74.
13 Of Prayer, 80. 14 Of sincerity and hypocrisy together with some Characters
of both sincere and Hypocritical Christians, 84. 15 Of Affliction, 92. 16 Of
Patience, 102. 17 Of Baptism, 105. 18 Of the Sacrament of the Lords supper,
109. 19 Of preaching, 113. 20 Of Godly, learned, and of ungodly, unlearned,
Ministers, 116. 21 Of self-calling self-making preachers, or rather
Anabaptistical praters, and seducers, 124. 22 Of a good and a bad Conscience,
132. 23 Of Life, 137. 24 Of Death, 144.
FINIS
A little dark PICTURE of the Great, Glorious, Unparalled Loyalty, Piety, and
Policy of the Renowned Restorer of Monarchy, Liberty, Tranquillity, and
Prosperity to ENGLAND, SCOTLAND, and IRELAND
The Lord General MONK.
THe World has bred brave Hero's whose bright Name
Darkens the Sun and fills the Trump of Fame.
Whose fragrant memory is still i'^h Bloom,
And never shall wither till the day of Doom.
Whose acts at once astonish, fire, indear
All noble souls that them do know, or hear.
Those are the root, and sourse whence that Renown
Did grow, and flow, which justly does them Crown
With honor, love, and praise, whereby they all
Survive with glory their own Funeral.
Such virtuous great Worthies there have been:
But they died childlesse sure; for we have seen
Nothing but dwarfs in this base, Iron age
(Except in Treason, Avarice, and Rage,
Wherein such horrid Monsters have been known
As never before in all the world were shown)
Until our true Saint GEORGE did rise and kill
That hideous viprous brood, who plotted still
In their enchanted Castle to enslave,
Torment and keep us till we found our grave.
A dismal darkness has this sinful Land
Ore spread e're since by a cur^^, cruel hands
That glorious King Charles the first.
Light was quenched, whose happy rays,
While we enjoyed him turned our nights to days.
That orifice at which we all have bled
Almost to death (our martyred Sovereigns head)
MONK now has stopped by his pious Art,
And healed with his faithful, Loyal Heart.
Twelve years we have had nor day, peace, Law, nor Spring;
He gives us all by bringing home our King.
The City gates he broke and threw aside
T'unhinge Rebellion, that great CHARLES might ride
With Love and Safety, there from whence did spring
His hurt, his help; loss, gain; joy, suffering.
Our bane is now our balm: Such is his skill
We Are now preserved by that which did us kill.
The bloody Sword by his just loyal vote
Has made rank poison our best antidote.
Some say there is a Phoenix, but we see
A Fable is become a truth in thee.
Thou art the healer, honor, Atlas, love,
Of three expiring Kingdoms. As above
A Crown of bliss attends thee, so below
Prayers, praises, thanks, which really we owe*
Thy matchless merits, we shall duly pay
With zeal, and joy, until our dying day.
We have felt the difference 'twixt Law, and Lust;
'Twixt cruel perjured Tyrants, and a Just,
Mild, gracious Prince, whose love, and piety
Were his chief crimes. Our Faith and Loyalty
To CHARLES his Son our hatred shall express
Of their ingratitude, and wickedness,
Who murdered him only for this one thing,
That they themselves might get above the King.
This is our cost and sorrow we soon saw:
For neither Oaths, Religion, nor Law
Could bound or stop their furious ambition,
Pride, Avarice, Rebellion, or Sedition.
They racked us, robbed us, hatched plots to destroy
Our Naboth's, their good vineyards to enjoy.
Thus bolted, beaten, burdened we had spent
Our days in slavery, misery, banishment,
Had we not been freed and restored by thee
From Tyrants Traitors to our Liberty.
When therefore (Famous MONK) thy body shall
Receive a writ of ease to rest from all
Those pining cares, black dangers, palsy fears,
Which canker, and consume our flying years;
(Mirror of men) thine Epitaph shall be
Sighs, tears, and groans, not varnisht poetry.
Not stones but hearts shall make thy monument
Which will endure till time it self be spent
And thus those seeds which thou this year did sow,
Will root, live, sprout, and till the last day grow:
Two harvests thou shall reap, honor in this,
And in the next World endless joy, peace, bliss.
On thy rare Tomb this shall be writ.
Here lies the Elixir of all wit,
The sum, the map, the Quintessence
Of Prudence, Loyalty, Sapience.
Englands Savior and Renown:
Who gave his Sovereign his Crown,
And would not snatch it as his own,
Although he might have climbed the Throne.
A world of wonders was this man:
A Caesar, Soldier Christian:
A Son of Mars, and yet a He is an exception to that too general rule Nulla
^ides pietas que viris qui castra sequuutur.
Saint;
Who loved colors, but loathed paint.
Rich and Righteous, good and great;
The pillar of our Church and State;
A scourge to Rebels, friends to those
That were not the Kings traitrous Foes.
Most valiant, yet durst not draw
His sword against King, Oaths, or Law.
Known unto none, yet known by all
To free three Ki^gdomes from their Thrall.
Though others scrambled for Empire
He only did to obey aspire.
Phanatiques he id dissipate
Because both truth, and peace they hate.
Lambert and's Locusts he o'rethrew,
Yet did not fight that bloody crew.
By stratagems he made them yield;
With words, not swords he won the field,
The maul of errors, Heresies
(Which do bemist, and dim the eyes
Of those that follow false new lights,
Until they lose their Fame, Faith, Sights)
He was like subtle Fabius,
By wise delays he saved us.
Religious pure, and lovely Face,
Which Blood and Treason did disgrace,
Spot, and deform, he did make fair
And beautiful: For the right heir
Of our late King (the best of Men)
He restored to's Diadem.
He wooed, agreed, and Married
Great Britain to her Sacred Head,
Whom fraud and Force had severed
From his true Spouse and Royal Bed.
This is a little: All the rest
Of him by silence will be best
Expressed who did far excel
Whatever Wit, or words can tell.
But hark! Me thinks I hear some call and say,
Down with these common stones, throw them away,
MONK cannot die. He therefore needs no verse
T'embalm his Name, or to adorn his Hearse;
Nor yet to give a Tomb a tongue to tell,
Whose dust in that dark silent house does dwell.
His true Allegiance, and Piety
Will make him live to all eternity.
It Is true. I Have done: But will not cease to pray,
May England have a MONK until doom^-day.
Amen. T. ^.

Upon the Happy, Safe and miraculous return of our Sacred Sovereign CHARLES II.
to his Scepter, City, and Subjects on the XXIX. day of May 1660; A short,
Loyal, and Cordial
WElcome great King of Hearts! We Have had all night
E're since we wanted thy refulgent light
Who art our only Sun, plagues, curses, wars
Oppression, Rapine, Ruin, Faction, Jarrs,
Bonds, blood, confusion, woe's, calamities,
Gaols, gibbets, axes, plunder, Heresies
Have been the sad, but just effects of those
Black crimes, and bloody paths, too many chose
Loved, and resolved to tread: We now do see
At once the want, and worth of Mornarchi^.
Our Law, peace, safety, properties and all
Our comforts were eclipsed by the fall
Of glorious CHARLES, yea killed and buried
With him for them and us who lost his head.
But thy miraculous Return does give
A resurrection to them, for they live
Again by thy reviving influence,
Whose presence quickens them. The sight and sense
Of this choice mercy unto us shall be
Both cords and chains of faithfulness to thee
And love; praise, thanks to our good gracious God,
Who has destroyed our Serpents, burned his Rod.
Thy safe arrival makes a joyful spring,
The Heavens weep for joy to see our King.
Since thou did rise and guild our Hemisphere
With thy bright beams, no ominous cloud appear.
Those beasts of prey that hunted to have fed
O'th sheep and Shepherd too, are all now fled.
Our day is unto them a dismal night,
Their dark deeds, make them fear, hate, shun the light.
Peace, plenty, gladness, triumphs do express
And prove our Loyalty, our happiness:
Men, earth, air, water, fire do all agree
To guard, obey, feast, honor, welcome thee.
Our pangs are gone: The twenty ninth of May,
We Will therefore call Englands happy Birthday.
Thy people had hard labor, swoonings, cries,
Cares, faintings, fears watered with weeping eyes,
Did burden, rack, afflict them, till they saw
Their Child, and Father (the true spring of Law,
Justice and power) to their longing arms,
Brought and delivered without blood, or harms.
But now they have forgot their Throws, and sing
Being safely brought to bed of a brave King.
Whose virtues are too big for art, prose, verse,
To limn, to hold, or fully to rehearse.
Whose life's a miracle, whose patience,
Is truly wonderful; whose innocence,
Sufferings, sobriety, desire of peace
His enemies, and comforts did increase.
A King, yet without Subjects, rich, yet poor,
Born to a Throne, yet cast upon the floor,
By Rebels hands who threw their Sovereign down,
To raise themselves and to usurp his Crown.
Forced into'th Field of war; amongst enemies
Abroad, at home, he was; who to surprise
And kill him did pray, plot, fight, pay, combine;
Though by all Laws both humane and divine
They were forbidden those hellish, horrid crimes
Which Christians durst never act in former times.
The weapons which they used for their defense
Being only prayers, tears, flight, obedience.
Deprived he was of Friends, rest, means by those
That professed Loyalty, but were deadly Foes.
His guard was dangers, his associates
Want, fear, distress, dishonor; his estate
Was seized and divided for this end,
To Increase rebellious numbers to defend
Their theft, and sacrilege with Gun, and Sword,
Against their Oaths, our Laws, his right, Gods word.
And which is more, they voted to repeal,
Null and prohibit what God does reveal
To be his will, Law, and command to all:
(We might nor pay, nor pray, but for his Fall)
'Twas death and treason made by them to do
What Reason, Conscience, Scripture binds us to,
(Thus we may see how wickedness proceeds
From evil thoughts to words, from words to deeds
Black as the place where all such shall remain
Without repentance in horrors and pain.
Firebrarnds, and Rebels being condemned to dwell
By a just God in endless flames in hell.)
But all these blows did hew, polish, and square
Thee for Gods Temple. Great afflictions are
The road to Heaven, physic, wholesome food,
Which God prescribes, and gives his for their good.
Prosperity, us surfeits, crosses cure;
The potion's bitter, the effect both sweet and sure,
Love, power, mercy have refined thee,
And brought thee out o'th furnace for to be
A praise to God, a blessing to this Land,
Which was consumed by his angry hand.
His dispensations are just, gracious, rare,
No age, or story can with those compare,
Which he has showred on thy Royal Head,
Since miracles did cease, and go to bed.
On that same day where thou did first see Light
He did restore thee to thy Throne, and Right.
Armies excluded, Armies brought thee in;
A Rump was guilty of that odious Sin
Thy sad exile; a Loyal Parliament
Did call thee home from thy long banishment.
The City fed those flames that did consume
Our peace, the City also did perfume
Their streets with loyal Fires, and put out
The stinking ^aggots of the new-light Rout.
Petitions moved that murder might be done
On our ^ust King; Addresses begged his Son
Might be restored to this benighted I Will
Which has been a dark Egypt all this while.
Our crimes deprived us of our Sovereign,
The sins of Rebels and their frantic Train
Together with the cries of pious men,
Prevailed with God to give's a King again.
That King by whom all other Kings do reign,
Did pilot thee over the dangerous Main.
Those envious gusts which two days hindered
Thy passage to's, in traitorous Lungs were bred.
The Ships, the Sea, the wind that filled the sails
With which, in which, ore which with prosperous gales,
Thou did then sail, they were the Prayers, Tears
And hearts of pious Subjects, whose great ^ears,
Sorrows, and dangers are now vanished,
And by thy happy presence banished.
But terrors, anguish, hotly do pursue
And sting that bloudy^ painted, faithless crew,
Whose consciences, and matchless Villainies
Tell them their guilt, and future miseries.
What Is got by sin does seldom long endure:
Justice is sometimes slow, but always sure.
We Have seen the spring, the summer, and the fall,
The birth, growth, rise, ruin, and death of all
Their wicked plots; Let Us therefore strive to be
Such Subjects, and such Christians, that we
May join Allegiance unto Piety,
As Debt, and Duty to his Majesty:
Since fearing God and honoring the King
Will peace and happiness to England bring.
And let none have so much as one good day,
That will not heartily boch say, and pray,
God save the KING. Amen.
T. G.


