The Zealous, and Impartial PROTESTANT, SHOWING Some great, but less heeded
DANGERS OF POPERY. In Order to Thorough and Effectual Security against it. In a
LETTER To a Member of PARLIAMENT.



LONDON: Printed by M. C. for Henry Brom at the Gun in S. Paul's Churchyard.
1681.

The Zealous and Impartial PROTESTANT.
SIR,
WE have discourst a great deal of the Popish Plot, and the commonly
acknowledged dangers of Popery: On that side we are justly sensible of our
Perils, and have not much need of more Warnings to look about us. But all the
danger of Popery does not lie one way; it has other Methods to advance its
Interests besides Killing and Burning; and of some of those I doubt we are not
sufficiently aware. Like the percht Phesant we look so intently at the danger
that makes the loud Noise, that we little heed the Enemy behind the Bush, that
is ready to shoot us off. I remember I said when I last waited on you, that
there are ways in which Popery is silently promoted; I shall now represent some
of them to you with Honest, and Impartial plainness, as becomes one, who is an
hearty enemy to Popery in all the Steps, and Methods of it. And

THe First occasion of our farther Danger that I shall mention is, the present
Diminution, (not to say Extinction) of Reverence to the Authority of the Church
of England, and the Protestant Reformation, by Law established. Popery was not
thrown out here by Rebellion, Sedition, or popular Tumults; but this Church was
in a regular way Reformed, by the deliberate and grave Counsels of our Rulers;
These our Reformers purged out the Roman Corruptions; and in their steads,
settled the Ancient Primitive Christianity, which was established by all the
Authority of the Kingdom, both Ecclesiastical, and Civil: and this
Establishment in Doctrine, Discipline, and Worship, is that by which we know
the Church of England.

This, our pious Reformers, Kings and Parliaments, by the advice of Learned,
Grave Divines, Bishops, and others, settled, and bound upon us by most solemn
Sanctions; this they fixed as the National Profession, to stand so in all Times,
and not to serve only for a present Expedient (as some talk in their Dream) for
their Reformation they founded upon the Holy Scripture, and upon the Doctrine,
and Practice of the First and Purest Times, of the Primitive Fathers and
Councils, Christ himself being the Cornerstone: And the Grounds being
unalterable, the thing settled on them, ought (in the main) to be so, and must
have been so intended by those Excellent men, who so well knew what they did,
and the Reasons of their so doing.

Here was our Religion now purged from Popery; a Religion that in the whole
Constitution of it, has the greatest antipathy to that corrupt Profession;
this is our old Protestantism, that, which was persecuted by Papists with Fire,
and Faggot; that, which diverse of the Reformers themselves sealed with their
Blood, in opposition to Popish Idolatries, and Superstitions: This was the Way,
the Religion of the happy Elizabeth-Days, which are yet so Celebrated, so
glorious among Protestants; and that finally, which was stood to, contended
for, to the Death, by the Royal Martyr, King Charles the First. Here then is
the standing Bulwark against Popery, this is Primitive Christianity restored,
our Anti-papistry: The Protestantism we understand, and can defend: and the
Establishment and Maintenance of this, is our security against the Popish
Depravations.

When we would destroy this, some thing we must set up; the Church of England
is that which our Protestant Lawgivers have erected, have by so many Laws
confirmed; This now is twisted with our Monarchy, and the whole frame of our
Civil Government: so that the overthrow of one, will be the destruction of
both. If this Church should be overturned (which God forbid) confusion in the
State must follow, and then Anarchy, and cutting Throats; and it is most likely,
Popery at last. For when this Constitution is ruined, we must to new Modelling;
And where shall we rest? Every Pretense, every Way has as much right, as any
other of the Competitors; and then we fall into a Scufle, and endless
Disorders; and who but the Roman Church will get by that? If this Fortification
should be dismantled, before we could get another in the place of it, Popery,
in all likelihood, would be with us.

Now this Bulwark we are (many of us) throwing down, and taking away the
Ordinance, and Artillery: Or rather we have done it, in great part; and have
made the Church weak, and defenseless. The Authority, the Coercive Power, in
effect, is gone: And what does Vice, or Humor, or Faction care for Words,
Papers, Arguments? Excommunication is the penalty, and we know how little that
is made to signify: so that the Church is obeyed by as many as please, and as
long as those please: Such as will not at all, or but in this, and that, take
their own course, and there is but little remedy. This is the plain, sad truth.
Laws we have still, but the multitude of Offenders (with other things) make all
in a manner unpracticable. The Authority of the Church, and the Reverence, is
lost and gone; the People dissolved, and at loose: They fear not, they care not
for Ecclesiastical Laws, or Penalties: They will follow their own Ways, and the
Teachers they have heaped up to themselves; and the few that are left with us,
are (diverse of them) ready to be gone too, as soon as they are punished, or
take Pet, and the Governors, and Ministers of the Church do not humor them. So
that the strength of the Church is broken; little of the Fortress is left
standing, besides the dead Walls; and even these many would have down too: Down
with it, down with it even to the ground, is the Cry.

This is a sad part of the state of our Church, and this its weak, almost
ruined Condition, has no doubt been the great temptation to many to desert it.
Every Constitution, every Government ought to have Authority, and Power; or it
is Precarious, and will be in a little time Contemptible: And ours having been
made so by the loss of its strength, and due force, no wonder if it falls into
disesteem, even among diverse that formerly revered it: No wonder if these,
being so prejudiced, betake themselves to a Church which has Authority, has
Power. They have been brought up (perhaps) under a fense of the necessity of
Ecclesiastical Government and Authority; of the Obedience, and Reverence that
is due to the Church, and its Constitutions; and of the Mischiefs, Schisms, and
Confusions that arise from the want of these: And then observing, that our
Church is so weakened, so disabled, so despised and affronted, they bid adieu to
it, and betake themselves to that Corrupt, Idolatrous Church, that yet has
Authority, has Rule over its Members.

This, Sir, I dare say, has been one of the chief occasions of the late
increase of Popery, and Papists, and the revolt of so many from the Reformed
Communion. For one, and the most immediate consequent of want of Power in any
Church, is general Carelessness, and Neglects, and the loss of all Solemnity in
Worship: Congregations will be thin, and their Deportment; and public
Devotions negligent, and indecent, which greatly scandalize the regular and
truly devout, who are therefore the more easily tempted to put themselves among
those with whom there is more appearance of decence and solemnity, in the
exercise of Religion.

This has been a Rock of offense, and Stone of stumbling: The way to remove
it, and to prevent the further Mischiefs, would be to Establish the Church of
England, and to give it Authority.

We are at present very zealous against Popery, (thanks be to God for any true
Zeal against false Worship) but methinks too much of our Zeal is only Negative;
we are for throwing down Popery, but we talk little of establishing any thing;
and while it is so, our Zeal is lame, and imperfect, and will never effect any
thing to purpose. If we will secure our selves against Papism effectually, we
must fix, and establish some Constitution of Religion, that may be a constant
Fence against it. Popery we will not have; so far we are right, but what are we
for? Something we must: Popery will not be run down by Atheism; if we have no
Religion, or none Established (which will come to the same) the Roman Religion
will prevail, at long run, in despite of us: Some Religion (the worst) will be
too hard for none; at least 'twill have men's Hearts, and then above half the
work is done. We must not think to keep out Popery by mere brutal force, as the
Heathens attempted to extinguish Christianity: If we would go the right, the
effectual way, we should endeavor it by professing, by settling a better, a
more Catholic, more ancient, more holy Religion than theirs. A bad Religion is
most effectually driven out by a good; not by none.

Well, something must be established; And what do we desire? Would we have
Presbytery? That is new; that is different from the Primitive usage of the
Christian Church, that is unformed yet by the very Nation of the Patrons, it is
an Idea different as every man's fancy is, the men themselves have not yet
agreed upon the Scheme; and God knows when they would agree, if the Matter were
left to them; and when that is done, What may it cost us before it can be
established? How long may it be before the People are well reconciled to the
Novelty? And if ever it be established, the Ecclesiastical Supremacy is gone
from the right place, and indeed the Royal Power every where is lost. The King
is a Subject. He has only changed his Lord, one for many, the Pope, for the
Synod and Elders. The Gentry and People are, ipso facto, Slaves; and then we
have talked, and contrived well for Liberty. Let Presbytery be considered where
it has been, in Geneva, Scotland, little Essays of it in England, and then let
any tell me if it be not so. He that owns not this, knows it not, We shall then
neither Marry, nor take a Servant, nor dispose of a Child, nor order any of our
Domestique Affairs, without the cognizance, and arbitrament of the Elders:
Every word we speak, every thing we do, must come under their censure, and be
exposed to their Chastisement. It will, in short, be a Yoke to our Necks, which
neither We, nor our Children will ever be able to bear. And I doubt not but
those that understand themselves and it, will be ready to say, We would not
have this. Let those that know it not, read the late History of Scotland, and
then speak if they would.

But what then would we be at? Is it Independency we would have? This is a
thing different from the practice of the whole Christian World, unknown to
Ancient, or later Times, except here in the days of Rebellion, and in New
England now. Popery takes away one of the Elements from the Laity in the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, this takes away both Elements from all, but a
very few; for they impropriate the Communion to their separated Company. Popery
takes away part of one Sacrament, these take away the whole of both Sacraments;
for they allow not Baptism to be Administered, but to the Children of their own
Sect. Popery keeps the Scriptures up in an unknown Tongue; and these make it a
dead Letter, a nothing to all, but those that have their Spirit to understand,
and interpret. Popery damns all the World, that is without the pale of their
pretended Catholic Church, and these unchurch, unchristian all, but a few
Hypocrites, Phanatiques of their own sort. One of them, Lewis Du Moulin,
Cromwell's Historian in Oxford, has writ a Pamphlet lately, to prove, That not
one in an 100000 ( nay, probably not one in a Million) since Adam, shall be
saved; and that one is an Independent, no doubt. Popery requires auricular
Confession to a Priest; and these require a particular Story of every man's
Conversion before their Congregation, as the first necessary condition of
Communion. Popery pretends that the Roman Church is Infallible; and these
reckon every one of their private Spirits to be little less. So that this in
many things symbolizeth with, and is as intolerable as Popery it self; and what
the Tyranny of it is, may be read in the Story of our late Confusions,
particularly in the History of Independency: And New England can let us know,
how gentle they are, where they have Power, and how much for Liberty of
Conscience; for they there Hang up their own Offspring, the Quakers, for
professing, and living to the Principles, that they themselves teach.

And both Presbyterians, and Independents agree with Papists in this also, viz.
In binding the heavy burdens of their own disputable (and some of them impious,
and absurd) Doctrines, upon the Minds and Consciences of men, under the penalty
of being Vnchurch'd, and Ruined: They are both severe Inquisitors into men's
Opinions, and will allow no latitude of thinking beyond their dear Orthodoxy,
contained in their large Confessions of Faith; which are Creeds they make, over
and above the Apostolic, and Primitive ones, as the Papists do, teaching for
Doctrines (necessary fundamental Doctrines) the Traditions of men, those of
their own Party.

These therefore I suppose, and hope, will not suit us; I am sure they will not
suit either Monarchy in Government, nor the Liberty of the Subject: No, they
will comport with nothing but Democracy, or Anarehy, both which are Tyrannies,
and the worst sort. And I believe few or none of the intelligent English
Gentlemen can think of them.

But, what then can we desire? what can we propose to have? Is there some know
not what, yet to be found out? Is there any new Models yet to be invented,
unknown, unpractised in any Age, or Nation of the Christian World? Many there
are in the Brains of conceited men; whose Windmill shall be set up? What shall
give it Reverence and Authority? What shall secure it against the rest that
equally pretend? How shall it get hold upon the Consciences of men? or will we
have a Religion without having Conscience concerned?

What ever is set up as Religious Security against Popery, must stand on the
grounds of Scripture, right Reason, and the best and purest Antiquity; Popish
Corruptions do all consist in departure from these. If what we endeavor to
establish be impeachable by Scripture, Reason, or Antiquity; we destroy our own
Grounds, and disable our own Arguments against Popish Depravations. Upon these
then we must stand, by these we must establish; and if these things are so,
what can we desire, what can we think to have but our Old, Protestant, Legal
Constitution of the Church of England? What but this, which is agreeable to
Scripture, Reason, and Primitive Christianity (as has been proved by many
learned men, to the shame both of Papists, and Phanaticks of all sorts)
accommodate to our Civil Government; wrought into our Fundamental Laws; suited
to, and sufficient for all our needs; sober in its Principles, moderate in its
Government and Discipline: Its Articles are not imposed on the Conscience as
all Fundamentals, and of necessity to Salvation (as Popish, and Presbyterian
Principles are) but as pious wholesome Doctrines, Articles of Consent, for the
avoidance of Controversies, and Disputes; its Prayers are Grave and Serious,
without affectation, or doubtful Tenants: Its Ceremonies few, ancient, decent,
declared to be in themselves alterable and indifferent; its Power is owned to
be only Spiritual; what other any Ecclesiastics have, is acknowledged to be
the favor of Kings; it invades no rights of Princes, it secures Obedience to
Government, and the interests of Societies: Its Penalties are all for
Correction, not Destruction; it punishes none for bare Opinions; it readily
receives Offenders into its Bosom on repentance; it is not forward to denounce
Curses against Dissenters: It is very Candid, Charitable, and Ingenuous to
other Churches; it was reformed by just Authority, with great Temper, and
avoidance of Extremes. These particulars, and a great many more to the same
general purpose, have been fully proved by the learned Asserters of our Church,
and lately in a particular worthy Discourse of the Moderation of the Church of
England, which is so much opposed because so unhappy to be so little understood.

It will much concern us (now especially) to study and consider this
Constitution, which is the only mean between dangerous Extremes; that, and that
only which can be made to stand: Other Models are Romantic, Vnpracticable,
they may entertain the imagination of fantastical, busy, unquiet Innovators;
but will never be brought into a constant settlement of Practice; or be made
any security to us against Popish Superstitions: This, by the Grace of God, and
Wise, Sober Counsels, and Endeavors, the Church of England may: And if any
Mercy yet remain for so sinful a People, it will be made so. It is, I am sure,
the duty of every Friend to his Country, of every hearty enemy to Popery, in
his place to endeavor it.

Especially Sir, such Gentlemen as you, Representatives of your Country in
Parliament, I humbly think are concerned to Consult, and Act your part, in
order to it. We honor you, and thank God for your great Zeal against Popery;
you will effectually express it to your future Glory, and your own, and the
Nations lasting Security and Happiness, by endeavoring to make firm, and to
fasten our Foundations, by helping up the decayed Banks, and Dams, which the
Wisdom and Piety of our Kings, and Parliaments have made against the Inundation
of that Ocean of Errors, and Superstitions; by laboring to build up our almost
ruined Walls, and to fortify our Bulwarks, viz. To strengthen the Religion of
our Protestant Reformation, by Law Established; that it may be yet more firmly,
and securely settled. This, Sir, I hope you in particular will endeavor, and
not give occasion for that Reproach, that your Zeal is not for the safety of
your Religion, but of your Lands. You cannot secure the latter, but by making
the former safe; nor do this (I humbly believe) any other way. Your Father,
Sir, and other Relations, were zealous Adherers to this Excellent Church, and
suffered much for their King, and It, being very sensible of these truths. You
inherit their great Estate, and I hope you do these their Virtues, You had
through God's Blessing, and their Care, a pious Education in this Protestant
Way, this you still profess, and I hope will adhere to on all occasions.

You see the Churches Enemies on the other side, those that so lately destroyed
it, the King, Government and all, are now as bufie as ever, and seem to be
confident to do their Work again; they are always stirring, and industrious in
our Difficulties and Dangers; these are their opportunities: Their business
also is to destroy us, which if they could effect, they would by that make way
for Popery, which they seem so earnest against. You cannot but observe how they
outrage, traduce, abuse, and fly at the poor distressed Church of England,
the Fathers, and Sons of it. They think themselves so secure of succeeding,
that they do in a manner declare already: They have been always seeking
Pretenses, and are now glad at heart of the Popish Plot, because of the
opportunity, and advantages it gives them: and it is as plain as Light, that
they would use it to ruin us the other way; and if they succeed, we are as
certainly undone. I hope you will not be so intent on one Danger, as to
neglect, and oversee the other: Yea, we fall at last into the same which we
most fear, if they once drive us into Confusions in Religion, which must
unavoidably follow the destruction of the Church of England. So that with great
reason I may affirm, that these Enemies of it, are promoters of Popery,
notwithstanding the loud noise they make against it. I hope when it pleases
God, and the King, that the Parliament shall meet, You, with the rest of our
Patriots, will consider for the Confirmation, and I stablishment of our Legal,
Protestant Constitution, against the dangers of Fanatical Confusions, as well
as those of Popish Superstitions.

Whether the great Assembly of our Representatives shall think fit to desire
some smaller Alterations, and Abatements for the gaining reasonable Dissenters
(some will never be satisfied) or not; it is not for me to conjecture. All
sober Sons of the Church of England will no doubt acquiesce, and be content
with what the Wisdom of the Nation shall think fit: But when that Point is
resolved whether one way, or the other, it is to be hoped Strengthening, and
Settlement, with such Allowances, or without, will follow; that we may not be
always floating. This is the longing expectation of all Wise, and Good men, and
it must be Moderate, Grave, Religious Counsels that must contrive, and effect
this Happiness for us: Many such no doubt will be offered at your Meeting, I
hope you will go with the Healers of our Breaches, and not with the fierce men
that would drive things to Extremes. I am sure you can get nothing by
Confusions, and Dissettlements: Pray God disappoint those that would have
Distractions, because they think they can get by them.

I remember, walking with you last Summer in your Park, you were pleased to ask
me, What way there was to fecure the Church of England under a Popish
Successor, though he should be Mild, and Gentle, and not bent upon the
enforcing of his Religion? One chief ground of the Question was, That the King
bestows the Bishoprics, and many other Ecclesiastical Preferments, and it
cannot well (as you reasonably offered) be supposed, but that He will, in that
case, bestow them on such as either are Popishly affected, or not very averse
to, or zealous against that Religion: Or if the King should do otherwise, and
bestow them upon the most Worthy, Sincere, thorough Protestants, yet the People
would entertain Jealousies of them, and never think them such: which would
destroy their Authority, and Reverence, and occasion the dispersion of the
People yet further, into Corners.

To this I said, That I did not pretend to offer public expedients in such
great and weighty matters; but I thought, that if by any means of Justice and
safety to the Rights of the Crown, (such as consent in that case would be)
Canonical Elections should, during such time, be granted to each particular
Church, and the King should please not to determine them in their choice to a
Person by his Conge de' stire, (as now) but leave them to their liberty of
Choosing as they thought fit, (as in some former times they did) each Dean and
Chapter to choose the Bishop of the Diocese, and their own Members; that this
might be reasonable Security. And if the Bishop, the Dean and Chapter, the
Clergy of each Diocese, or distinct Deanery, or the Universities, should have
the right given them of presenting to the King's Livings (during such time of a
Popish Successor) this way I humbly thought, might in all likelihood, secure us
against those Dangers. For the Clergy of the Church of England are of all men
most concerned in point of Interest, as well as Principles, and profession to
oppose Popery; and as far as lawfully they may, all advances toward it. (This
one would think should need no proof, but it seems it does among some, and I
shall clear that Matter by and by.) And they would no doubt, take care from
time to time, to Elect such as were most fast to our Protestant Constitution,
most eminent in their Lives, and Learning, and most able and ready to oppose
Popish Corruptions; and so the Church of England might stand, if direct, and
professed Violence were not offered to it: To this purpose I then said, I think
on the occasion of his Majesty's gracious offers for Protestant Security under
a Successor of the other Religion. I do not know what opportunities may be
offered again, the next Session, but if any such be, and this particularly
might be obtained, I hope it will be accepted, and methinks some such thing
should be desired. But, Sir, I am no Projector, I speak all this with all
imaginable submission to the wiser Judgments of my Superiors.

CHAP. II.
II. ANother occasion I note of the increase and danger of Popery, is our ill
treatment of our own Protestant Clergy, those of the Church of England. Their
Predecessors were they who first formed our Reformation upon the soberest, and
best grounds of Opposition to the Roman Church (as I have shown) and by their
Blood sealed our Protestant Establishments: And the Successors of those blessed
men, Bishops, and other Episcopal Divines, have, ever since, been the Scourges
of Popery, who by their learned and excellent Writings, have confuted, exposed,
triumphed over the numerous Errors of that Church: These have been the grand
Champions of the Protestant Cause, that have fought our Battles against the
stoutest, and most daring Enemies, with glorious success; such were Bishop
Jewel, Bishop Morton, Bishop Andrews, Archbishop Laud, Bishop Hall, Bishop
Davenant, Archbishop Usher, Archbishop Bramhal, Bishop Tailor, Bishop Cozens,
Dr. Hammond, Mr. Chillingworth, Mr. Mead, Dean Stillingfleet, Dean Tillotson,
Dean Lloyd, Dr. Henry More, Dr. Brevint; these and innumerable others, have
strenuously, and plainly refuted, bafled, and disproved the Popish
Depravations: And every where, men of the same sort, in all parts of England,
are very busy both by Books, and Sermons to render those Corruptions odious,
and detestable as they deserve: Particularly we have an eminent, aggregate
Instance, in the Reverend Episcopal Clergy of the City of London: How many
learned, substantial, convictive Sermons have they preached against the Popish
Doctrines, and Practice, since our late Fears and Dangers? I believe there have
not been such delivered in that City against those Superstitions, since the
Foundation of it: More sound, accomplished, judicious Preachers, it certainly
never had; never any that understood the Roman Falsities better, never any that
were more resolved, or more active Enemies to them. The Divines, the Ancient,
and the Modern, of the Church of England, principally, have by their Preaching,
and their Writings, so informed, seasoned, and spirited the People against
Popery, as we find at this Day; from them they have their chief Grounds, from
them their courage of Opposition. It Is true, some few others have written
something, Mr. Baxter, and Mr. Pool, have labored worthily: Dr. Owen has said
somewhat to Fiat Lux, and there are some Sermons of the Presbyterians extant,
Morning Lectures against Popery: These are the most, the chief of their
Performances I ever heard of. Indeed the People of the Dissenting Party talk
commonly, as if the Nonconformist Ministers had written the most and best
Books against Popery, and had this way shown themselves more zealous
Adversaries to it, than the Conformable Clergy have done: But they do but show
their ignorance in this, as they do in other Matters of the like nature. And
the ground of their Mistake is this, That they take all the Books which their
Ministers have written against the Church of England, to be written against
Popery. They have indeed written more than a Horseload of Books of this sort;
but what they have written against the Church of Rome, a Boy may carry at his
Back. I would not disparage any Protestant Writings against the Papists, nor
appear partial to the Episcopal Divines; Let the World compare, and judge of
which side have been the most, and most considerable Opposites to the Popish
cause: Let any the most prejudiced against the Church of England, read both
sorts, and then judge, who have been the Original Authors, and who have only
used the others Reading, Learning, and Reasonings. I would leave the Matter
with the most partial to Dissenters, to determine, when they have read, when
they have considered. There is no man certainly of understanding, or experience
of the World, but must grant that the chief, the most successful Antagonists of
Popery have been the Clergy of the Church of England. These the Papists have
always most apprehended, opposed most; the others they have taken little notice
of; they have not shown that they reckoned them considerable. This is plain,
and clear to all the World. Others make loud Outcries against the word Popery,
and Papist, but the Episcopal Divines do the Business.

And now, since we are zealous against Popery, it might be expected that we
should cherish, and encourage those that fight for us against it, and have come
off laden with so many Trophies of Victory; that have so asserted our Cause,
and given our Enemies so many Mortal Wounds; that are still ready for this
Warfare, and always prepared for our Defense; one would think, I say, we should
unanimously love, respect, and cherish such useful Friends, and Leaders.

But alas! The Matter is quite otherwise: There are not any Ministers of any
Religion in the World that are so disrespected, and ill treated: I mean not by
Popish and Sectarian Enemies only, from such they expect bad usage; but from
many of those whom they instruct, whom they serve, and who pretend to be
Children of that Church of which they are Ministers; at least they are such as
do not openly disown it. The People of all other Religions in the World
reverence, and respect their Priests, and Teachers; the very Turks, and
Heathens do; this do Papists, and the Sects of all sorts, and it is a natural
consequence from love, and respect to Religion: But we (many of us) vilify,
and depress ours; give them no respect for their Work, their Office sake; yea,
they are so much the less for it with us: We love to vex, and reproach them: We
cheerfully hear any defamatory Lies their Enemies invent against them; we are
ready to spread, and publish such Stories, and seem to delight in so doing: We
call them by Nicknames of contempt, and scarce think any bad enough: We are
apt to censure all their actions and their words, putting the worst, and most
uncharitable Constructions on them: We pinch them in their Dues, detain, and
arrest their Rights from them; think every thing too much that they have,
though it be by the most Ancient and Fundamental Laws; and many, not content
with the harvest of great Tithes, the Impropriations, snatch the Gleanings, the
small things that are left also, from them: We allow all others to grow rich by
any means, right or wrong, Lawyers, Physicians, Tradesmen; not enduring almost
that our Clergy should have any thing; denying them any Employment (or
regretting it) that has any Power, Reputation, or Advantage; and forcing them
upon a great deal of Secular Business that is troublesome, and odious, to
recover their Dues, and Childrens Bread, that is withheld, and wrested from
them; increasing their Work, lessening, taking away their just, legal, ancient
Profits; envying the encouragements of Learning that are left, the Dignities of
the Church, though spent in Hospitality upon our selves; clamouring at them,
ready for occasions to seize them, and desiring such, though Englishmen not
Foreigners; our Flesh and Blood, our Children, our Brothers, our Nephews,
possess them. These sad things, every one that observes may see, how much they
are so, and a great part of the Conforming Clergy, perhaps the greatest, feel
all these instances of ill Usage from some or others. I do not say that all of
us treat them thus, (God forbid) Persons of Breeding, Piety, and Worth, usually
are kind, civil, and respectful to this Order; but yet how common the other
Treatment is, may be observed in most Conversations, and in the ordinary course
of things among us.

And now, Sir, what could we do more for the advantage of Popery, and the
promoting of it? What more than to pelt, vilify, and dishearten their grand
Enemies? What more to give color to their Slander, that we Protestants are a
People of no Faith, no Religion? What more, to render the Protestant
Instructions we receive from them, contemptible among their Hearers; and their
Oppositions of the Roman Church insignificant? What can we do more to expose
them to all the temptations of the Roman Emissaries, than to loosen them from
their proper Guides, and to destroy all Reverence, and Respect toward them?
Smite the Shepherds and the Sheep will fly. What more to affix the Popish
slander on our Reformation, that it was but hatred of the Clergy, and love to
their Lands? What more toward the destroying our now flourishing Protestant
Universities, the discouragement of all Learning, and consequently, the letting
in of Ignorance, and Popery upon us? What can we do more to dishearten men of
Parts from entering into the sacred Function, and filling the Church with men
wholly ignorant, and unlearned, to the great Scandal, and certain Ruin of it?
To all these Mischiefs does the ill treatment of those of the sacred Function
tend, (which will end in Popery) besides the disingenuity, unreasonableness and
impiety of it.

Which way think you Sir, did the Jews and Heathens of old, endeavor to
destroy Christianity? Was it not by vilifying, and persecuting the Preachers of
it? Which way does every Sect endeavor to destroy another; is it not by
opposing, and disgracing the Teachers, and Leaders? What surer way is there to
undermine, and ruin Popery, than the rendering their Priests, and Jesuits vile
among the People; and the lessening their Authority, and Power over them? And
what more direct course to destroy the Protestant Religion, than the vilifying
the Protestant Clergy, and rendering them of no account or estimation? Is not
this the way the Fanatic Whiggs take to Ruin us? Against whom do they spit
their Venom, and bend their chief Force, but against the Bishops and Ministers
of our Church? And will not the disgracing of them do the Papists as much
service? On the other hand, what is the way that all Sects and Professions take
to uphold, and promote their own Persuasion; is it not to encourage, and
cherish their Teachers? Do they not honor, and respect them? Do they not
vindicate their Reputations on all occasions, and are they not zealous for
them? To trouble, to vilify, or speak against their Preachers, is to touch
them in the apple of their Eye; they are very tender, and concerned here: And
by this means they maintain the Reputation, and Interest of their respective
Professions: And do not we by the contrary Practice, lay the Honor, and
Strength of ours in the Dust, and make way for the wild Beasts of the Roman
Forest to break in upon, and to destroy us? This certaintly is as direct a
Course as we can take to promote Popery, the great Object of our present Fears.

I know, Sir, all this will be extremely ungrateful Discourse to some, and
provoke them to pour out their usual Reproaches against the Clergy. Ignorance,
and Ill-living, will presently be objected, aggravated to the height: These
will be pleaded to justify the ill usage I have represented, and to invite
worse? And it would be wonderful indeed, if in so great a Body of men as the
Clergy are, viz. Nine or Ten Thousand, (it may be more) there should not be
Instances found to give color to such Reproaches; and if there should not be
some to deserve very bad Characters. But let it be considered, that the far
greatest part of Livings, are poor Vicarages of 20, 30, or 40 Pounds a Year,
into such Patrons must put whom they can get, and Bishops that admit, know not
men's ill Lives, and the Laws are content with very slender qualifications for
Learning; nor are great Matters necessary for every Country Village; and this
poor condition of so great a number of the Clergy sets them into mean
Conversation, and by their low and bad Company, they are tempted (and often
purposely so) to disorders; which then are triumphantly published, the men are
despised, and the whole Order for their sakes. Some are surprised; for some
Traps are laid, and they are industriously drawn into Scandal on purpose to
defame them, and the whole Clergy, and it cannot be denied but that too many
are Clouds without Water, spots in our Feasts, Diotrephes's, Demas's, Judas's,
not only in the smaller Cures, but in the more considerable Preferments: Many,
most of those, the Laity present to, and do not always prefer for worth, but
for diverse other, sometimes, very undue considerations; all which considered,
it cannot be, but Scandals must arise among so great a Body of men, in such
Circumstances; and then they having so many Enemies, of so many sorts (
Atheists, Papists, Fanatics, Worldlings, Debauchees,) who watch for their
haltings, and rejoice when they fall, who are ready to invent so many malicious
evil things of them, and to publish, and spread what they hear, or what they
make, (their interest being to have them and the Church vilified, and despised)
it could not be, but that they must suffer under manifold Reproaches, though
they were all wise, cautious, innocent; how much more when there are diverse
ill, unwise, unwary men among them? and in all great Bodies in the World, in
all times even the best, such mixtures have been: And even the Good, the most
Excellent have their Faults, and Imperfections, which when ill will is to
represent, and comment upon them, are sometimes so heightened, and improved as
to blacken them all over, and to make them appear very vile to the World.

But after all this, it must be said, that the Church of England (blessed be
God for it) has a great number of most Excellent Divines, men of great Piety,
Parts, and Learning; substantial powerful Preachers; Pious, Sober, Virtuous
Livers; such, as for all kinds of Ability, this Nation never had greater,
better, more. Let my former Instance of the Clergy of London be considered, as
an evidence of this: Their worth is so great, and shines so bright, that the
Adversaries of our Church cannot but acknowledge it. Mr Baxter, in one of his
late Books (the most sharp he has written against us) owns that he meets with
judicious, substantial Sermons, almost in every Church in London, where he
happens to go: And up and down in the Country, every where, one may find very
excellent Persons that lie hid, and make no public noise in the World. I have
said this by way of brief, but just Apology, in the behalf of our abused
Clergy; and add, that notwithstanding the ill Character they lie under, among
some, and the failings, and imperfections they are guilty of, yet this Nation
never had (I believe) a wiser, learneder Clergy upon the whole, since the
Beginnings of it: And the contempt, and ill treatment they meet withal, is one
of the greatest Reasons why they are not better.

General disrespect makes men careless, and incautious in their Lives: Whereas
honor and esteem ingageth them to be circumspect, and wary to maintain that
veneration, and regard that is paid them. So that the men that most upbraid the
Clergy with ill Lives, are the principal causes that many of their lives are so
obnoxious; and they may consider (some of them) whether they do not themselves
for sordid, and unworthy Reasons, bestow their Livings upon such as they
complain of, and so make the reason of their own Complaints.

I have been tedious upon this Head, which yet would require larger
Animadversions, and I shall here crave leave yet farther to note, That

Among all the abuses fastened on our Clergy, there is none more unreasonable,
and unjust than that of their inclination to, or no great distance from the
Roman Church. This reproach our Enemies now, every where, publish, or infinuate
to carry on their design of destroying the Church of England, which shows that
some will say any thing against them, any thing that may render them popularly
odious, though it be never so contrary to all truth, and all appearance. And I
challenge the whole Protestant World, to show a public Instance of more Zeal
against Popery, than our Church of England Divines have expressed against the
Popish Religion, ever since, and before, the discovery of the late Plot. Every
Pulpit can witness their frequent, earnest Sermons against those Superstitions;
and every Stationers Shop can show their numerous excellent Books against them.
Or if these were not, we may consider that Interest will not lie; men,
especially such, as they suppose our Clergy, will not act contrary to that. Can
we think that all the Gentlemen of England that have Abbey, and other Church
Lands, will desire, and endeavor to promote Popery? Are they suppose we
favorers, and friends of that Religion, that in likelihood would divest them
of their Estates? Can we think that the City of London are for blocking up, and
hindering the Current of the Thames? Or that the Lord Mayor and Aldermen have a
plot to translate the Trade to Lincoln or York? Have the Merchants any desires,
or designs for the destroying of Shipping, and Navigation? Shopkeepers
intrigues against Trade? or the Lawyers designs against the Business of
Westminster Hall? If no one is so foolish as to object such inclinations and
endeavors against those, why should they then alledg Popery, any degree of it,
any the least inclination to it, against the Clergy of the Church of England,
whom of all men it would most thoroughly, most certainly undo? And that there is
no Churchman so ignorant, but he must know. For all the Married Clergy lose
their Livelihoods, without remedy, if that be all: All the Prebendaries in the
new Churches which were Monasteries of Monks, must turn out, unavoidably: All
that have been active in Preaching, or writing against Popery (which takes in
the chief part of the Clergy) are in imminent danger of being ruined further
than the loss of their Livelihoods amounts too. If there should be any that
think of saving themselves by Conformity; they can look on that only as better
than being utterly undone, not as a thing otherwise desirable. For the uncouth
work with which they are unacquainted, the servile subjection to their
Superiors, to which they have not been used, and above all, the hatred,
contempt, fury of the People, to which they will be exposed, and by which they
will be still in danger of being out-raged; are worse Circumstances, and will
be so to them, than any Poverty, any Condition whatsoever in the Service of
this Church, can possibly be: So that could they, with the wreck of their
Consciences, and future hopes, be safe under Popery, for this World; yet they
must be very uneasy, very miserable in it. And though they could be secure of
the utmost kindness of the Papists (which there is no reason to expect) yet
they would be in perpetual danger of being torn in pieces, or knocked on the
head by the People, if any Commotions (which we cannot think but such a state
of things would be very liable to) should happen. And if the Tide should turn,
and that Religion be again expelled, any way, they must then be (if suffered to
live) the most hated, detested Creatures alive. And are such Circumstances as
these desirable? Can any men in their Wits covet, and endeavor to arrive at
such a condition? Who ever really thinks that the Clergy of the Church of
England desire, or are inclined to Popery, thinks they are Idiots, or Madmen.

And what is there so reasonable, so lovely, in Popery to incline so great a
Body of men, that know it, and have shown they know ill enough by it, to
renounce all their Interests in favor of it? This would make some believe that
Protestants have belied the Popish Religion, and cheated the World with false
Representations of it, if the Clergy of an opposite Christian Church do
secretly desire it, contrary to all their Professions, Oaths, and Vows to God
and Men, and contrary to all their dearest Interests in this World. If this be
so, Popery has strange Beauties, and Charms, which the Glergy see, but will
not acquaint the People with: And what can be alleged more to the advantage of
Popery? Or what can more express the Slanderers extreme malice against the
Conformable Clergy? Which, as I have shown, has a tendency to the advancement
of the Popish cause and interest.

Now to prevent it here also, we should countenance, and encourage these
Adversaries of that Church, and Way, the Divines of our own. It Is their
employment, and has been their study to discover the errors, dangers, and
malignity of Romish Corruptions, and Innovations. Diverse ingenious Gentlemen of
the Court, and Country, are likewise well instructed in this Knowledge; but the
Clergy have made it most their Business, and are most immediately concerned:
By such their Craft must be detected, their Pretenses exposed, their Endeavors
defeated. Popery will not be kept out by Railing, and Noise, it must be the
light of contrary Conviction that must do it; it must be kept from taking hold
of the Hearts, and Consciences of men, and not only be resisted by the exercise
of Power; so that, if we are heartily disaffected to Popery, and the increase
of it, we should show that inclination by our favor to those who so
strenuously, so unanimously oppose it. We ought to respect our own Clergy for
that Reason, and for many others, for their Character, and their Work, etc.

God has dignified them with highest Titles of his Ministers, his Ambassadors,
Stewards of his Mysteries, Angels, Stars, Light; and shall we despise those
whom he is pleased to honor? Are these titles marks of Infamy, and Reproach?
Their Business also, and Employment requires our respects to them; it is the
greatest, most honorable, most useful; they serve us for our noblest part, our
highest ends, these challenge our kindness, our countenance, and ingenuous and
candid thoughts of them, which we should show in dislike of vilifying
Discourse, and in reproving unjust Reproaches of them. Charity thinks no
evil; not of any, especially not of our Spiritual Guides, whom we ought to
reckon worthy of double honor for their Work sake. We should consider what
Enemies they have on all sides to invent, and spread Slanders of them, to make
much of little, something of nothing: and where we discover faults, we should
reporve them privately, we should endeavor, what in us lies, to make their
Lives comfortable, that fo with Courage, and Resolution, they may address
themselves to their great Work. Those who are always oppressed and kept down,
will beable to do no great matter.

The Apostles indeed, and Primitive Christians got vigor from Oppositions, and
Persecutions, but their assistances were extraordinary and immediate: And,
thanks be to God, we have many resolved excellent Men, whom no ill treatment
will discourage from their Duty; though others of lower Form, that might
otherwise be very useful, in some degree may be disheartened. We would not have
them intermeddle in Secular Matters; it is pity men should make it more
necessary than they desire, by giving them trouble to get their small Dues (
Small especially in Cities and Corporations) but pay justly, cheerfully, and
not divert them from their other Business (which is enough) by vexations of
this sort; this is cruel, and shameful. And 'twere greatly to be wished that
the Government would take care to augment the Livings in Corporations, and
great Towns, where the greatest employment is and the least encouragement; and
appoint some speedier, easier way for the gaining of small Dues, great part of
which now is lost, or got with incredible Envy, Hatred, and Toil. This has
been aimed at, and endeavored in a late Parliament, and 'twould be just, and
for the interest and advantage of the Protestant Religion, it should be
effectually considered. The ways that are now, through the iniquity of the
Times, are tedious, vexatious, odious, and scarce practicable at last: and the
Minister must resolve to sit down either with the loss of his Maintenance, or
his Reputation, and his Peace. So that to purchase quietness he must be a
Beggar; and is under great temptation to lose the interest of his Family, and
the rights of his Church. These discouragements will easily be removed when any
Parliament shall think fit to set about it.

And since I am upon Desirables, I Will mention one or two more, viz. That
Patrons would take conscientious Care in presenting to their Livings; that they
would consider the fitness of Persons, and the Churches Service, and not be
moved by other undue considerations; for want of this, many unqualified,
incompetent men creep in, to the great dishonor and prejudice of our Church,
and Religion. And if these things were rectified, it is to be supposed, and
hoped, that Care would be taken, that Degrees should not be given in the
Universities but to men of suitable Learning; nor holy Orders, but to Persons
known to be fitly Qualified. The rectifying these few things, would cure many
of the greatest Evils that oppress, and disgrace the Clergy, and Protestant
Reformation. They would then be animated to their Duty, be Ornaments to the
Church, have power with the People, and so be enabled more effectually to
defend the Protestant Interest, and Religion; whereas our present Proceedings,
lessen and expose both them, and it.

CHAP. III.
III. Our Divisions (which must necessarily follow want of Authority in the
Church, and respect to its Ministers) are plain, and acknowledged occasions of
our Dangers. Never was a People so Broken, so Divided. What numerous names of
Sects have we, and scarce any one at Unity within it self; all subdivided, and
broken into diversities that want names: We have raked up all the old Heresies,
and added new; Monsters formerly unheard of: All that the Phancies, all that
the Phrensies of conceited and distracted men can invent, are Doctrines of
Religion, and Grounds of Sect-making among us. And all are zealous for their
particular Conceits, all call their own imaginations by the most sacred names,
Light, God's Truth, Gospel Ways, Holy Mysteries, Daunings, Illuminations,
Refinings; and a world more of such fondness; by which they are infinitely
puffed up in their own Phancies, as the only Knowing, the only Spiritual
Christians; and taught to scorn all other Doctrines, and Ways, as beggarly
Rudiments, Elements of this World, and Carnal Reasonings at the best; yea,
generally to rail bitterly at them, as Lies, Popish, Babylonish, Antichristian
trash, Doctrines of Devils, and such like; and consequently, to hate, and
bitterly to revile all different Judgments, especially those that are
uppermost, Established, or countenanced by the Government, now, chiefly the
Church of England; but if any one of them were got into the place, it would be
the same thing, all the rest would fly upon it, and tear it with their utmost
Rancour, Vehemence, and Reproaches: Which state of things among us is
infinitely Scandalous to the Protestant Religion, to which they all pretend:
And those that leave us, clamorously object that there is no end of our
Factions and Divisions: That it is a sign our Church is not the true one, since
it is so broken, shattered, divided: Which Divisions they think, and say are
either the natural consequents of our departure from them, or the Judgment of
God upon us for that Separation. See, say they, what you Protestants are, a
medley of wild disagreeing Sects, as different from, and as fierce one against
another, as against us; one in Name, but in Principles, in Affections, in your
particular ways infinitely diverse, infinitely opposite. You have no
Principles, are fastened to no Foundation; float up and down, like the Waves of
the Sea, still rouling from one Sect to another: Whereas we Catholics are one
Body, an Edifice firmly built upon the Authority of the Church, having no such
Fractions among us, but being as a City that is at unity in it self. By such
suggestions, to which our Divisions give too much color, they deceive the
Hearts of the Simple, and draw multitudes into their Snares.

And as our Divisions promote Popery by way of Scandal, and the ill opinion
they beget of the Reformation; so they do the same by giving the Papists
positive, and direct opportunity to play their Game. They put themselves into
all shapes, and disguises among our Sects, and under those Vizards drive us on
toward more Confusion, and disseminate their own Doctrines under other Names,
and Appearances, with great advantage to their Cause. So that while there are
such Separations, and Conventicle Meetings among us, Popery is still carrying
on: The Popish Agents will creep into Houses; they will hide, and shelter
themselves under those pretenses, and drive on their Business by them.

So that there is no way for us to come to any assurance against Popery, but by
Union, by which the Scandal will be removed, and the advantages that we give
our Enemies by our Divisions. But this, considering how things are, may seem
utterly unpracticable; union and agreement in Opinions, is certainly
unfeisable; it never was in the World, it never will be: But yet, some External
Union, Subjection, Truce, fairness among the different minds may: And how is
that to be attained? Must all Dissenters from the Church be suppressed? Or, must
they have a general Toleration? The ordering this Matter, must be left to the
Wisdom of our Governors; only in general I say, something must be done for the
removing the mischievous effects of our Divisions. I will not pretend to
direct, but I Will give you my opinion in two things.

1. Toleration is not the way. Liberty of Conscience must be given; there is no
help for that; no power on Earth can invade it; for Liberty of Conscience is
liberty of Practical Judgment; and the freedom of that none can take away.
Liberty of Practice then, is the thing in dispute; that consists either in
professing our private Opinions, or our walking in private Ways, contrary to
Establishments; and as to these too, strictly speaking, our Liberty cannot be
taken away; For whatever the Laws or Penalties are, men will still retain
natural power, and liberty to profess what they believe, and to act according
to that profession. The question then is of Political Liberty, whether they
should not be determined by Laws, and bounded by Prohibitions, and Penalties in
Ecclesiastical Matters, as well as others? And so, it will come to this,
whether there should be any Government in the Church or not? For if there be a
Government, there must be Laws, if there be Laws, there must be Penalties
annexed to the violation of those Laws; otherwise the Government is precarious,
and at every ones mercy; that is, it is none at all; the very nature of
Government requires Restraints, and the bounding the liberty of Practice: and
to strive for Toleration, is to contend against all Government.

Let it be tried in the Civil State, in Armies, in Schools, in any Societies,
or public Bodies; And see what work it would make with them? None certainly
could stand under the practice of such a Principle: For if Penalties are
forborne to any, why should not all expect it, when there is occasion? And all
may have the same pretense when they need it. If no one is to be punished for
doing that which is agreeable to his Conscience, or not doing that which is
contrary to it, every one will quickly learn to say that the thing he would do
is his Conscience, and the thing he dislikes is against it: And it is impossible
for all the wisdom in the World to tell, but that it may; no one can judge that,
but a man's self: So that here is an effectual loose and outlet to all
Government in the Church; yea, and in the State too.

For Conscience is as much concerned in the Duties of the Second Table, as in
those of the First. -- Conscience void of offense toward God, and toward men,
Acts 24. 16. And there is no Statute of the Realm that can be made, but men may
find a pretense of Conscience against it: And if Conscience (every man's
peevish, humoursome, erring Judgment, which he will call by that name) be so
sacred, that no one must be punished that follows it, then every one may be
excused, when he thinks fit to plead this, and so goodnight to all Laws and
Governments of all sorts. If a man steals another Goods, the Law would punish
him: But says he, I did according to my Conscience; the possessor was a wicked
man that had no right, for all property is founded in Grace, and I did but take
what my Godliness gave me title to: I was bound in conscience to assert mine
own, and the Godlies right. And then the Prosecution according to this Doctrine
of Liberty of Conscience is at an end, and the Offender clear. If a man
violently detains what is another by Law (as the Quakers actually do in the
case of Tithes) he must not be punished, it is his Conscience he will tell you. If
one that is Pressed for the necessary Service, and defense of his Country against
a foreign Enemy, alledg it is against his Conscience to fight, he must be
excused: If he say his Conscience forbids him to pay Taxes, that he is subject
to none but King Jesus, and that all other Government is Antichristian, his
Purse must be free, and the King must lose his share; and then in a short time
you may judge what will become of his Majesty's Revenue. If he pleads it is
against his Conscience to bear Office in Church, or State, he must not by any
means be troubled, his Neighbors must take the Burden, and share the trouble
among them. All these are just, and due Inferences, and we see by them whither
this Liberty leads; nothing can be safe under it, no not our Lives. Men may
think it a duty to murder us; Those that kill you, shall think they do God good
service: And the Scotch Field-meeters actually hold, and teach in their
Sermons, and their Books, that it is lawful, yea, heroical, to kill Bishops, or
any ordained by them; and in consequence of that Doctrine, Ten of those Zealots
barbarously murdered the Archbishop of St. Andrews. Yea their Doctrine is,
that it is lawful to kill any one that has forsaken their Covenant,
consequently the King himself, upon whom they forceably imposed it: And some
that have the heroical Impulse, that is, a strong inclination to murder any of
the sorts so sentenced by them, will think himself bound in Conscience to do
it. And when he has so done, must he be indemnified, and exempt from
Punishment, because it was his Conscience; So it ought to be according to this
Doctrine.

If it be said, that these are plain Cases, and men cannot plead Conscience for
disobedience in such Instances. I answer, that nothing is so plain, but men
that have an humor, an interest, or will against it, may dispute, and doubt,
and deny when they please; and the Instances alleged actually are among the
Quakers, Fifth Monarchists, Scotch Presbyterians, and such like; and if this
Principle be allowed, their number, and their pretenses would quickly increase
to the destruction of all Right, Property, and Government.

But Liberty, some will say, is desired only in the Worship of God: And if
right of Conscience be the reason it should be had there, the same right of
Conscience extends to all things of Morality, where Conscience binds as much,
and is as sacred; and the bounding it in matters of Worship, is Arbitratious,
and without Reason; which men would quickly find, if they had once gained the
first Point. And this Liberty is so destructive to all rights of Government,
and Society, that none of those that now contend for it, will allow it when
they have power. Ask the Papists in Spain, Germany, or France, if they are for
Toleration? Ask the Presbyterians, whether they would Tolerate? In their times
nothing was so abominable, so Antichristian, as accursed Toleration, (as they
then called it) nothing so vehemently thundered against in their Pulpits every
where. We may remember how they Persecuted, Sequestered, Imprisoned, ruined the
Episcopal Divines for reading the public Liturgy, according to the Laws,
their Oaths, their Consciences: Their plea of Conscience was nothing then; we
know who denied the liberty of this Worship even to the King himself in his own
Chapel: They would not suffer in his Extremities any of his own Chaplains to
come to him, when he earnestly desired it. And what Liberty was given to all
other. Sects by the Independents, in their day, because they could not help it,
was denied to Popery, and Prelacy (as they joined them) because they could. And
there is no Sect, were it in full power, that would give liberty to any other.
Even now they deny it, and violate their own pretenses of Liberty of
Conscience; they persecute Conformists with bitter hatred, and with railing,
malicious accusations; they shoot the arrows of bitter Words, and endeavor to
destroy their Reputations with Tongues set on fire of Hell: They give no
quarter to their Consciences, but persecute them, as far as they can: and
persecution in the Heart, and in the Tongue, would be so in the Hands quickly,
if they had power.

So that Liberty of Conscience, and Toleration, are things only to be talked of,
and pretended to by those that are under; but none like, or think it reasonable
that are in Authority. It Is an instrument of mischief and dissettlement, to be
courted by those who would have Change; but no way desirable by such as would
be quiet, and have the Government undisturbed. For it is not consistent with
Public peace and safety, without a standing Army: Conventicles being eternal
Nurseries of Sedition and Rebellion. If these Dissenters would be contented
with Liberty, 'twere pretty well, and tolerable; but that will not do: whatever
is the modesty and meekness of the pretense, they must have the Rule and Sway
of all or they will never be satisfied.

We see this actually in Scotland; there is no manner of Imposition in worship
there either of Liturgy, or Ceremony, but the worship in Churches is in the
same way with that in their Conventicles; and yet they tumult, and rebel on
pretense of Religion and Conscience. They would have their Covenant, Christ's
Government, as they call it, that is, the Dominion and supreme Rule themselves.
Mere Indulgence they scorn, many of them think it unlawful to accept any from
the King, and have upon that account made a separation from those of their own,
that think they may: and thus in likelihood it would be in a little time here
also, if Toleration under Limitations, were granted.

So that whatever it may do elsewhere, where People are less concerned for
their Opinions; we certainly can never be safe with it, without an Army to
secure the Public from the Mischievous effects of it. And if ever this should
obtain, Popery would get such an advantage by it, as God forbid it should ever
have again in this Kingdom: And we know, Toleration was a principal thing aimed
at, and endeavored (as appears by Coleman's Letters) in order to the
introducing of that Religion. So that upon the whole we see, that this is not
our way. Let us then consider,

2. An Accommodation with Dissenters of less malignant Principles; What will
that do? It Is certain, that with some of them no terms can be made; they will
never unite, never be satisfied; to such it is in vain to yield, in order to a
Consolidation that is unpracticable. On the other hand, there are who make
other professions, and are not so vastly distant from us, those declare for an
Episcopal Government, and a Public Liturgy; with them one would think it
should not be impossible to Unite. They pretend that some small Abatements, and
Condescensions on our part, would do: And we grant that our Liturgy and
Ceremonies are alterable; some actual alterations have been made since the
return of the Government: If reasonable Alterations and Compliances would gain
them, perhaps it might be worth while to endeavor it, this way. I speak
doubtfully, because it is a thing of great and various Consideration; if sober
men could be gained, and considerable numbers of People with them, upon
tolerable Terms, it would be a strengthening to our Church, and very desirable.
But it should be weighed too, whether any considerable men, and numbers would
in likelihood come in? Whether the People would be reconciled to the Church
with them? Or whether they would not fly from them, when they are ours, as
they do from our own men, and betake themselves to those that still stand out
in defiance? And whether the Persons we admit would not with more authority and
advantage, propagate ill Principles among our People whom they they are allowed
to teach? Some of those that by straining, have got in, have done so; Conformed
by halves, and in a way that shows their dislike of what they do; that it is
Force, and not Choice; and have made it their business, if not directly to
oppose the Church, yet cunningly by way of Insinuation, they have fomented and
kept alive corrupt Doctrines. These things may be considered on both sides, by
those that are concerned to open the Gate wider, or to keep it as it is.

If our Governors should think fit to widen, and to yield in some things, it
would be a Christian compliance on their part, and perhaps a kindness to our
Episcopal Clergy, whose Obligation to some Innocent, but offensive usages
disaffects many mistaken, well-meaning People to them, robs their Churches of
their Company, and them of their Kindnesses, and Encouragements; renders their
Lives full of difficulties, and disputes, enforces them to eternal Contests
for their Dues, and renders their Ministry, and profitable Pains, in many
places, ineffectual. The Cure of these Evils, and the settling the Church upon
larger, and so a safer Foundation (as to Interest I mean) are possibly good
Reasons, why the Matter should be now taken into serious and deliberate
Consideration. And the dangers from Popery which the Dissenters also so much
apprehend, should methinks render them more apt to comply, and willing to
accept of moderate terms in order to our Conjunction against the common Danger.
This I believe some are, and with them there is possibility of Uniting, and
likely there may be good effects of it: But others of them, are strangely
heightened by our Dangers, and stand now upon more distant terms than ever, they
expect that the World will shortly be their own, and therefore show themselves
more inveterate against the Church and us, than ever. Certainly these do not
believe the Popish Plot, nor fear Popery as they pretend; they only amuse, and
affright the People with them, thereby to carry on their own designs:
otherwise, they would, now especially, supplicate the Government for Union, and
sacrifice Humor, Interest of a Party, and the Pride of Separation, to the
Protestant advantage, and safety: They would be more yieldable, and compliant,
and desirous to cement, and join with us for the common Benefit, and Security.
If the Government should think fit to consider those that are so, and to make
any small, alterations in their favor, it would be Charitable, and Candid, and
possibly for the Public Interest. But whether fit, or not, it is not for
private Persons to determine, nor very decent uncalled, to offer their opinion,
when that Point is concluded, I think.

3. The Constitution should be made firm (whether with any alterations, or
without them) and Laws put in punctual, vigorous Execution. Till that is done,
all will signify nothing. The Church has lost all through Remissness, and
Non-execution of Laws: and by the contrary course things must be reduced, or
they never will. To what purpose are Parliaments so concerned to prepare good
Laws, if the Officers who are entrusted with the Execution, neglect that Duty,
and let them lie Dead. This brings Laws and Government into Contempt, and
'twere much better the Laws were never made: By them the Dissenters are
provoked, and being not restrained by the exacting of the Penalties, they are
fiercer, and more bent upon their own ways, than they would be otherwise.

But it may be said, the execution of Laws of Conformity, raises the cry of
Persecution: and will not that be Scandalous? Not so scandalous as Anarchy,
Schism, and eternal Divisions and Confusions, both in Church and State. Better
that the unruly should clamor, than that the regular should groan, and all
should be undone: Better the Schismatical should be justly punished by the
Government (let them call that Punishment what they will) than that the
Government should really, and for ever be Persecuted by them. If Penalties must
be suspended when ever the guilty clamor, and call things by wrong names, then
farewell all Government. Our Governors have Consciences too as well as private
Persons, and they ought to act according to theirs, for the public Benefit,
and Safety, let it be never so much against the grain of those that will for
ever be discontented.

But it may yet be Objected, that punishment in such Cases, will do no good:
Men will not be beaten into Religion, nor out of any. And it is true, that some
will never be reduced, never reclaimed; but then, their just Sufferings will be
warnings to others. The greatest part of those that now scatter, and run about,
do it out of Humor, or Fancy, or Faction, or Interest, or Animosity, or
desire of being accounted Godly, not really out of Conscience, and conviction
of Duty; and these, the Penalties duly exacted would bring back into Order, and
when they have been used to that, and strict Government, they may really grow
wiser, and be reconciled thoroughly, to the Church, and its Constitutions,
against which they were before so prejudiced; for hereby they will be forced
into soberer Company, and under more sound, and sober Preaching. Our Ministers
then will have the opportunity of informing their abused, and misguided
understandings, of discovering the Fallacies, and Mistakes they have been
abused by, and of setting their Consciences right in those Matters. While
People run on without control in their own ways, they will not hearken, they
will not consider any thing that is offered to them: Like the wild Ass, they
snuff up the Wind, who can turn them away? But when their Opinions, and Ways
bring them trouble, when they are chastised for them, they are then more
disposed to attend, and weigh the Reasons offered without the usual Partiality,
and Prejudice. And thus punishments are instruments of real Reformation, and
amendment. The truth of this we have in part seen: For while the Act made by
the late Parliament against Conventicles was pretty briskly executed, our
Churches began to be filled, and the People were from all quarters coming in;
and had that course been followed, as it was begun, it would have done the
business, in likelihood we had been settled, and not exposed to such dangers of
Popery, as we always shall be, while the Church is unfixt: and so by the Grace
of God we might yet be, if this Method were retrieved. But then, the work must
be done with a steady hand, and firm resolution, constantly, universally; that
all may see we are in earnest for Establishment. Such a course I am persuaded
would yet bring us into Regularity, and External Union, which would give
Beauty, and Strength to our Church, gratify all good Men, and disappoint the
designs of our Popish, and other Enemies.

CHAP. IV.
III. Our carelessness, and indifferency in Religion is one of the greatest,
and most unhappily influencing occasions of our fears, and dangers of Popery.
Religion requires, and deserves our highest Affections, and most diligent
Endeavors. It is Zeal; so in the truth of things, and in the general sense of
Mankind: So that where Zeal is not, People will not believe that Religion is
there: The Zealous still lead them, and have their company; and when ever it
happens, that the generality of a Church, or Way, are cold, dead, and
unconcerned either to Religion in general, or to their own particular
Profession; that Church, and Profession is like to be deserted by those of warm
affections, who will betake them thither where they may have company in their
Zeal, and entertainment for it.

Here now has been a principal occasion that many have fallen off from our
Church, to the Roman Superstition. Blessed be God, we have an excellent
constitution of Religion reformed according to Primitive, Apostolic Doctrine,
and Usage: But the misery is, We, the Members, have by our Carelessness,
Indifferency, Irreligion, brought disgrace upon it, and laid it low in the
opinion of many zealous, and devout People; for the most will judge of Religions
by the Professors of them.

Our difsenting Adversaries were, and are very zealous, they have a Zeal for
God, though not according to Knowledge; that heat has been very wild, and very
mischievous; and by the ill conduct, and bad effects of it, we are prejudiced
(many of us) against the very Word, and against the Thing: So that we run (as
it is usual) into a quite contrary extreme, and are afraid of any thing that
looks like warm Concernment, in, or for Religion.

The Sects are earnest in their Prayers, so to Folly, and Extravagance: On the
contrary how indifferent are many of us to the Service of our Church, those
sober, grave Devotions, which formerly, when they were suppressed, we disputed so
earnestly for: How little have they of our Company? How undevoutly do we demean
our selves at them? How slightly do many talk of saying Prayers, and being
Devout; as if they were things to be jested with? How little Reputation does
Devotion give any one among us? How little Shame or Disrepute the contrary?

The Dissenters are Superstitious, as to hearing Sermons; are swift to hear,
place almost all Religion in it: Whereas too many of us, reckon little of
Preaching, perform it as an Exercise, hear it as an Entertainment, (at the
best) diverse make nothing of it; at least, are without any affectionate
concernment about it.

The holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, which the Fanatics impale within
their select numbers, but is freely permitted to us, how many slight? how few
attend? The greatest part neglect it quite, and will not by the most constant,
and earnest importunities of their Ministers, be persuaded to do thus much, to
testify their being Christians.

The Sects are zealous contenders for their dear Models of Government, and
Discipline: But how little do we (most of us) heed the Government, and
Discipline of the Church? We care not how it is affronted, or trampled on, yea,
we are ready upon every occasion, and without any sometimes, to fly in the
Face of the Governors of it, and to tear them, our selves.

The Separatists are zealous to Superstition, in the observance of the Lords
Day: Some of us in opposition, reckon not much of it: most I doubt are too
negligent, and remiss here. In nothing does the humor of Opposition appear
more among us than in this. We hold sacredness of places on the account of
dedication to religious uses, and respect due to them; for this the Sects
despise us as Superstitious: They on the other side hold Sacredness, and Divine
Separation of some time, the Lords Day (at least;) this Doctrine and the
consequent Practice, some among us, impeach as Superstitious, and heed not that
Day as they ought. Frequent Acts of Parliament are made to enforce its
Religious observation, and to restrain abuses, and prophanations of it, which
yet are the same as before, and Magistrates that should execute Laws, in many
places, take little or no notice of them.

Now the consequence of this unhappy Coldness, and Indifferency, must be, that
many People that are affectionate to Religion must needs turn away, and join
themselves either to the Conventicles on the one hand, or the Papists on the
other, both which have great appearance of Zeal and Devotion; and many, no
doubt, have gone off to the Roman Church upon this only score, being
scandalized by our neglects, and indevotion. This was the temper of Laodicea,
and the Remedy prescribed, to prevent Ruin, was Zeal, Rev. 3. 19. And except
we learn, and practice this, our Church in he necessary consequence, must fall
to nothing.

Our Enemies on both sides are diligent, studious, zealous, and if we continue
negligent, and careless, their designs to destroy us at length, must of
necessity succeed; and here is one of the most considerable Causes they have
succeeded so far already. The way of Cure and Prevention, is sober, active
Zeal, both in Clergy, and People.

As to the Prayers of the Church; the Ministers' ought to read them with more
affection, and external Devotion; the People to attend them with more
diligence, and constancy; and their attendance ought to be more humble and
devout. There was never more reason for our constancy, and zeal in this Duty
than now: Prayers are always seasonable, but most necessary in times of public
Difficulties, and Dangers. The rude Mariners betook them to their Prayers in
the Storm, JOB. 1. In their affliction they will seek me early, Hos. 5. 15. If
we do not so in ours, it will be a sad symptom.

We should further express our Zeal in being constant, and unanimous in
attending on the holy Sacrament; our neglect of this is shameful, and
intolerable: Nothing has given so great a blow to our Religion, it has made
some believe, and say we have none. We are earnestly invited by our Lord, and
his Messengers; How many earnest Sermons, how many excellent Books, press this
Duty upon us, and give us direction in it? And yet we are little moved. We come
for fear of the Temporal Penalties, when we have entered into Offices, and
Trusts, but the Authority of our Supreme Legislator, and the eternal Penalties
he threatens, prevail little. This is scandalous Neglect: And we declare to all
the World, that Religion has no power upon us, when it cannot obtain thus much
from us. Of this carelessness we ought to repent deeply, to reform speedily,
Solemn appearance at the Lord's Table would give us the face of a Church, and
make our Religion look like something; the contrary exposes it to Contempt.

Our Zeal also should engage us to study the Constitutions of our Church more,
to search into the grounds of our Government, and Discipline, that we may be
acquainted with their Antiquity, Reasonableness, and Piety, and thereby enabled
to stop the mouths of Gainsayers, and to contend intelligently for our
Profession, and Practice.

The Lord's Day should be more diligently, and religiously observed by us. This
is the public, solemn time for the exercise of Devotion; so it is
acknowledged, whether it be of Divine, or only of Ecclesiastical Institution,
and therefore should be reverenced by those of each Opinion, and kept as a Day
separate from other days, and other uses: Places we think and say ought to be
so, Churches, and Altars; and with reason we believe this: There is at least
the same reason for Times, some others we allow; and this also in Doctrine; let
not the zeal of our Adversaries in this instance abate, and quench ours. The
reverence and all the great interests of Religion are in great part maintained,
and kept alive by the due observance of this Day. Let us express our Zeal, and
Devotion here also: To devote one day of seven to God, and his peculiar
Service, should not, methinks, be grievous to us: In this there is no
Fanaticism, nothing but what is very agreeable to the Doctrine of the Church of
England, which we should strengthen, and do honor to by such practice: This
Zeal is honest, laudable, necessary, and it is popular: And in Christian
Prudence we should do, and study all lawful things that tend to the enlargement
of the Church, and the edification of its Members.

There is yet another Instance, in which Zeal should be more expressed; which I
have reserved for the last, because I shall take the liberty to enlarge on it:
It is concerning Preaching, and hearing Sermons. I pretend not to teach, but
shall with submission to better Judgments deliver my opinion, which is, That in
Preaching, Ministers should chiefly, mostly, treat on plain, practical,
awakening Subjects, speaking of them gravely, and affectionately, without
Vanity, or Affectation, with design still to do good, and to make themselves,
and their Hearers better. Such I think should be the matter, and such the
measure of Preaching: And 'twould do no hurt if our Preachers generally took
more Zeal into their Pulpits than is usual with us, Zeal without Folly:
Methinks our Divines should not suffer others to outdo them here; much-less
should they quit this to them: The too usual want of this Zeal here, is a
principal cause of our Mischiefs: Some are almost ashamed, or afraid to be
zealous in their Pulpits. The preaching of too many is Declamatory, they
deliver not Theological Sermons, not such as are apt to instruct, or edify,
but seem to design the gratifying vain Phancies, and the pleasing of wanton
Hearers: They aim at Wit, and fine Sayings to gain applause among the
injudicious by silly Affectations, and when they are commended they have their
end, and the work is done: They move no devout Affections, seem not to design
it: Their Sermons are lifeless, dull Harangues, full of studied Vanity, without
Piety, or as much as good Sense. Hence many Religious are scandalized, and they
nauseate such Preaching, and are tempted by it to run away into Corners and
Sects; and here is one great ground of Separation, and loss of our People.

Now one, and a chief occasion that this Humor has so much obtained, is, that
many of the Laity, and such as pretend much to the Church of England, are for
the formal, unedifying, wittilizing Way; they have not the patience to hear a
Grave, Serious, Affectionate Sermon that plays no Tricks: But will be ready
(some of them) to Stigmatize, and rail against such a Preacher as a
Presbyterian, though he be zealously opposite to their Principles, and Ways,
and most hearty and affectionate to the Church of England. These would have
none (it seems) but affected, insipid, senseless Fops of it: They are willing to
give away all, or most of the men of Reason, and Religious Zeal to the Sects;
take them who will, they will not own them: These men have done the Church of
England the great Mischief, and have raised most of the Clamor, and Opposition
against it.

No Church in the World has better Preachers than this, and there are not upon
Earth worse than those I have last described; or rather they are none at all;
what they do is not Preaching; it is throughout doing another thing,
Declaiming, silly, childish speech-making; what you will; there is scarce any
other abuse of Speech bad enough to resemble it to. I cannot speak of it with
too much Contempt. Such Preachers are Prophaners of sacred things, contemptible
even in the things they aim at; their Oratory, their Wit is so; neither true;
both boyish, ridiculous, despicable to men of Sense. And yet (as I intimated)
some that pretend Zeal for the Church of England; that is, the Name, the
Shadow, applaud those Triflers, Players; and thereby tempt young men to take up
after their Way; and the affecting such stuff has spread far to the Scandal of
the Church, and the discountenancing the serious, earnest, effectionate Method,
which is so much out of fashion among this sort, that they cannot endure that
the Preacher should as much as seem to be in earnest: They will not allow him
to speak warmly, to move in the Pulpit, or to preach off his Notes. All must be
dead, cold Form to please them. If this humor be not suppressed, and Preachers,
generally as all the Wise already do) don't take another course, the Church
will never recover its just Interest, and Esteem. Preaching must be more
Serious, Affectionate, Zealous, this is in the power of every Preacher; to be
Profound, and Learned, is not so. In the many poor insufficient Livings we may
not expect men of great, and deep Knowledge, and where such are, this
Qualification does not recommend them to the generality of the People, their
Zeal does much more: In this the meanest Preachers may abound, and by this they
will affect their Hearers, though Wit, and shows of Learning are wanting.
These, as things are, the least able endeavor to ostentate, and such most; but
the highest they can attain to, in it, is but Pedantism, and Childishness,
which are despised by the Judicious, and not understood by the rest; so that
they lose their end, and the end of Preaching more; they do no good, get no
hold on the People; whereas did even these but aim at instructing the Ignorant
seriously, and the exciting all to their Duty earnestly, and devoutly, it would
atone for their imperfections with the Judicious, and have good effect upon the
rest.

I have spoken freely in this Matter, under a great sense of this Evil, and I
hope I shall not be understood to reflect upon any worthy men of our Church, I
designed only to express my just indignation against wanton Witlings
(Preachers, and People) whose number, thanks be to God, lessens daily, and
among all Intelligent Churchmen this way is exploded, and every where despised.

There is another Error in defect, in reference to Preaching, it is of those
that reckon it an indifferent, a merely humane thing; when as it is certainly
of Divine appointment, to continue to the end of the World, Mat. 28.20. We
ought in the sense of this, to be more frequent, and heedful, in our attendance
on Sermons than many are; and not shut out Preaching or Hearing, under pretense
of Zeal for the Church-Prayers. Those that pretend one Duty to the prejudice of
another, do really care for neither. Our Zeal should be Uniform, and respect
every duty proportionably to the Dignity, and necessity of it. And if generally
we had been so disposed, thus Zealous as we ought, many of the People that now
run away from our Communion, had still been ours. They like Presbyterians, and
other Sects, because the Preachers are earnest, and make show of much Zeal (as
the People also do) not because they are for such, or such a Church Government,
for this, or that Opinion: The multitude understand not these things, follow
them not for that Cause, but for the opinion they have of their being Godly,
and Zealous. And we may be, we should be as zealous for Religion, in the true
Way, as they seem to be in the wrong: Our Church permits, requires this from
us. We ought not to distinguish our selves from them by slighting, and avoiding
the lawful expressions of Christian Zeal; the Interest of our Church does not
require that, but the contrary. If our Zeal were more proportioned to the
goodness of our Cause, that goodness of our Cause would be more known, and
acknowledged, and our Adversaries would more easily be reconciled unto it.

CHAP. V.
V. ANother occasion of our Dangers, is the contrary extreme to our Coldness,
viz. Extravagant Zeal. Here I shall first consider the present fury of Atheists
and Infidels, and then discourse of other sorts of intemperate Heat, and
Wildness, that in the long run, will greatly befriend Popery.

Where there were Atheists in former days, they hid their Heads, and were
afraid, ashamed, to appear, but in these they glory, they triumph: In no Age
did they ever dare so openly, in no Christian, in no Heathen Country. How
common is it for lewd men, yea, for green, untaught Youth, to question,
dispute, cavil at the most sacred Articles of Religion: To do this in Taverns,
Coffee-Houses, in all Companies, in the presence of the Ministers of Religion,
before them to choose? How will the young Witlings pride, and plume themselves?
How will they brisle, and perk up, when they talk with those of the sacred
function against Religion? How do they despise their Reasons, because
(forsooth) the thing they defend is their Interest; and vaunt their own
arguments as Demonstrations, when they are scarce Sense? It would turn a man's
Stomach to see the insolence and folly of these bold Youngsters, which are a
scandal to the Reformation, and give occasion to our Roman Enemies to brand us
all as Atheists, or not far from being such; whereby they are hardened in their
Way, and have great advantage to win more to them.

Particularly at this time these Infidels do Popery great service. They are
violent in their Out-crys against it, violent to Fury; none so fierce as they;
of which there can be no Reason, but either the consideration of their Lands,
or this, that Popery is a Religion, (at least it pretends unto it.) Now by this
their clamor and fierceness, by their appearing so forward, so in the Front as
it were, against Popery, they give occasion to the Papists to think, and say
that our Zeal is an Heathen Persecution of Christianity, that they are so
malign'd, so opposed by us, because they profess Religion, and are not
Infidels: And it may suggest to others that are yet indifferent, that certainly
there is some great good in Popery, that such run upon it with such violence;
and it is natural to men to favor that, which the Wicked, and those whose ways
they have cause to abhor, dislike, abominate, and fly out against.

So that, these harden Papists, and recommend their Religion; they render it
less odious to some, because it is so to them. What evil have I done? said the
surprised Philosopher, that these (the Multitude) applaud me. On the contrary,
what good has Popery done, that vile Atheists rage so against it? It Is a shame
to be commended by some, and a praise to be condemned, and persecuted by
others. See, says the Papist, who are furious against our Religion! They are
the same that blaspheme against God, dispute his Being, burlesque his Word,
deride his Son, despise, revile, trample on his Ministers, of all sorts; these
Protestants lead you; these you triumphantly attend; these you voice up to be
Patriots; these are they that show most violent hate, and rage against us.
Whoever gives occasion to such upbraidings as these, does without doubt, credit
and promote Popery; and this the forwardness of many Atheists has done, and
does daily.

Now for Cure of these Mischiefs, we should every where disown, declare against
the wildness of these Furies; despise their pretended Zeal; and help, shame,
and reprove their Hypocrisy; suffer them not to name Protestant Religion;
decline their company; discountenance all they say, and all they do: Brand,
hoot at them, let the World see, let our Enemies see, they are not of us, that
we have nothing to do with them. Thus we should do in Charity to them, (public
shame and reproach may do them more good than any other Method) this we owe to
our selves, and to the honor of Religion, to vindicate it from the Scandal,
and Reproach these vile men bring upon it. If ever there was a time for Zeal
against Atheists, Debauchees, Buffoons, it is now. It is always seasonable, now
most so: These are our principal Enemies, who whenever time serves will be as
fierce against us (all sorts and professions of Religion) as they are now
against the Papists. These are the common Foes, enemies not only to Religion,
but to all Government, and Societies; to Mankind: and should be used as such.
These permitted, cherished, will bring God's Judgments upon us, and possibly
Popery as one. Let us then have no fellowship with those men: And if any such
should have crept into the Parliament, it were infinitely to be wished that the
Zeal of that Assembly would purge them out, like dross, fit for no use, or
rather, as what is most offensive, and destructive. They have done so by the
Papists; all good men desire, and pray they may do the same by these.

If any thing unqualifies for that service, one would think Atheism, and
Irreligion should. What blessing can be expected on public Councils, when
these are mingled. Where they are they will disturb all, break all, make all
ineffectual. We are not to look on the Dangers we apprehend as proceeding only
from common, natural Causes; no, The Hand of God is in them; they are His
Judgments, as for our other Crying Sins, so particularly for reigning Atheism,
and contempt of Religion: And if we expect help, and safety from the objects of
our Fears, we must endeavor to make our peace with Him, by repenting of all
our Sins, and particularly by expressing our Zeal against these greatest,
worst, the root of all the rest. And it is vehemently to be desired, that our
Representatives in Parliament would begin here, lay the Ax at the root, by
effectual Laws crush this daring, comprehensive Impiety, and make it Capital;
as of all Crimes it chiefly deserves. Let us first settle this Point, that we
are to have some Religion, and then make what further provision we can against
a corrupt, a bad one. Let us vindicate, and assert the Honor of God, and our
Common Savior, and then we may expect the Divine Blessing and Assistance in
the rest.

But besides the fierceness of the Atheists, there is an extravagant, mistaken
Zeal of others, that is a great occasion of our Dangers. Honest, intelligent
Zeal is necessary for our Security and Settlement, but the excesses of blind,
ungoverned Rage are most mischievous, and destructive; I shall note some
unhappy Instances of it that belong to our present state, and render it very
dangerous, viz. Such as have relation to our oppositions of Popery. That the
Nation is so awakened, so unanimous in detesting the false worship and ways of
the Roman Church is matter of rejoicing, and acknowledgment: But we ought to
have care, that our Zeal do not transport us to Extremes. I shall consider one
great Instance, which is, Men's multiplying the numbers of Papists beyond all
bounds of truth. I would by no means lessen any just apprehensions of our
Dangers, or say any thing that might tend to the remitting of due Caution, or
Diligence: I know the greatest Prudence, and Care is needful: But our Fears may
be extreme, and unreasonable, and great dangers may arise from those, as great
from our overmagnifying our Perils, as from not duly apprehending them: And
this way the things we fear have been encouraged, and promoted. People are apt
to talk of the numbers, and strength of Papists, and no doubt design them not
any service by it; but really, they are thereby encouraged, they thence flatter
their vain hopes, thence they are animated to Plot, to Attempt, being
acknowledged so numerous, so powerful; hearing that they have so many open
Friends, and so many others that will be ready to join with them when there is
occasion, and being apt to believe what they have so much reason to desire,
they are pufft with vain confidence, and are full of restless contrivances to
effect that, which they are made believe is so feisable. Whereas did they know
how inconsiderable their real numbers are, they must certainly sit down, and be
quiet. They would then understand that their business is unpracticable; private
Persons would be discouraged, and if there should succeed a Prince of their
Religion, in all probability, he also would despond, and never think of
attempting a thing, humanely speaking, so impossible; a thing, the endeavoring
which would certainly tear all in pieces, Religion, Government, and all: And
what the late Designs have done toward it we all sadly see. Therefore, that
they may see their designs are Madness, and that they ought to despair of ever
succeeding by their strength, we should let them know that they have abused
themselves, and others have abused them, by false Musters.

In the Year 1676/7. Orders came from the Archbishop to the several Bishops,
and from them to the respective Ministers, and Churchwardens in the Province
of Canterbury, to inquire carefully, and to return an account of the distinct
numbers of Conformists, Protestant Non-conformists, and Papists, in their
several Parishes, viz. Of all such men, and women that were of age to
Communicate. I have by me the return from the whole Province, which contains
all England and Wales, excepting only what belongs to four of the twenty five
Bishoprics. The number of Papists there returned, was but Eleven thousand,
eight hundred, and seventy, men and women, old and young. Now though in this
account, Conformists, and other Non-conformists were not so distinctly, could
not so justly be reckoned, yet for the Papists, they being so few in each
Parish, and so notoriously distinguished as generally they are, the Ministers,
and Churchwardens could easily give account of them; and there is no reason to
suspect their partiality, We hear, I know, that in London alone, and in some
particular Parishes, of that, and the neighbor City, there are vastly greater
numbers. But within the Walls, they are known to be very few, comparatively
scarce any such. In the Suburbs they are said to be numerous, (still the great
numbers are in places remote, or where inquiry cannot be well made.) In St.
Martins alone, I have heard of twenty, or thirty thousand; but the Account was
taken there, and as exact a one as could be; and I am assured by some that
should know, and had no reason to misinform me, that the number returned upon
the most careful scrutiny, was about six hundred: Of Lodgers there might be
more, but they are supposed to be accounted elsewhere, in the several Parishes
to what they belong. I have found the like fallings short of the reputed number
in diverse other noted places. In one City talked of for Papists, as if half the
Inhabitants were such, I am assured there are not twenty, men and women: In
another large and populous one, a person of Quality living in it, told me,
there were at least six hundred; but when the inquiry was made by the
Ministers, and Churchwardens of each Parish, the number was not found to be
sixty: And it is very probable such a disproportion would be met between the
reputed, and real numbers in all other places, if scrutiny were made. In all
the West, and most populous part of England they are very inconsiderable: I
hear frequently from Inhabitants of those Places, that in Bristol (the second
or third City of England) there is but one; and in the City of Gloucester one,
more, or two at most; in the other great Towns, and Cities Westward, scarce
any; and those that are in the Counties at large, are extremely few, thinly
scattered, here one, and at the distance of many Miles, it may be, another:
Some few decayed Gentry, and here and there an inconsiderable Countryman, or
Tradesman, very few of Note, or Riches, of either sort. And if an exact account
were taken of their numbers, and condition, from London to the Mount in
Cornwall, Westward, the inconsiderableness of both would exceedingly surprise
us: And I am very confident, that of all sorts of men, differing from the
Church of England, in the Kingdom, the Papists are the fewest; and those that
are, are so scattered, and live so distantly from each other, that it is really
very little they are capable of doing, in opposition to the rest of the Nation;
and the less, because of the great jealousy and hatred, that all universally
have conceived of, and against them.

We hear of vast numbers in the North; and there are more, no doubt, in those
parts, than in the Western, but I believe they are much fewer than we hear, and
no way able by their numbers, to make any kind of Balance for the exceeding
disproportion in the West.

The truth is, People are mightily given, and generally so, to multiply the
number of Papists, and they do it in common talk, at least ten-fold. Designs
have been, and I doubt, are still carrying on, which this pretense serves: A
chief thing to be done in order to public Mischief, is to affright the People
with the number and strength of Papists: And I believe if there were but ten of
that sort in the Nation, it would be the same thing. God forbid I should
diminish the real force of our Enemies, or endeavor to render us secure in
Dangers; The malignity and principles of Papists, their unwearied Zeal, and
diligence to overthrow our Religion, I very well know, and thank God that the
whole Kingdom is awakned to apprehend these; but I think, we shall encourage
them, and dishearten our selves, if we over magnify their strength, and
thereby give occasion to other Plots of as dangerous a nature as theirs.

But to all this, I know some will say, that though their numbers here are not
considerable, yet they are very formidable upon the account of foreign Friends
and Correspondents: And our danger from Abroad is really great; but not much
the more on the account of Domestic Papists, whatever they vainly persuaded
themselves: If our Neighbors should invade us, They, if they should be so
disposed, could do them but little service; we know their assistance in the
late Wars where they joined, was not very considerable; And now, their numbers
being so small, and they being so dispersed, and mingled; they being so hated,
and every Neighbor having so watchful, and concerned an Eye upon every one of
them, they could scarce signify any thing; yea, it may be thought, considering
how things are, that in such a Case, the fury of the People would offer them
immediate Violence, and prevent their doing that little they otherwise might.

All this, Sir, I say to show, how little sense, and reason there is in the
Popish Plots, and how much better it would be for them for ever to desist, and
to sit down in desperation of success. And if a Popish Prince should come to
rule over us, if he knew the real state of things, and the weakness of that
party, he would never think of reducing the Nation to that Religion, which
cannot be effected but by Miracle. The very attempt would hazard the ruining
him, and the Monarchy for ever. The mere jealousy (though most groundless)
ruined one Protestant King, and we see in what danger it has put another.

And if things are thus (as I am confident upon examination, and trial you will
find) let us take care that we promote not Popery by strengthening the hopes of
Papists; let us not hearten them by false accounts of their numbers, and their
strength, and thereby inspire them with courage to Plot against us. The better
way I think would be, to let them see we despise them; and to know how
fantastical and senseless their hopes are: This would really disable them,
break their Courage, and in likelihood put an end to their audacious Projects,
from which we have such frequent disturbance.

But we hear, and they are told, they have many secret friends, Papists in
their hearts, who will be ready to help them, when time shall serve: By this
way the number of Papists is supplied, and those that have ends to serve by it,
may make it what they please. I shall not deny, but that they may have some
underhand secret favorers, or that there may be diverse such in Masquerade
among the Sects: But is it likely, that those, whose caution and interest, has
kept them all this while from appearing, or declaring in times when they safely
might have done it, should venture all against the excited rage of the whole
Nation, in so desperate a Cause? Or, if the number of these were added, would
it make any proportion to the open declared Enemies of that Religion? If they
should lean upon such hopes, I doubt not but they would prove broken Reeds that
would fail, and suffer them to sink to the Ground.

And here I cannot but take notice of an intolerable Practice, extremely
prejudicial to the Protestant Interest, and Religion, every where now
prevailing, it is, the Stigmatizing every one that we dislike, or hate, or
design against, with the brand of Popery. If a Gentleman stands to be a Member
of Parliament, that is not a Fanatic, he is in their Mouths presently a
Papist. If one speak but an earnest word for the Government, and establishments
either in Church, or State that crosses, and stops some men's contrary
violence, he is a Papist. If a Minister preach up the Peaceable, healing
Christian Spirit, and Principles in opposition to Madness, and wild Rage, he is
a Papist. If a man does not believe every seditious lie that is published in
the Domestic Intelligence, and Coffee-house Letters, he is a Papist. So that I
am afraid the time is near (if seasonable stop be not put to this Rage) when
every Friend to the King, and Church, shall be a Papist.

If there are not real Papists in the Nation enough to keep us in eternal
frights, till these Plotters have done with us what they please, they will make
more, and we shall have enough ere they have done. First, They make the
Bishops, and all the Conformable Clergy such: We know they had concluded all
the former but three, a pretty while ago; and they are continually laboring by
scandalous Reflections, and downright Reproaches, in their common Discourses,
and their more public lying News, to blast the whole Regular Clergy, as
Papists in Masquerade, (as they phrase it) or favorers of Popery at least. And
though these have been always, and still are (as I have shown) the stout,
zealous defenders of the Protestant Cause, though they are the only significant
opposers (in their way) of Popish Errors, and Superstitions; though they expose
them daily by their learned Books, and Sermons, and no sort, no order of men in
the World ever did it more, nor so much; yet all this is nothing, it shall
notwithstanding be in the power of every contemptible Pamphleteer, of every
Atheist, of every Fanatic, to blast any one, yea, the whole Body of these men,
with the reproach of being Papists; an Outrage, and Barbarism scarce ever
heard of in other Places, and Times: And a sort of men there are that have no
manner of pretense to any Religion, but this of calling every one that is not
as Senseless, or as Atheistical as themselves, Papists: Those that know not
their Catechisms, that understand no more what Popery is than what is the
Religion of China, or the most remote parts of America; that never did, and
never will speak one reasonable word against that Way, nor for any; yet these
shall impudently cast the scandal of Popery upon the most learned, most active,
and most substantial Enemies that Religion has in the World: Just as if a man
should say, the Pope, Cardinals, and all the Jesuits, are Protestants in
Masquerade. This is intolerable insolence, and injustice, most scandalous, and
destructive to our Protestant Profession, and to Christianity it self; contrary
to all Charity, Modesty, Truth, and common Honesty; and nothing could more
encourage, and promote the ends, and designs of Papists.

For if this be so, if those that have studied the Points so thoroughly, have
been so conversant in the Scriptures, and Ecclesiastical Antiquity, who have
read the Books of all sides, and have learning to judge, if they are Papists, or
inclined to them; If they are so in spite of all their Interests, the zeal of
their contrary Profession, and all their sharp Books, and Sermons against it,
then certainly, may men think, this Popery has somewhat in it more Christian,
more reasonable than we have been aware, and it is not the Bugbear we have been
made believe: Thus may People be tempted to favorable thoughts of Popery by
this unchristian practice; and this puts the chief Fort we have against them,
the Church of England, into their hands; it begets infinite animosities,
hatreds, and jealousies among our selves, so that at last we shall not be able
to tell whom to trust, who is a Friend, or who an Enemy, and hereby shall be
rendered weak, and easy to be destroyed: This recommends Popery as a Religion
that has the Hearts of all men, and supposes that every one would be a Papist
if he durst; which is so far from being true, that considering how contrary
that Religion is to Sense, Reason, Scripture, and Antiquity, it is almost a
wonder any one should be of it, whom Interest, or Education has not
irresistibly engaged.

And it is strange to see how slippery, and uncertain men's fayings are, for I
have heard the same sort affirm often, (reflecting upon the nonsense of that
Religion) that they think the Jesuits, and other learned men among them do not
in their Hearts believe it themselves: and yet now, when the contrary talk will
serve a mischievous turn, every Protestant, every Learned man, every other man,
that is not of their way, or mind, shall, when they please, be a Papist in his
heart. The Jesuits are not Papists in their Hearts, but Protestants, whose
Education, Interest, Studies, Profession, Labors have been still against them,
are so in theirs: Which besides the other extravagances of it, is impious
usurping the Prerogative of God of Searching Hearts: and at this rate even our
Thoughts are not free; we shall not think what we can, but what these strange
censurers please: And here is taking away Liberty of Conscience with a witness.
It Is in vain to urge to them that we profess our selves Protestants, that we
always did so, that we practice according to that profession, frequent the
Protestant Worship, Prayers, Sermons, Sacraments, have taken the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, and are ready to take any Test against Popery; this
will not do, all is nothing, we may have Dispensations for all this, and be
Papists notwithstanding: According to which rule of judging, it is impossible to
distinguish a Protestant from a Papist: And then the censurers are Papists, the
Presbyterians, Independents, Anabaptists, Quakers, the most eminent, the most
zealous of them, every Mothers son, are all Papists, when any one has a mind
to call them so, and there is no possible way for them to clear themselves; nor
is there any possible way for any sort of men to be Protestants but by being
loudest and strongest, and able to knock the rest on the head. If any call us
Papists, there is no way to stop their mouths but by cutting their Throats: Lo!
here is foundation laid for our Massacring one another, and doing the Papists
business to their hands: It Is but for the prevailing Party to call the rest
Papists, and they can never answer it, they must be so, and there is no help;
and so they unavoidably fall under all the Rage, and Fury that is, or may
further be raised against those our common Enemies.

Now according to this proceeding, Papists are indeed very numerous, and there
are scarce any Protestants; yea, there are none at all; there are none but one
side or other has called Papists, and do; and none (not one of them) by this
rule, can clear themselves, and prove they are not so: so that as soon as they
are accused they are mute, and the matter must be taken Pro confesso. No man is
clear from being a Papist, but he that is not accused; and so his clearness is
only his good luck, that he has not Enemies, or that charge has not yet come
into his enemies Heads, or into their Tongues; as soon as it does, he is gone
too.

You see what Confusion this involves us in, it dashes us one against another,
and blows up all Protestants at once; more generally, more effectually, than
any Powder Plot can, or ever could do. So that we may justly say, that such
Censurers as these are promoters of Popery and Popish designs in an high
degree. And who-ever invented this piece of Mischief, whether Devil, or
Jesuits, or our own Malice, and Rage, it is one of the most destructive Engines
that ever was formed against us. For it throws us all into the Dark, full of
Rage, and Fury, where we are provoked to fight and lay about us, but have not
one glimps of light to see a Friend from a Foe. And when things are come to
this pass, Papists may forbear Plotting, we shall do their work our selves.

Now to Cure these evils, and to prevent the Dangers they threaten, it is
greatly to be desired, if the present ways of discovering Papists are not
sufficient, that some other Test, the best that can, were made; and when that
is done, it should be made highly Actionable, by a particular, strict, severe
Law, to call any one Papist, that has taken the legal Test. For it is
intolerable that the greatest, and most dangerous reproach possible (as that
now is) should be fastened upon a man by whoever pleases, and that there should
be no remedy, nor as much as any way of clearing. In other Cases, the Law takes
care of men's Names, as well as of their Estates, and there is no reason but it
should, they are, and ought to be as dear to us, and our greatest Interests
depend on their security: And if it be not done in this Case, here wants one
great provision for the Liberty of the Subject, and our common safety from
Tyranny, and Arbitrary Power. There is nothing in the world more Arbitrary than
men's Tongues let loose, and if they are not restrained, and tied up here, as in
other Cases, we are all Slaves, and all exposed to suffer the greatest Evils
from one another without any way of Redress; and so fall into state of War.
This is a real, and mighty Grievance, and it is to be desired, and hoped, that
suitable Provision will be made against it.

There is yet another branch of this Folly, and Injustice, which is,
uncharitable Censure, and suspicion of all that turn from Popery, as if they
were really, and at the bottom the same still. Some men are for keeping up
their numbers full, and will not allow of their Conversion, except they are
converted over to their Sect, or some way, or other serve their Interest;
except they run with them in the ways of Schism, and are factious against the
Government; if they do thus, they are dear applauded Converts; but otherwise,
if they are only come into the Church of England, and stick there, if they are
friends to the King, and assert Him, and the established Order in Church and
State; they shall be Papists still, in spite of them.

There are many Instances of this unworthiness, but among them all there is not
a greater, than in the case of an eminent Nobleman, which you and I have had
discourse of. His Ancestors, most of them (perhaps) were Papists; all were not
so, for the great Grandfather was Lord Privy Seal to Queen Elizabeth. The Lord
that now is, has professed the Protestant Religion these thirty Years, that is,
as long as he has been capable of making a judgment for himself: He married a
great Lady, an eminent Protestant, of a famous, zealous Protestant Family; has
for many Years, (fifteen, or sixteen to my knowledge) kept a Protestant
Chaplain, of the Church of England, in his House, who has read the Public
Liturgy twice every day there; his Lordship has always accustomed to be
present at them, and uses to be as regular in those Devotions as any Member of
our Church can be: And not only so, but he frequents the Communions also, which
at the appointed times are there duly Administered: His Children likewise are
carefully bred in the Protestant Way of the Church of England. Some two or
three old Servants his Lordship has, who have lived all their days in the
Family (of the Popish Religion) they being ancient, and having no other
dependence, my Lord still keeps them there (and 'twould be very unbecoming his
Nobleness to do otherwise) but all the Servants else are Protestants: And I
know that both this Lord and his Lady take great care to have them all receive
the holy Communion according to the Church of England. And it was not long
since that his Lordship himself spoke to a Divine of our Church, whom he sent
for on purpose, to instruct his eldest Daughter, (then newly of Years for it)
in order to the receiving the Sacrament, which the young Lady piously did, as
the course of the Family is. This Lord you know is in great Command, and by the
Laws is obliged to give all other proofs, which I dare say he sincerely does:
He is a Member of his Majesty's Council, of this, as well as of the former, and
to all Acts of Council against the Papists, his Name is still one: And yet
notwithstanding all this, such is the perverseness, and malice of some men, that
they voice him up for a Papist, though all things he does, and all things he
says declare the contrary; and they seem resolved that so it shall be, let his
Lordship say, or do what he will. This is strange Treatment, and looks as if we
wanted Papists, and were resolved to make as many as we can possibly find any
color for: It shows that those men really do not fear them, but rather fear
the want of them, to furnish out pretense for their Designs, and Projects.
Otherwise, 'twere very strange that so great a Person, and his Family, should
not be welcomed, and joyfully received into our Protestant Communion; and other
Noblemen of the Popish Religion encouraged by the civil, and kind reception, to
do the like: But it being so much otherwise in this, and many other Cases, it
is plain, that notwithstanding all their clamor, and talk, some men desire
there should be more Papists, than really are, for color, and show, to assist
and countenance their Stratagems, and perpetual contrivances against the
Government, both in Church, and State. Whatever they have a mind to overthrow,
and destroy, they mark with the brand of Popish, or Popishly affected, whether
with Reason, or without any, matters not. Popery is, (and justly so) the object
of the greatest hatred and the most general, so that it is but spending this
Imputation on those we would ruin, and their business is near done.

Whether this be not the reason of the present injustice, (of this kind)
offered, to the Church of England, and especially to her Clergy, let those that
know some men, and their manner, judge. They are sure the Churchmen (Divines,
and others) will adhere to the Government, and are not to be drawn into their
ways; and the grand Business of some is to overthrow the Church and them; so
that they must be branded, blackned, and rendered popularly odious; and what so
effectually does that, as putting the Comprehensive mark of all mischief, that
of Popery, upon them. But on the Contrary, all those they shall have occasion
to use in order to their destructive designs, shall be united in the dear name
of Protestants. It Is no matter though many are Atheists, many Debauches, mere
Worldlings, and Politicians, some acting from malice, and revenge, some from
ambition, some to repair their broken fortunes by a shuffle, some out of greedy
desire to be fingring Church Lands again; yet all declaring against Popery, are
Protestants, though they never heard themselves reckoned of any Religion
before. So the Sects, of all denominations, that agree scarce in any thing
positive, that hate, and vilify each other, and will scarce allow that any but
themselves are Christians; yet these also are all tack't together by the kind
denomination of being Protestants. All but we of the Church of England are so,
that is, Those that are of no Religion, and never pretended to be of any; those
that were bred of the Papists, and taught their Principles by the Papists;
those that never took Oaths, or Tests against Popery, and that (many of them)
refuse to take any: Or to give any legal security to the public that they are
not Papists; these are Protestants, the Protestants: But those that profess the
Primitive Christianity reformed by our Martyrs from Roman errors, and
corruptions, and established by our Laws; Those that have publicly bound
themselves to this truly Protestant Religion, by Subscriptions, Oaths,
Sacraments, Tests, (all the ways that the wisdom of the nation can find out for
security) these are Papists, Popishly affected, Papists in Masquerade!

Sir, I speak nothing of this to expose, vilify, or affront any; but out of
tender regard to the honor of the Protestant name, which must needs needs by
such courses, I pray God preserve us from the ill consequences of proceedings
that are so partial, and unjust, and that Popery in the event have not the
advantages by them that they so fairly offer it.

I hope you do not understand me, as if I intended that all were Atheists,
Debauches, etc. that seem now to be overrun with an extravagant zeal and
violence, and that wrongfully charge the Church of England. No; I know what
allowances are to be made for men's mistakes, who are abused by the cunning
deceits of crafty designs. Many honest, and Religious persons are so mislead at
this time: and those I pity, and pray for. But that there are many wicked men
of the sorts I have described, studying, and endeavoring the ruin both of
Church, and State, you cannot but apprehend; and those it is that I humbly
caution you against. And if ever Popery have any considerable advantage in this
Nation, it will be by their means. The mistakes of furious Zeal against Popery
may effect that, which all the direct Zeal in the world for it, would never be
able to bring about. It Is sobriety that must settle, and secure us.

SIR,

I Have thus written to you with honest plainness, and freedom, such as becomes
an Englishman, and a sincere Member of the Church of England. To the same
purpose I have spoken to others, as I have had occasion, with no other design
but of serving the Government, and Protestant Religion by Law Established, to
which by the Grace of God, while I live, I will adhere. But for this innocent
sort of discourse I have suffered severely from the fierce Zeal I have
described, and have been Stigmatized by it as a Papist, a denier of the Plot,
and an Enemy to Parliaments. I have reason to think that you have heard these
injurious things of me, and because you have not seen me of late, and do not
know how I may be changed, I shall trouble you with a short account of my self,
in reference to these Charges.

For Popery, I always was as hearty an Enemy to it as any man that lives, and
have declared that Emnity by such zealous, frequent and public oppositions as
would expose me to the greatest rigours and persecutions of that Church, should
it (which God forbid) ever regain Authority, and power in this Nation; Besides
that I must certainly, unavoidably suffer the loss of all under it. I say, I
have publicly, solemnly, earnestly declared against Popery, ever since I was
capable of examining and knowing it; I have represented the Idolatries,
Superstitions, Heresies, Immoralities, Novelties, Absurdities, Nonsense, and
all the Antichristianism of that Church, with as much earnestness and
plainness, as any man in my station has or can do. I have done it always, on
all occasions, and particularly since the late Plot, and often since, (and our
dangers require this Zeal from us.) Such a Papist, Sir, I am: One that never
thought of that Religion, but to detest it: And this inclination and
resolution, by the help of God, I shall carry to my Grave.

As to the Plot, I have reasoned about Circumstances, and spoken of the folly,
and infatuation of the Contrivance, and management by the Papists; I have
laughed at many Coffee-house Stories, and Terrors, for which there was no
evidence; I have been sensible of other Plots, and Designs built on the
occasion of the Popish one, and have spoken of those, with concernment, as in
these Papers I have done: But as here (all along) I suppose the grand Popish
Plot, and own there was such a one; so in all Conversations, I have
acknowledged the Plot, and see too much cause to believe the late Designs, and
endeavors of Papists to work our Ruin. I know enough of the malignity of
their Principles, and the vileness of their Practices (of this sort) to dispose
me to receive the Evidence.

As to the last charge, I heartily reverence the Constitution, and respect
Parliaments as much as any Friend to the Government can do. I know their
usefulness, their necessity, and the veneration that is due to the
Representatives of a great Nation, and of our own. But after all, this Body how
great, how venerable soever, owns it self to be Fallible; and as all men take
the liberty to blame what they dislike in public proceedings, and even in
theirs; so have I sometimes taken notice of such Mistakes, and Miscarriages as
the violence and designs of ill men have led that Assembly into.
Notwithstanding which, I can truly say, I honor Sober, Religious, and Loyal
Parliaments, as much as any man. And I hope this, when it meets, will prove it
self to be such, to the confusion of all Popish and Fanatical Designs, and the
establishment of our Religion, Peace, and a lasting Happiness. This is my
constant Prayer to Almighty God for Them; and to this every true Englishman
will say Amen.

I have been a little tedious, and perhaps impertinent in this Apology; but I
hope you will pardon it, as an effect of the great desire I have to preserve my
self in your good opinion, which I hope I shall never forfeit by deserving such
Characters as the fierceness of some would fasten on me: But always continue as
I am, a sincere lover of the true Protestant Religion, an affectionate Friend,
and Subject to the Government, in Church, and State, as now established: And
particularly to your self,

Sir, An humble and faithful Servant.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.
THE First occasion of our further danger of Popery, considered, viz. the
weakening of the Church of England. The Constitutions of this Church are our old
Protestantism: This Church our Bulwork against Popery, which unavoidably will
follow the destruction of it. The present sad state of the Church of England
described: Its diminution the great occasion of the late growth of Popery. The
way to keep that out, is to establish something; nothing but the Church of
England can with reason, or safety be set up; not Presbytery; not Independency;
not any new Model. The strengthening the Church of England earnestly pressed. The
unwearied designs and endeavors of the Kings, and Kingdoms Fanatic enemies
against it, at this time, particularly, and always in our dangers. An humble
offer for security of Protestant Religion under a Popish Prince, if such should
ever be.

CHAP. II.
The Second occasion of our danger, viz. our ill treatment of our Protestant
Clergy, those of the Church of England. They formed our Reformation, and diverse
of them sealed it with their blood: They still are the great Champions of the
Protestant Cause: They have writ all that is considerable against Popery: They
by their Writings and Sermons have, and do still with great zeal, judgment, and
success oppose those corruptions. The unreasonableness of ourvilifying, and
depressing them, while we pretend zeal against Popery. Their ill usage briefly
described: By it Popery is advanced. The most common Objections against the
Clergy of our Church considered. The senslesness of that charge, that our
Clergy are inclinable to Popery. How contrary that is not only to their
Principles and Professions, but to their Interest: This Charge favors and
recommends Popery. Considerations why we should stand by, countenance, respect
and encourage our Clergy, now especially. Some humble motions on their behalf,
for the advantage of the Church, and the prevention of Popery.

CHAP. III.
The Third occasion, viz. our Divisions: Those described. They promote Popery
by way of Scandal, and by giving them direct opportunity to play their game. No
way to assurance against Popery but Union; which is the way to that, (1.)
Toleration is not. Liberty of Conscience stated and considered. Its
destructiveness to all Government; That no Party is really for it, but use it
only for clamor, and pretense when they are not uppermost. It is Rule all
would have. (2.) Accommodation with Dissenters considered, modestly proposed,
and in the supposable advantages, and dangers of it, and humbly left to the
wisdom of our Governors. (3.) What ever is thought fit, Accommodation, or not,
the Constitution should be made firm, and Laws put in execution, in order to
our Union, and security against Popery. Objections answered.

CHAP. IV.
The Fourth occasion, our carelessness and and indifferency in Religion. The
necessity of sober Zeal, Religion is recommended, and secured by it, ours much
prejudiced by the want of it. All Sects advance and grow by zeal, though
ignorant, and mistaken; Instances of their zeal; we ought to be as zealous in a
good cause, as they are in a bad; in what particulars we should be more
zealous, viz. in attending Public Prayers, and Sacraments; in studying the
Constitution of our Church; and in observance of the Lords day; zeal in
Preaching largely discoursed, and the folly and mischiefs of the trifling,
wittisizing way largely represented. Preaching vindicated against the opinion
of its being a very indifferent, and merely humane thing.

CHAP. V.
The Fifth occasion, viz. extravagant Zeal. The present fury, and pretended
zeal of Atheists justly reprehended, and scorned. The mischiefs their Fury
against Popery does the Protestant Religion; to prevent which we ought to
disown their pretended help, and kindness: An humble motion for the effectual
suppressing of Atheism, in order to our security against Popery. The
extravagant zeal of others mischievous. Men's unreasonable multiplying the
numbers of Papists an advantage to Popery. Their real numbers in this Nation
inconsiderable; their hopes from Foreign Assistances vain. The senselesness of
their Plots. The unpracticableness of introducing Popery here by force. Our
multiplying the number, and strength of Papifts encourages Plots. The pretense
of their many secret Friends considered; the mischievous use of that pretense
to the confounding of us among our selves; as it has of late been used it
effectually does the Papists business; a way of prevention offered. Another
branch of this injustice, viz. uncharitable charging all that profess
conversion from Popery, as if they were still Papists. Another instance, viz.
the appropriating the name of Protestant to the Sects, and other enemies to the
Government: The mischiefs of it. The Conclusion, being the Authors Apology.

FINIS.
Advertisement concerning the ERRATA.
THe Reader is desired to take notice of the following Errors of the Press:
Some of them (especially in the first, second, and fifth Pages) are Alterations
of the Copy; others are, mostly mispointings, but such as perplex, and alter
the Sense: The rest I leave to common Ingenuity, and Charity.

Errata.
Page 1. Line 18. Read England, the Protestant Reformation. p. 2. l. 6. r. is
that which we call the Church of England. p. 5. l. 21. r. Patrons of the
notion. p. 7. l. 26. r. model. p. 15. l. 21. r. wrest their Rights from them.
p. 33. l. 4. r. decent, uncalled, to offer their opinion. l. 5. r. I think. p.
40. l. 9. r. wittisizing way. p. 44. l. 17. r. Zeal, and help. p. 47. l. 3. r.
Protestant Non-conformists. l. 28. r. to which. l. 32. r. populous. p. 48. l.
6. r. one more, or two (at most.)


