A LETTER FROM St. OMARS, IN Farther Confirmation of the Truth OF THE POPISH
PLOT, UPON A Consideration of diverse Circumstances IN THE TRIALS.

TOGETHER With several new Matters relating to a farther Discovery thereof; AND
PARTICULARLY, A LETTER from Mr. JENNISON, Proving Mr. Ireland to have been in
London the 19th. of August, contrary to the Staffordshire Witnesses, and what
the five Jesuits (lately Executed) insisted upon at their Trials. With REMARKS
upon the said Letter.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXIX.

A LETTER FROM SAINT OMARS TO A Friend in LONDON.
SIR,
I Should be unworthy of that care and friendship which you have expressed
toward me, if I should not gratefully acknowledge the satisfaction I have
taken, not only in your several Letters from time to time, giving me an
account of the Discovery of that most hellish and horrid Plot, so lately made
known in England, for the alteration of Religion and subversion of Government,
by Massacre, War and Fire; but also the great pleasure I have received in the
present which you sent me of all the printed and written papers, publicly made
known, and privately dispersed concerning this Plot. I must therefore, after I
have acknowledged the favor therein, let you know the satisfaction I have
taken, how much it has wrought upon my Conscience, what impressions they have
made on others, the Objections some have made, and the Answers I have been
enabled to give them, grounded on those public Trials and Transactions which
you have sent me. And as you have truly convinced me of the great Error I was
run into; so no doubt, by your Argument and Assistance, I have been able to do
the like on this side the Water, to many, who erred not wilfully, but were led
aside by the cunning Discourses of the Adverse Party, and to stop the mouths of
some of the most malicious and violent Enemies of the Protestants in England,
who here have endeavored to make us believe there has been no such Plot
contrived by the Jesuits and Papists in England, or else that the Plot is only
of the making and contriving of those you call Sectaries and Fanatics in
England; and that all this is wrought through their Cunning and Contrivance, to
scandalize and extirpate the Catholics and their Religion in England: and
other stories to the discrediting the King's Evidence, as if they had falsely
accused, and took away the lives of many holy men and Catholics, innocent and
unknowing of any such Plot or Massacre, thereby begetting a general Odium and
Evil-speaking against the Sectaries and Heretics, as they call them, in
England. By these cunning Artifices and sedulous Insinuations, they have been
very careful in these parts, to take away the scandal and reproach so horrid a
design might lay upon the Catholic Party, and to invalidate, as much as they
are able, all reports and proofs thereof; and therefore have endeavored to
stop and suppress all the light thereof, and all Books or Papers that may any
way inform the Judgments of the people, who are made to believe quite contrary
to what you have made me to see. And I question not but that also, in some
measure, the same skill and artifice of the Jesuitical Party is used amongst
you as well as here, and that by their cunning Insinuations and Contrivances,
they have been able (as you seem to intimate) to pervert the minds of many in
England, and to fix on them a strange blindness and disbelief of the Plot, not
only of those of their Religion, and well-affected to their way, but also of
many of the more moderate and simply honest of the contrary Party, who have
been led aside by their specious pretenses, and sedulous insinuations, and
diligent aspersions of the Witnesses, and startled and confirmed by the
pertinacious denying and seeming Innocence of those that suffered for the same.

If then in England, where these things are transacted, they are able to
alienate the minds of many, and to keep them in the mist of ignorance and
unbelief, you may be sure that at this distance, and where the power of your
Adversaries has more force and strength, and where they have far greater means
to stifle the breaking forth of the least Ray of the light of Truth, that the
people are much more ignorant, and by that means more prejudiced against you;
though there are none almost, to whom I have made known and communicated those
Papers and Letters you sent me, but are either convinced, or know not how to
raise any just Argument against the Truth of what they assert.

It has always been the way of these sedulous Emissaries of the Society, to
palliate great miscarriages with specious pretenses, and to daub over the most
notable deformities with an holy paint and religious fucus, and to color their
detected Crimes by pious frauds, lies, and perjuries. And it is not now they
begin to practice those things you seem to hint at in your Letters, as may by
several instances and known eveniments be made appear: and which indeed has
been a scandal to many good Catholics, and knowing Christians, who have not at
all approved of the ways of these Jesuitical Brethren, who have converted
Religion to principles of State, and changed Christianity to mere Policy; and
by endeavoring to maintain their own greatness, and by unjust and politic
ways striving to attain their ends of Power and Dominion, have lost much the
opinion, not only of those of the contrary Religion or Reformed, but also of
many of those who are Roman Catholics, who have been distasted at their
principles and practices. For as there were Roman Catholics before there were
Jesuits, so were that Order not in being, I am apt to believe that their number
would not be less: for though by their Artifices and Policies they have made
themselves great, and kept up the power of the Bishop of Rome, and by their
insinuations into all the Courts of the Princes of Christendom made themselves
formidable, and knowing of all affairs; yet on the other hand, by the many
miscarriages and detections of many of their Plots and Contrivances, and their
wicked and evil Machinations, they have opened the mouths of the Protestants
against the Roman Catholics too justly, and also opened the Eyes to see, and
alienated the Hearts of many of the Roman Catholics themselves from their
detested ways and abominable courses, which they have manifestly taken to
establish themselves, or as they say to propagate Religion, and to extirpate
Heresy.

But certainly, Truth does not need the hand of Policy, and especially evil and
immoral Maxims, and unvertuous Contrivances, to defend it: and as it is far
from the Doctrine and Method of Christ and his Apostles, and their immediate
Successors, to propagate his Religion or Christianity by Plots, Massacres,
Force, or Cruelty, or by any unjust way or means; so always the attempt thereof
has ever proved pernicious, and: has raised up evil thoughts of Religion in
many, making some Atheists, and others Heretics and Schismatics; and by that
means they have lost more from the Catholic Cause, then ever they have gained
thereto by these pernicious courses. For where the dint of Argument cannot
prevail, and where the Conscience cannot be allured, the dint of Sword,
Oppression and Persecution, will never be able to overcome; nor Plots and
Contrivances, though never so well laid, will prevail, as we have often
experimentally found. And though by these means any Religion may seem for a
time to be established, yet at last it will quickly burst out into a flame; for
it is impossible, with the greatest Tyranny to establish the greatest Truth,
unless it be received into the Minds and Consciences of the people.

I must therefore once again acknowledge the great satisfaction I have received
by those Books, Papers and Letters which you have sent me, and which have
rectified my doubtful thoughts, and made me very sensible, that there has not
only been a very great Conspiracy, and most horrid Plot, but also they have
made me see who were the contrivers and carriers on of the same: and now I
likewise rest satisfied in the punishment of some of the Offenders, being
assured that they died not for the Cause of Religion, (as they would here make
us believe) but as Criminals and Traitors to their King, Country, and Laws.

I must confess, there has nothing more troubled my Conscience, and made me
question the verity of the Romish Faith, in which I was bred, then the laying
open of these horrid Designs, and the constant practices of these Brothers of
Jesus in all parts: and it has so far awakened me, that I now make it my
resolution, to satisfy all those scruples that have arisen thereupon, and to
inform my self farther, and to try if those Arguments that the Protestants have
used to justify their Separation, be according to those Rules laid down in the
Scriptures or not, and to make a more diligent scrutiny into all those
differences between us, that I may be no longer in the dark, and grope after
uncertainties. And therefore I shall desire still your assistance and
correspondence, in furnishing me with those Books and Writings that may be fit
for this intention: for as I am an Englishman I have a natural love to my
Country, and notwithstanding any difference in point of Religion, and distance
at present from the same, I constantly wish, as I ought, its prosperity and
felicity, as I believe all true English Catholics not Jesuited, or perverted
by their horrid and destructive principles, do the same; and truly hate all
these undue and unrighteous ways of propagating Religion, and the Romish Faith.
And I cannot but take notice of that cruel and detestable malice of the
Brothers of the Society, who would have cut off Berry a Priest, for writing in
favor of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, which I think any true
Catholic may take, without any wrong to his Conscience; and for that end (as I
find in your Depositions) they offered 10 li. as a reward to the said Deponent
to kill the said Berry. I cannot therefore blame my Countrymen, if after all
these doings, which have appeared so horridly unjust, cruel and bloody in all
respects, they are grown severe and bitter against all Romish Catholics; and
many thousands, though innocent, must suffer in your thoughts and opinions, for
the sake of these wicked wretches. And the Plot has now appeared so general
and universal through the Nation, and not only there, but in France, Flanders,
Spain, and Italy, that I cannot but wonder at the extent thereof, and admire at
the great and abundant mercy of God, that has almost miraculously brought it to
light, and prevented it, when even ready to be effected, and even in the height
of their security. And this certainly shows, that God does not own such wicked
and undue ways and practices, as to bring in any Religion whatsoever by Blood,
Plots, Murders, and Designs.

And I must here take notice and acknowledge, that long before the discovery of
this Plot, I have observed in discourse with many on this side the Water, that
there was a more then usual expectation of something to be done in England; and
sometimes they would darkly intimate, that e're long we should see the true
Catholic Religion flourish again in that Kingdom as much or more then ever: so
that no doubt, many more here knew of this secret, and had great expectations,
besides those who were entrusted in carrying on the Design.

As to what you seem to desire, how this Plot is resented here, among us, and
what people say thereof, I must answer, that the stream seems to run two ways,
and is divided according to the humor of the people. For the more moderate and
just do extremely blame the Authors and Promoters of it, and look upon them as
the Ruiners of the Catholic Religion in England, who had such indulgence, such
favor and kindness showed them, both from Prince, and People, that
notwithstanding the severe penal Laws against them in that Kingdom, they
enjoyed fully their own, lived quietly without molestation, reproach, and
distinction, were admitted into all Offices and places in the Commonwealth and
Army, enjoying all the liberty they could expect, or justly desire: and
therefore these extremely blame the Jesuitical Party, and all those who were
Conspiratours, and promoters of this Plot and horrid Design, as wicked and
ungrateful persons, that should abuse so much mercy and indulgence shown to
them, and that they could not see their own quiet and happiness in enjoying
their Liberty and Estates without interruption, in a Kingdom wholly Protestant,
and where they are but a handful in comparison of the others, so that they
could not hope to prevail, without horrid Massacres, much Blood, War and
Devastation. So that these men seem to be odious, and detested by all that have
or make any profession of Godliness, Religion and Piety, who do verily believe,
that they have thereby utterly subverted and ruined the Catholic Cause in
England, believing that you will now urge all those penal Statutes in force
against them, and make others more severe, where they are desicient, or banish
them wholly out of the Land. And that this will justly open the mouths, and
awaken the Pens of all the Protestants against them, and rip up all their
former Cruelties, to set the teeth of the people on edge against them, and to
render them odious, by showing their former bloody doings, which had else been
forgotten, and were raked up under the ashes of Time. As I perceive by one Book
you sent, called The Antichristian Principle Discovered, in a brief and true
account of all the hellish Plots, bloody Persecutions, and horrid Massacres,
and most inhumane Cruelties and Tortures, exercised by the Papists throughout
Europe, etc. Which shows how much the Spirits of people are awakened against
them by those new Machinations, and that all their former Errors, Faults and
Cruelties will be anew laid open, and brought out of the Grave of Oblivion, to
testify against them.

But it is not only in England, that they have by these unjust and wicked
devices done themselves and their Party an injury, but they have awakened the
jealous eyes of all the Protestant party throughout Europe, who seem to be
startled and troubled at this wicked and horrid Design. And as I have heard it
lately reported, it has been so very ill resented by all the Protestant
Princes in Germany, that it has put them upon stricter caution or preserving
themselves and Religion against these sort of men, and the Papists in general,
when they see England, the prop and glory of Protestantism, so desperately
struck at, and like to be subverted by these horrid Plots, and wicked
Machinations and Conspiracies.

But there is another Party, who either out of cunning, malice or ignorance,
will not believe, or at least seem not to believe this to be any such Plot as
you in England would make it to be. And these sort of men are very sedulous in
raising diverse Objections, and endeavor to lessen the Evidences, and asperse
the Judges, calumniate both Magistrates and People, and by all manner of unjust
ways and contrivances seek to instill into the Minds of people that there is no
such grand Conspiracy, and that it is only a subtle and politic way of some
great ones in England, to make new Combustions and Insurrections there, by
which means either to set up the Presbyterian Party, or to bring in again a
Second Commonwealth; and that all those who have died for those Crimes objected
against them, as Coleman, Ireland, Pickering, Groves, Green, Berry, Hill, etc.
all died Innocent, Saints and Martyrs, without sufficient proof, and
undeservedly. And this these sort of men have been so very careful to promote,
and with that Confidence and Artifice, that truly, they have begot to
themselves a very great Party, not only on this side the Water, but (as I
understand from some coming from thence) in England also. And indeed, before I
received your last present of all the Trials, which you sent me, I could not
tell what to thing of it: but since I have read them, and seriously weighed all
things in an equal Scale and with a just Balance, I am thoroughly convinced of
the reality of the Plot, and the justness of those men's Sufferings who have
died for the same.

And since you have given me the liberty and freedom to communicate to you my
thoughts fully concerning this Plot, I think it will not be impertinent
cursorily to take notice of the several Objections they have raised against it,
to annihilate or invalidate the same, or at least to call off the Odium and
blackness of such a wicked Conspiracy from themselves on others; and also, the
Answers I have been able to give them in relation thereto. And since it may be
of a public good and concern, and to the satisfaction of many fluctuating
people, if you shall think it requisite, I give you free liberty to publish the
same.

In the first place then, that they may beget a very ill opinion of the Persons
that are the Discoverers of this Plot, and Accusers of those concerned therein,
they have endeavored to render, them ill Persons in their Lives and
Conversations; and so by this means to make all they shall say or swear not to
be believed or adhered to. They remember the Maxim, Asperse boldly, something
will stick. This is only to throw dirt in the faces of those persons that God
has raised up to detect the most horrid of Villainies. And thus Mr. Ireland, in
his Trial, very subtly brings in Sir Dennis Ashburnham to lessen the Testimony
of Mr. Oats, by making him a person of little credit and of ill fame, and that
he broke Prison at Dover; but that only by hearsay.

Indeed could they have given any good proof of Mr. Oats his being formerly
perjured they might have done something as to taking off his Testimony, and
weakened his Evidence in the opinion of the Jury: but what they endeavored to
prove was so very weak and frivolous, that it made rather against them, and
only showed their Malice, for all that Sir Dennis says, amounts only to this,
that he had known Mr. Oats in his youth, and that then he was not a person of
that Credit as to be depended on for what he should say, and that had the
Discovery of the Plot come only from his Testimony, he might have made some
doubt of it. But then, the very same person confesses, that it being so
corroborated with other Circumstances, he was convinced and satisfied in the
truth of the thing. See now, from what little shadow of ill, they raised a dark
mist to blind the eyes of the people, and by it would endeavor to make them
believe all that Mr. Oats should say was false, and that the Plot was of his
own making and contriving, set on by the Enemies of their Religion.

But let it be granted that Mr. Oats had been formerly an ill Liver, or what
they say of him as to his Life and Conversation in his youth: we know that God
makes use of Sinners to glorify his Name, and a conspiring and persecuting
Saul may become a great and glorious Apostle. Had not Mr. Oats had ill
Principles, he never could have been drawn into so horrid a design, (but the
Hand of God was in it, who out of Evil produces Good:) for the Jesuits are so
close and subtle, and carry on their Designs with that Secrecy and Contrivance,
that it would be impossible to detect them, and to have a plain and evident
proof against their Treasonable practices, but by one of themselves, and of
their Conspiracy. And therefore it cannot be thought any hard usage, (as the
Lord Chief Justice Scroggs observes,) to convict Offenders by Testimony of
their Fellows, because it is hardly possible to bring other Witnesses: and
therefore in that respect Witnesses cannot be absolutely spotless.

Considering the depth of this horrid Plot, and the great persons that were
collaterally in the same, carrying on great and various designs, Mr. Oats, the
first Discoverer, ran a very great risque of his Credit and Life, so that it
behoved him to be cautious and wary, and not to discover a thing of this nature
without great proof: and for that by the Laws of England, one single Testimony,
though backed with other Circumstances, will not serve to condemn a person in
case of High Treason, Mr. Oats could not of himself have been able to have
brought the Offenders to condign punishment, had not God (whose hand was in the
Discovery) raised up others also afterward to give Evidence, and to clear up
and dilucidate the whole matter. And this very thing it seems, made those
concerned in the Plot so very bold and confident, as not to Fly upon his first
Discovery of the same: and he had like to have been born down with a strong
tide of Opposition, till the Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfry, whose
forwardness and activity in doing his Duty, and detecting this horrid design,
exposed him to their malice and fury; and they, who had gone so far, as to
endeavor to murder their King, and subvert the Government of their Country,
would not stick at the little murder of one that was so active a minister in
bringing the business to light, and unravelling the bottom of their wicked
designs.

But the murder of this person strangely awakened the minds of people, who
were before in a great Security, and looked but lightly on the Plot, (as I am
informed by Relations from England) and the cry of his blood called down God's
Vengeance on the Plotters, and no doubt, they gave themselves a mortal blow
when they strangled this Innocent person. And since it was requisite, that
there should be more Evidence then one, God made use of this Murder, so far as
to awaken thereby the Conscience of Mr. Bedlow, who was to have been engaged in
the Murder of this Gentleman, and who knew of it, and was one in the great
Conspiracy and Plot, and who also, though fled for the same, was at last
compelled by the force of his troubled Conscience to come in voluntarily, to
second Mr. Oats, and to detect both the Murder and the Plot.

I cannot hear, that they have any thing to object against Mr. Bedlow in
particular to take off his Evidence, but that they asperse him in general
terms, as if he were hired to the same: but if any one of an unbiased Judgment
shall seriously read and weigh all the several proofs made out against the
Criminals, by Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow, agreeing in all Circumstances, though
no intimacy was ever known to be between them, he must needs acknowledge, that
nothing is more clear and evident, then that there could not be any such
Conspiracy between them, to invent and frame so many strange stories and
relations as they have given in under their Oaths, with all Circumstances as to
Places, Time and Persons, without betraying themselves, or being intrapped by
those quick eyed persons by whom they have been examined, and of which we
should quickly have heard. So that I cannot but admire at the strange impudence
of those persons, who still buz into the ears of the people, that it is no Plot
but of Oats and Bedlow's making, giving the lie in the face of a whole Nation
to the Justices, that have taken the Examinations, to the Judges, that have
sat on the Trials, to the Council, that have sifted and looked into the Papers
and Writings belonging to these Plotters, Traitors and Murderers, and to the
Lords and Nobility of England, and to the Parliament, the Representative of all
the People of England, who in their Vote die Lunae 24. Martii 1678. declared
nemine Contradicente, That they were fully satisfied by the proofs they had
heard, That there now is, and for diverse years last past has been, a horrid
and Treasonable Plot and Conspiracy contrived and carried on by those of the
Popish Religion, for the Murdering of his Majesty's sacred Person, and for
Subverting the Protestant Religion, and the Ancient and well-established
Government of this Kingdom. I say, that after all this clear Evidence against
them, and that nothing can be made out more plain and perspicuous, that they
should still endeavor to press upon the belief of people, that it is a
fictitious Plot, is the most strange piece of Impudence I ever heard or read of.

Can any that entertain such a thought believe that the whole Nation are
deceived? and that all these, the wisest of the Kingdom, are deluded, or can be
made Fools and Asses of by Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow? or in reason think or
suppose, that all these persons are so wicked to frame a Plot against the
Papists, and to take away the several Lives of these wretches, only to
extirpate a few Papists out of the Kingdom? One of these must consequently
follow if there be not in reality any such Plot, as these sort of men would
have people believe. But God seeming to resolve to discover fully the bottom of
this design, and to make it apparent to all the world, he has given a cloud of
Witnesses, and wholly to take away that scruple, has raised up Prance and
Dugdale, two more, to second and confirm the truth of Oats and Bedlow's
assertions.

As to Mr. Dugdale, I have heard that they have been so far from aspersing him,
that they have (some of them) been forced publicly to acknowledge him a sober,
honest man: yet he was drawn into the Plot for Religion's sake, till he came to
know of the intended Murder of the King, and then the alarm-Bell of his
Conscience rung so loud that it awakened him out of his Lethargy, and brought
him to a confession of his Crimes, and to be an Evidence against them.

As to Mr. Prance, God suffered him to go on and to be zealous (as I observe
by his own Book) in this Plot, and to be one of the Instruments assisting in
the murder of that worthy Knight Sir Edmundbury Godfry, and to continue
without remorse, till he was taken only upon a bare surmise of his being from
home some nights, which caused him to be brought before the Council, where he
was discovered by Mr. Bedlow, to be one of those persons that he had seen in
the Room where Sir Edmundbury Godfry lay murdered; which Mr. Prance himself
acknowledges to be the immediate hand of God, which so far pressed upon his
Conscience, as afterward to make a full and ingenuous Confession both of the
Murder and Plot, for which he received the King's Pardon. And this is a
strenuous evidence against them, and strong confirmation of the Assertions of
Mr. Oats and Bedlow, and that what they had delivered, was not by Combination,
or any Conspiracy between them.

But against Mr. Prance, I find they had raised three several objections,
thinking thereby to make his testimony inconsiderable. The first was, that he
was Mad. But as to this, I think all that have read his Depositions, and the
Evidence he has given as to the Plot, with the circumstances of his being
engaged in the same, and the punctual account of the Murder of Sir Edmundbury
Godfry, will not judge him to be bereft of his senses. The things too well
cohere together to proceed from a distracted person. The second is, that he was
tortured, and ill used in Prison, to make him Confess against his Conscience;
and that all he had said as to the Plot and Murder, was through fear and
terror. But I shall only mention his own words, sufficient to clear this
Aspersion, page 25. of his Narrative, That the Report was wholly false and
scandalous, but that on the contrary, he had received all the kind usage and
civilities imaginable, from Captain Richardson the Keeper of Newgate, where he
was confined all the time of his stay; and that nothing of compulsion or force
was put upon him to declare any thing, but that what he did was freely and
voluntarily, not biased by any sinister end, nor out of any malice, or in
wrong to any person whatsoever: And this he declares in the presence of
Almighty God, the Searcher of Hearts, before whose just and dreadful Tribunal
he expects to appear, and begs and implores the mercy of the King of Heaven, on
his sincere Repentance, for his wicked fact, and great sin committed, in being
an Accessory to the Death of Sir Edmundbury Godfry, as he had obtained that of
his King here for the same. The third was, that being through fear and terror
made to acknowledge himself guilty, he was forced in his Conscience to deny all
again, before His Majesty of Great Britain. And here indeed they have some
appearance of Truth, and with it they have made a great dust, thinking by this
means to blind the eyes of the people. But Mr. Prance himself in his Narrative
page 22. and 23. so well clears that aspersion, that there can be no more said,
and in my judgment renders him more strong and firm after his staggering and
fluctuation: for he calls it there his imbecility and weakness, that though he
had only for his Conscience sake made his free Confession, being awakened by
the horror of his Crimes, yet afterward he went and declared to the King that
he was Innocent, and that all those he had accused were also Innocent. Now they
cry out, a man that will thus say now one thing, and then another thing, is not
to be believed; and that his Evidence is nothing worth. But page 23. Mr. Prance
says this for himself, That the fear and terror of death (not then having any
assurance of Pardon) lying heavy upon him, and also the fear of being
assassinated by the bloody and revengefull Priests and Jesuits, and also that
if he should escape with Life, that he should wholly lose his Trade, and so be
consequently ruined and undone, since his chief subsistence depended on the
Trade he had with the Roman Catholics, and that his Soul was not yet entirely
out of the snare of Popish thraldom, induced him to think he might lawfully
say, That he and all the rest were Innocent, because the horrid Crime of the
Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfry had been declared by the Popish Priests to be
no sin, and so in that sense they were all Innocent, though he had not since
the Fact received Absolution. And thus by the way you may observe how they all
die Innocent, as themselves at the Gallows are pleased to say.

But then he desires you to consider, that to strengthen his first assertion,
and to invalidate this act of his weakness and fear, he says, That what he had
declared concerning the Murder was solemnly and upon Oath; and this supposed
Retractation, suddenly in Passion, Consternation and Fear, and not upon Oath.
Secondly, That he was no sooner carried back from the King and Council to
Newgate, not being above half an hour after, but that he earnestly requested
his Keeper to carry him back again, that he might justify his former Confession
to be true in all Circumstances, and that what he had lately said contradictory
thereto, was caused by his perplexity of mind, and the terror he lay under;
and being immediately carried back, He denied his Recantation, and voluntarily
upon Oath confirmed what he had first declared to be true.

And afterward falling sick whilst in Newgate, and like to die, he then
expecting to die, declared and often asserted to diverse his first Confession to
be true in all points, as also since he recovered his health: So that it is very
plain, all this dust which the Priests and Jesuits have raised about this
matter is blown away, and Truth is become perspicuous to any ingenuous man,
that will but impartially look into these transactions, and consider them as
they are, and not as they are represented by their false perspectives.

This is all that I have heard to be objected as to the Witnesses, and you may
judge by what I have been able to say, how frivolous it is. But these malicious
persons have not only raised objections against those persons before
mentioned, who were Witnesses against these Plotters, but they also endeavor
to cast an Odium on the Judges themselves, especially the Lord Chief Justice;
whom they report to be a very violent and passionate man against them,
triumphing in their overthrow, handling the Prisoners cruelly and hardly,
daunting their Witnesses, and lashing out against them and their Religion, with
many the like bitter reports: and as I have heard, they have not stuck to have
sent him Letters from this side the Water, upbraiding him for walking contrary
to the steps of his Predecessors in the like Cases; and have also been so
impudent, as to send him a Book in the French Tongue, which endeavors to make
this Plot to be contrived and laid, not by the Papists, but by the Factious and
Sectarian Parties in England. But this is fumos vendere, and I think that
Worthy Person needs no Justification. I am satisfied, and suppose none that
have read or heard the Trials of those persons condemned for the Plot, and
Murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfry, but must remain satisfied in the fair and
upright dealing of the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, in hearing the Evidence
fully on all sides, and judging justly and indifferently between the King and
the Prisoners. And in this extraordinary Case, if after an impartial and legal
Trial, he, in summing up the Evidence, pressed it home to the Jury to do
Justice, and if he spoke something as to the Catholic Religion, and the
Jesuits, and Jesuited party, that has raised these Commotions and Conspiracies,
and brought those men into the snare, he ought not to be blamed; and I cannot
find either in him, or those other Judges who gave Sentence of Death on the
offenders, but that they did it according to Law, modestly, and without that
triumphing and bitterness, as they would seem to intimate.

But to what poor shifts are these men drove to hide this abominable Plot and
wicked Contrivance! when they would insinuate into the people on this side the
Water, and at a distance from you, that there never was any such person as Sir
Edmundbury Godfry, and that you in England have framed a story of such a
Murder, taking a hint from a Town called St. Edmunds Bury, to make the Papists
odious, and by that means to raise the malice of the people against them. This
shows very much the weakness of their Cause, or rather the foulness of it, that
they are forced to such narrow starting-holes to keep up their reputation here:
But with you this needs no answer, that worthy Gentleman being so well known in
the place where he dwelt, and was too public a Light to be hid in obscurity
under a Bushel.

To make this Discovery yet more full and evident, I find that God has brought
forth of the Tower of London one Mr. Everard, after four years imprisonment, to
give his Testimony concerning this very Plot, as appears by his Evidence and
Narrative upon Oath, who there affirms what he knew of the same, and after what
manner he came by it, being informed of it in Paris; so that coming over to
England, for the intent of discovering what he knew concerning the same, he was
clapped into the Tower, under the pretext of having some design of making an
attempt against the Duke of Monmouth's Life, where he was kept four years a
close Prisoner, without ever being brought to any Hearing or Trial; and though
he had several times made some discovery of this Plot to Sir John Robinson, the
then Lieutenant of the Tower, he either did not or would not believe any thing
of it, and would give no information to His Majesty concerning the same; as may
more fully appear by the Depositions of the said Mr. Everard: which certainly
is a very great Testimony, and very much corroborates the Assertions of the
other Witnesses concerned in the Plot, this man being none of the Confederacy,
and so not entrusted with the horrid Intrigues thereof; yet so far knew of the
same, as to have given some Light to the farther discovery of this dark design,
had he not been thus subtly prevented by some of the Plotters means, who are
since in custody themselves in Ireland, the Province where they were to Act;
for both that Kingdom and Scotland also was at the same time to have been
subverted, as well as England. But things were not then ripe, and God had
designed to let them run on yet farther in their wickedness, that his Glory
might appear more great and perspicuous, and that his mercy, and protecting
care of the King, and people of England, might be seen in diverting and making
known a Plot and Conspiracy so impending, and near taking effect, being carried
on with such secrecy, skill and power so many years: but to God be given the
Glory, and let the barking mouths of these Currs be stopped at last, and their
endeavors to hide and to make this Plot of no account be blasted and come to
naught. Amen.

Not withstanding the Artifices of these men to support their credit here
abroad, and in some measure with you also in England, their Accomplices are like
to suffer for their treasonable practices. Some of the underlings have already
paid for their Treason, with the forfeiture of their Lives; and the more great
and formidable Plotters are like also to be called to account, and the very
bottom of this horried and hellish design like to be discovered. It is
therefore now time for them to bestir themselves, and inded to say the truth,
they will leave no stone unturned, and having first endeavored to scandalize
the Evidence against them, they now try to corrupt it, and to take them off;
and this they have procured a subtle Agent to effect, one Nathaniel Reading,
who by great and fair promises of great rewards and some Gold in hand, would
have taken off Mr. Bedlow, one of the chief Evidence for the King against these
Plotters; but I find that Mr. Bedlow outwitted him, and notwithstanding he was
a subtle Lawyer, brought him to shame and punishment for his Crime, which
certainly was of a very high Nature, and which was punctually proved against
him, so that none can deny the Truth thereof. Now from this I argue, If there
were no Plot, as the Jesuits here have endeavored to have made us believe, why
should those accused thereof seek by such unjust means of bribery to take off
the Evidence against them; and to draw beforehand such matter only for the
Evidence to swear to, as might be sure not to make them guilty of Treason, and
out of the danger of the Law? Innocence needs not these shifts, and this also
to me, and all rational men, must needs be another proof of their Guilt; and
that notwithstanding all this stir that they have made to hide their Crime, and
most horrid Design, they are guilty of the same; and that there is and has
been a horrid Plot and Conspiracy.

Since you have desired me to communicate my mind fully to you, I hope you will
not think me tedious in that I cannot yet leave this matter; and that I resolve
as briefly as I can, to mention to you my thoughts on the several Trials of
those persons Condemned, both for the Conspiracy, and for the Murder of Sir
Edmundbury Godfry, and to let you know what here has been said thereupon: for
they have not only endeavored by all means and ways to bespatter and
calumniate the persons of those who discovered the Plot, the Judges who gave
Sentence on the Traitors, and the Witnesses against them, but also violently to
speak against the Justice and legality of the Trials themselves; and so far to
justify the Criminals, and those Condemned and Executed for Traitors, as if
they died illegally, without apparent proofs, and Innocent, and Martyrs.

And here I cannot but admire the strange audacity of these men, that they
should think to be able, with bold and lying assertions to lessen and pervert
matters of fact, and things so notoriously known and acted in the face of a
Nation; things not privately or clandestinely acted, but publicly and before
the whole World. But what is it that these men will not attempt? Tantum
Relligio potuit suadere Malorum?
It Is for the sake of Religion, and they may do any thing.

The first that comes upon the stage is Mr. Coleman, a leading man in this
horried Plot and Conspiracy, and a prime actor and promoter of it, by his great
correspondency abroad, both at Rome and in the French Court. I have read the
Trial of that person with caution and consideration; and however plain the
proofs may appear to me, and to others of unbyassed judgments, yet they have
had the confidence here to assert, and endeavor to impress it on the minds of
the people, that nothing could be made out against this man to render him
worthy of Death, or to make him guilty of Treason; and that he died innocent, a
Saint, and a Martyr; and that at the Execution he utterly denied there was any
such thing: a Plot, as was pretended, though he owned himself to be indeed a
zealour promoter of the Catholic Cause. And, as I have heard, many were so
sottishly deluded with this opinion of his innocence, that they purchased at
dear rates pieces of the Halter that strangled him, to keep as relics of his
Saintship. That a great argument of his innocence was, that he never
endeavored to make any escape or to fly away, having his Liberty several days
after the discovery of the Plot, and his being questioned about the same.

The men who seem thus to believe nothing, and go about to persuade others to
be of their opinion, and who raise the objections and reports to cast a mist
before the eyes of the people, are those no doubt whose Consciences know the
contrary to what they pretend to be absolutely true, and are and have been
agents and promoters of that Plot and Conspiracy they would cry down: and they
cannot but know that Coleman and the rest had a fair Trial; that the proofs
were home and evident against them, and that they suffered justly and by due
course of Law. But it is their interest to seem of another mind: and
notwithstanding they have endeavored to render the Lord Chief Justice odious,
and cunningly to insinuate his illegal proceedings with Mr. Coleman, those of
their own party could not but acknowledge the words that I showed them in the
seventeenth Page of his printed Trial to be full of honor and integrity. For
there speaking to Mr. Oats, who was then to be sworn as evidence against Mr.
Coleman, he gives him warning to speak nothing but the truth, not to add the
least tirtle that is false for any advantage whatsoever; for that since the
Prisoner's Blood and Life was at stake, he should stand or fall, be justified
or condemned by Truth. He also then puts Mr. Oats in mind of the sacredness of
an Oath, and that to falsily it, and thereby to take away a man's Life, was
Murder. Therefore he desired he would speak nothing but the downright Truth,
that he may not be condemned by any Circumstances, but by plain evidence of
Fact; and so that not only Mr. Coleman may be satisfied in the justness of his
Trial, but all people else. I think this is sufficient to manifest the
uprightness of the Judge, and that Mr. Coleman had a free and legal Trial for
his Life, according to the Laws of England.

But that they should so boldly and with a consident Brow assert, that nothing
could be made out against him, that should render him guilty of Treason or
worthy of Death, is very strange, when not only the witnesses that are brought
against him do prove sufficient matter of fact, but his own Letters produced
and read before his face, which he acknowledges for his own, do in plain words
say, that he is about a great work, no less then the Conversion of three
Kingdoms, and the total and utter Subversion and Subduing of that pestilent
Heresy the Protestant Religion, which has reigned so long in this Northern
part of the World; and for the doing of which there never was such great hopes
since our Queen Marie' s days as at this time: page 69. Now can there be any
thing more clear, then that this subversion of a Religion so generally received
in those three Kingdoms, and so long and thoroughly established, could not be
effected but by the subversion of those three Kingdoms, and by the destruction
of the established Laws, the Liberties, and the Lives of many thousands within
those three Kingdoms? and all this could not have been done without bringing in
of foreign Force, or raising a Rebellion amongst your selves, or both. In his
long Letter to Monsiour Le Chese he says, page 53. He would willingly be in
everlasting disgrace with all the world, if by the assistance of 20000. li. to
be obtained from the FRENCH KING, he did not regain to the DVKE his MASTER his
former Offices, and especially that of being ADMIRAL of the FLEET: and again
page 54. he tells you for what end this design is, that it might give the
greatest blow to the Protestant Religion in England that ever it received since
its birth: and therefore in the conclusion of one of his Letters to Le Chese,
the French King's Confessor, he desires the power and assistance of France,
which next under God he relies upon. So that his own hand convicts him of
endeavoring to bring in Foreign Powers into England, to establish the Roman
Catholic Religion, and to overthrow that now there established.

This was but one way to bring his designs about; the other most horrid and
bloody was the taking away the Sacred Life of the King, which Mr. Oats swears
against him, page 21. that he was privy to the Consult at the White-Horse
Tavern in the Strand, wherein it was resolved, that Grove and Pickering should
be employed to effect it, and that Mr. Coleman did approve of the same: so that
by this the proof was plain against him, for by the Laws of England his assent
made him equally guilty with the Assassinates, there being no Accessories in
Treason. And this Resolve he swears was communicated to Mr. Coleman in his
hearing in Wild-house: and page 22. he swears he heard him say the design was
well contrived. And page 24. Oats swears that Mr. Coleman knew of the four
Irish Russians sent to Windsor to kill the King; and in his hearing asked
Harcourt at Wild-house what care was taken for those four Gentlemen that went
last night to Windsor; who replied, there was So. li. ordered to be sent to
them, which he saw there on the Table, most part of it in Guinies; and that Mr.
Coleman gave a Guiny to the Messenger who was to carry this reward, to be
nimble and to expedite his journey. Then page 25. he swears again, that Mr.
Coleman was privy to the instructions sent by White, Provincial of the Jesuits,
from these parts, to empower the Consulters to propose 10000 li. to Sir George
Wakeman to poison the King; and that he not only saw and read these
Instructions, but copied them out, and transmitted them to several Conspirators
in this Plot within the Kingdom. And page 26. he swears, Mr. Coleman said he
thought 10000. li. was too little, and that it would be necessary to add 5000
li. more, that they might be sure to have it done. And page 27. he swears that
he saw Mr. Coleman's Commission for to be Secretary of State, from the General
of the Society of Jesus, by virtue of a Brief from the Pope; and that in
Fenwick's Chamber in Drury Lane he saw him open it, and own the receipt of it,
saying it was a good exchange.

One witness is not enough in this case, but I find also Mr. Bedlow a second to
strengthen the other's Evidence; he swears page 43. that he heard Mr. Coleman
say at his own house, That if he had an hundred Lives, and a sea of Blood to
swim through, he would spend it all to carry on the Cause of the Church of
Rome, and to establish that Church in England: and if there were an hundred
heretical Kings to be Deposed, he would see them all destroyed: so that both
swear to the killing of the King, and subverting the Government. I cannot find
that Mr. Coleman could make any good or satisfactory defense for himself, but
would have sought starting-holes and shifts to have amazed the minds of the
Jury, with putting the witnesses to have proved to a day what they averr, which
is in most things done, and would take that advantage, where Mr. Oats says
page 72. he will not be positive that it was such a day; but Mr. Coleman cannot
bring any positive proof that it was not that day, or that the witness
contradicted himself, as he attempted to do. And indeed though Mr. Coleman was
never so wise a man, sufficient to be Secretary of State, in matters of Fact so
plainly and quite blank proved against him it is a very hard matter to make a
good defense, nay impossible, unless he can any ways prove the witnesses
perjured, or some impossibility or contradiction in their Testimony, which Mr.
Coleman was not able to do. And therefore I cannot but admire that any can say
he had not a fair and legal Trial, and that nothing could be made out against
him worthy of death; for if knowing of this Conspiracy, of subverting Religion
established by Law in the Kingdom, of an intent of murdering the King to
promote that Cause, and also of endeavoring by Letters and Correspondence to
engage a Foreign Power to assist to bring in this Cause, be not worthy of
death, nothing is. And when such proof is made out so clearly, whatever Mr.
Coleman may say at his death of his Innocence, it ought not to be believed; for
he may have many evasions, and as Mr. Prance says in page 23, and 24. of his
Narrative, it is, according to the sense of the Jesuiticol Doctrine, (I will
not say Popish) to be Innocent, when the Priests had solemnly declared the fact
they were accused of to be no sin or crime, as they looked on this, of bringing
in the Romish Religion by the death of an Heretical Prince, to be: or he might
be Innocent having received full Absolution for the same. But whatever he
meant by those words of Justification, I believe few will ever believe him
innocent of the Fact for which he was accused, that either have heard or read
his Trial. And though he had the considence to deny this Plot, hoping perhaps
that it might yet take effect, things then not being so fully discovered as
since; or, as I heard, expecting a Pardon or Reprieve to the last moment: yet
it is now too generally received, and all the circumstances more fully appear
since his death, and that he was instrumental therein. That he fled not at
first for the same argues not his innocence, so much as the confidence he had,
that it was not so much known as he found afterward it was, and relying too
much on the hopes of being brought off. But herein also he was deluded, and
perhaps repented too late, having been heard to say with great passion at his
Execution, There is no Faith in Man.

The next who came upon their Trial were Ireland, Pickering, Grove, Whitebread
and Fenwick, being accused of this horrid Plot and Conspiracy: and though the
two last were by the oath of Mr. Oats sufficiently proved to have a great hand
in the Plot, and contrivance of the murder of the King; yet because there
wanted another concurrent Testimony, they were set by till further evidence
might be produced: and because these also are said to be innocent, and that the
matters of fact were not proved as they ought against them, I shall briefly
charge my memory with what I have read in the Printed Book of their Trials; and
as it gave me full satisfaction in that case, perhaps if diligently considered
it may do the like to others.

But first I shall observe to you, because many or most of these Conspirators
are Priests and Jesuits, and that Ireland, if not Pickering, is so; they have
given forth abroad, and no doubt spread the same amongst the ignorant at home,
that they were tried, and suffered quatenus Priests, upon the Statute of the 27
Eliz. by which Statute it is made Treason for any person that is a Subject born
in England, to take Orders from the Sea of Rome, and afterward to come into
England, and remain here 40 days, and ipso facto for that offense he shall be
found guilty, and suffer as a Traitor: so that they would endeavor to persuade
the ignorant that they suffer only as Roman Catholics, being Priests doing
their Function, obeying the orders of their Superiors, and the dictates of
their own Consciences; and not as Plotters, Traitors, and Disturbers of the
Public Peace. But that they might not fancy to themselves, that they suffered
Martyrdom for their Religion, nor persuade others to the same, as many have had
the vanity to believe, and others the confidence to assert, it was declared by
the King's Council in open Court, that these men, though liable to be punished
by that Statute, were not Indicted as Priests, nor upon that Statute of 27
Eliz. but of a more horrid and detestable Crime, The killing of the King, and
subversion of the Government.

And to prove this two witnesses are produced, Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow; and
though both cannot perhaps speak to one and the same Consultation, nor to one
and the same time, yet are they in Law two witnesses to one and the same Crime:
for thus several witnesses to several overt Acts are so many witnesses to the
Treason; and the several overt Acts which declare the Intention, are but as so
many evidences of the Treason: and this was openly declared to be Law in Court,
upon the Trial of these persons. And there is a great deal of reason that it
should be so, for men that run the hazard of their lives in such Consultations,
will hardly suffer two persons to meet twice together, whom they are not well
assured of, but so dispose them that they may meet severally, at several times,
and in diverse places, as Mr. Oats and Mr. Bedlow did.

As to the proof, Mr. Oats swears, page 19. and 20. that in a Consult, begun
at the White Horse Tavern in the Strand, and prosecuted at the Meetings at
their several Chambers, it was Resolved, that Pickering and Grove should go on
in their attempt to murder the King; that Grove should have 1500 l. for his
Reward, and Pickering 30000. Masses for his: (which at 12 d. a Mass comes to
the same sum in their account.) And this Resolve was signed by Whitebread,
Fenwick and Ireland, and by several others at four Clubs. He swears punctually
that he saw them sign it, and carried the Instrument from one to another, and
that they signed it severally at their Chambers. He also swears, page 23. that
Pickering and Grove accepted to murder the King on those terms, and that in
his presence they took the Sacrament and the Oath of Secrecy upon it, and did
agree to effect the bloody proposal. Farther, the same Deponent swears, that he
saw Pickering and Grove walking in the Park at several times, watching for an
opportunity of committing their bloody design of murdering his Majesty, having
with them screwed Pistols, which were longer then ordinary, and furnished also
with Silver Bullets: and, page 24. he swears that Grove would have the Bullets
champt, to make the wound incurable. And farther, that in the Month of March,
having a fair opportunity of effecting their design, the Flint in Pickering's
Pistol being loose, he durst not make an attempt; for which negligence Grove
was chidden, and Pickering received twenty or thirty strokes of Discipline, by
way of Penance, for his carelessness. Page 22. he swears against Whitebread,
that he saw his Letter, in which he expressed a great deal of Joy, that Sir
George Wakeman had accepted the 15000 l. to poison the King; and also, that he
was by, when Harcourt, another of these Jesuits, and Fenwick the Prisoner, were
at a Consult, and agreed to the Proposition of Fogarthy, of sending four Irish
Russians to kill the King at Windsor, and that they were sent accordingly. And
page 29. swears, that Whitebread had sealed some hundreds of Commissions, which
they called Patents, to raise an Army, to be in a readiness upon the Death of
the King, which Seals were then produced in Court, naming one Commission in
special, which he the Deponent delivered himself to Sir John Gage of Sussex.
Page 22. he swears against Fenwick, that he told him that he, the Prisoner, and
three Irishmen more, fired Southwark, and that he had 400 l. for his share, and
the rest 200 l. a piece. And page 20. to show the great Malice of these men,
Whitebread ordered Mr. Oats to come purposely from S. Omars into England, to
Murder D. Tongue, for Writing the Jesuits Morals; and page 21. the same
Whitebread sent by him Instructions, that care should be taken for the Murder
of D. Stillingfleet, and the Bishop of Hereford. These are the chief things
observable in Mr. Oats his Depositions, and which are sufficient to prove this
horrid Plot.

Then the Second Witness, Mr. Bedlow, swears page 37. that he was employed for
the space of near five years as a Messenger by these Conspiratours for the
carrying their Letters to several beyond the Seas, and returning others back,
all or most relating to this Plot: for page 38. he swears he had a way to open
the Letters and read them, whereby he fully informed himself of matters. He
swears page 37. that he heard some of these Conspiratours say, they would not
leave any member of an Heretic in England that should survive, to tell in the
Kingdom hereafter, that there ever was any such Religion in England as the
Protestant Religion. He swears also the manner of his coming to be first
employed by them, and then he brings his Brother James Bedlow to confirm his
being their Agent or Messenger, who knew nothing of the Plot. He swears, page
48. and 49. his being so long employed by them, and that he had received
oftentimes from these Jesuits and Priests several sums of money in his
Brothers behalf, sometimes 50. or 60. pounds at a time: so that by this you may
see Mr. Bedlow must be knowing in this design, employed under them so long in
it. Page 41. He swears that about the latter end of August (the very day he
confesses he cannot swear to) at Mr. Harcourts Chamber (one of the
Conspiratours) he there met Ireland, Pickering and Grove the Prisoners, with
some others, where he heard them discourse, that the four Russians missing of
killing the King at Windsor, that Pickering and Grove should go on in their
design, and that one Conyers was to be joined with them to Assassinate the King
in his Morning-walks at New market. And that Mr. Grove was more eager or
forward then the rest, saying, since it could not be done clandestinely, it
should be attempted openly; and that those that do fall had the Glory to die in
a good Cause: but if the Discovery should be made, it could never come to that
height but their Party would be strong enough to bring it to pass. All this he
swears very punctually to: and page 48. he farther swears that Harcourt told
him, that Grove was to have 1500 l. for his Reward, and that Pickering was to
have so many Masses as came to that money. And page 45. he swears, that at the
same time he heard them discourse of the killing several noble Persons, and of
several Persons that were to execute it; and in particular names one Knight
assigned to kill the Earl of Shaftsbury, Pritchard and Duke of Buckingham,
O-Neal the Earl of Ossory, and O-Brian the Duke of Ormond. So that by these two
Testimonies the Evidence is very full against Ireland, Pickering and Grove.

The Defense they have to make against this, is first, the denial of the Fact,
though they can bring no Witnesses to make any thing out but their own
Asseverations: but they who can have a Dispensation for the breaking of any
Oath, may be easily indulged for the telling of a lie to save their Lives, and
to keep off a Scandal from their profession. In the next place, they would
endeavor to seem not to know Mr. Oats, and make as if they had scarce seen
him: to this he swears by many several circumstances, which they are forced to
acknowledge; and page 32. swears Fenwick was his Father Confessor. But Ireland
raised some little appearance of contradiction or mistake in Mr. Bedlow's
Evidence, for he brings two or three to prove, page 56, 57. that he was not in
London all the month of August, Mr. Bedlow swearing that he was at the Consult
held at Harcourts Chamber, in the latter end of August, concerning the Death of
the King. And indeed two positively say the contrary, and that he was from the
third of August to the first or second of September in Staffordshire, and
Westchester, and by circumstance that he was in the beginning of September at
Wolverhampton. But were this granted, that he should mistake in the point of
Time, yet this is nothing as to the matter of Fact expressly sworn against them,
and so destroys not the Evidence, unless it were necessary to the substance of
the thing: for this Meeting and Treasonable Contrivance might be some days or
weeks after, and so true. And though such a mistake may somewhat weaken the
Evidence in the opinion of the Jury, it ought not to invalidate the truth of
the thing it self, which may be true in substance, though not in circumstance
of Time. But against the asseverations of these Persons, there is the Oath of
Mr. Bedlow, who swears it positively; and besides, Mr. Oats page 60. swears
positively, that ten days at least within August he was with him at Fenwick's
Chamber in London, and that in the beginning of September, either the first or
second day, he was to his knowledge in London, and that he had 20 s. of him.
Then a third person is produced, that had been Grove's Maidservant, who very
well knew Ireland, and the swears positively, and by good circumstances, page
57, and 58. that she saw him at a Scriveners Door in Fetter-lane, where he
lodged, about the twelfth or thirteenth of August. So that these three
concurrent Testimonies might very well be credited by the Jury in this case,
and make them justly bring in their Verdicts, as they did, Guilty, without any
deinur or hesitation. As for Pickering and Grove, they could not make any
defense, besides the denial of all that was sworn against them to be true, and
that they were innocent and not guilty.

And now let all the world judge who are to be believed in this case, and
admire at the obstinacy of these men, who shall deny so clear evidence against
them to the last gasp, and die in their Impenitency; and at those wicked ones
also, that shall secretly and slanderously go about to make the world believe,
that these men had not Justice done them, and that they died Innocent and
Martyrs.

I find my Letter swells to a bigger bulk then I intended, therefore I shall be
as brief as I can in mentioning the Trials of those who had a hand in the
murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfry, which was as punctually proved against them
as could be; for in the case of Felony, by the Laws of England, one sufficient
Witness for the King is enough, though here you shall find a very plain
concurrent Evidence, and the whole stress lies not upon Master Prance, who was
one of the Assistants at the Murder.

The persons accused and convicted for this Murder were, Robert Green, Henry
Berry, and Laurence Hill, Laymen, who suffered for the same: others concerned
were Mr. Prance, who confessed the Fact, had the King's Pardon, and was the
Accuser; besides Kelly and Girald, Priests, who assisted in the Murder, and
who are fled, and some others, knowing of, and abetting the same, are also
fled. The first thing that is proved by two Witnesses, page 12. and 13. is that
one of the Motives that these persons might have to murder this Knight, was,
because of his forwardness in discovering the Plot; and to this Mr. Oats
swears, that this Knight Sir Edmundbury Godfry told him he had been threatened
by several persons, for being so active in that Discovery, and that he told him
that he went in fear of his Life by the Popish party for doing his Duty, being
a Justice of the Peace, and that he had been dogged several days. Mr. Robinson
a man of Credit, and of the Knight's long acquaintance, swears also to the same
effect, and page 14. That Sir Edmundbury said to him, That he did believe in
his Conscience, that he should be the first Martyr, and that the depth of the
Plot was not yet found out. By this we may see the reason that these men had to
murder this Gentleman, hoping by his death to hinder the Discovery of the
Plot, it being then very young, and hardly credited, he having the chief
Depositions in his hand; or to deter others from being active or meddling in
the business, seeing the Revenge they had taken upon him for the same; or out
of Malice and Revenge to the Man, for being active in discovering their
Villainy, and bringing to light their wicked deeds.

The next Witness is Mr. Prance, who swears, page 14. that Girald and Kelly,
two Priests, first drew him into this Murder, he being a Roman Catholic, (as
all the rest were, except Berry, who said he died a Protestant, and feigned
himself otherwise for a livelihood, which I can hardly believe) telling him it
was no Sin, but a charitable Act, and that he was a busy man, and had done a
great deal of mischief: and so they told the rest: and this was at an Alehouse,
at the sign of the Plough, about a fortnight before this Gentleman was
murdered. He swears also, that they had dogged him into several places, to get
an opportunity of murdering him; and that on the Saturday (the twelfth of
October) about seven of the Clock in the Evening, Green and Hill, having dogged
him into a House at S. Clements, not far from Somerset House, where he was
murdered, Hill stayed to watch his motion, and Green came to Prance his House,
to call him to assist them, and that he immediately went to Somerset House,
where were Girald, Kelly, Green and Berry, and that about nine of the Clock,
Hill came before, to give them notice of the approach of Sir Edmundbury Godfry,
it being in his way to his own House, that Hill went up to the Gate to watch
for the coming by of Sir Edmundbury Godfry, and by a wile to draw him within
the Gate, pretending two men to be a quarrelling, and desiring his presence to
part them, he being a Justice of the Peace. That this Gentleman being at last
persuaded to do that good office, followed Hill within the Gate, till he came
to the bottom of the Rails, when Green, coming behind him, flung a twisted
Handkerchief about his Neck, and threw him down behind the Rails, where,
assisted by Girald, Kelly and Hill, they strangled him. Page 16. and 17. Mr.
Prance swears he was not by at the Action, for Hill ordered him to watch at the
Watergate, and Berry at the Stairs, that none might come in the mean time to
interrupt them, and that after a little while, that he thought they might have
dispatched him, he went to them, and found the four before mentioned standing
about the Body, and Green boasted to him, how well he had done it, and that the
rest told him the manner of their effecting it, and that Green, thinking him
not quite dead, gave him several punches on his Breast with his Knee, and
twisted his Neck about, and that presently after Berry also came to them. And
page 18. he swears they all six helped to carry him up a pair of Stairs, into a
certain Room in the House where Hill lay, where the Body lay till Monday night,
and was then removed into Somerset House, and on Monday night he was shown the
Body by Hill, with a dark Lanthorn, Girald, Hill and Kelly being by; and on
Tuesday night the Body was carried back to Hill's Lodging, where it first lay,
but not into the same Room, but one over against it; and about nine of the
Clock on the Wednesday night, they removed it to the Room where it first lay,
he being there when they removed it, page 19. and that about twelve a Clock
that night, a Sedan being brought by Hill, they all put the Body into it, and
that Berry at the sign of a hem that was given opened for them the upper Gate
of the upper Court; that he, Mr. Prance, and Girald the Priest (now the Porter)
first carried the Sedan, Green and Kelly going before: and page 20. he swears
they carried it to Covent Garden, where they rested, and that the Green and
Kelly took their turns, and carried it to Long-Acre, then Prance and Girald
carried it to So-Hoe Church, where Hill met them with an Horse, and that they
then took the Body up and set it before Hill on the Horse, who held him up, and
that Kelly, Girald and Green went along with him, and that he the Deponent then
left them to return home, for fear of raising a suspicion. But he swears that
the next day, they, Hill, Kelly and Girald, told him how they had disposed of
the Body; first that they had run him through with his own Sword, then thrown
him into a Ditch, and laid his Gloves and other things upon the Bank. Page 22.
he swears that they had all agreed to the Murder of this Gentleman, having had
more then one Meeting about it, and that the first that met him was to give
notice to the rest; that there was a considerable Reward to be given among them
for doing it, and that it was to come from (as they told him) the Lord
Bellasis. And also, that Girald was resolved to kill him that night, and if he
could not get him in a more convenient place, he would kill him with his own
Sword, in the Street that leads to his own House.

Judge now, whether all this be not punctually proved by one Witness, which is
as much as the Law requires in this case: however, that these persons might not
have any the least excuse that they had not Justice done them, and to satisfy
the whole world that they were not condemned only upon the Testimony of Mr.
Prance, I find other strong concurrent Witnesses, that by many circumstances
corroborate his Evidence, among the which Mr. Bedlow is one, who swears, page
28. that he had been several times treated with by Le Fair, Prichard, Keins,
and other Priests, about murdering a certain Gentleman they would not name,
about the beginning of that October this Gentleman was murdered, and desired
him also (not telling him the reason) to get into the Acquaintance of Sir
Edmundbury Godfry; and that he did so: and page 30. he swears, that very
Morning Sir Edmundbury was murdered, at the Palsgraves I lead Tavern Le Fair
told him, that there was a Gentleman that very Night to be put out of the way,
a very material Man, that had all the Informations that Mr. Oats and D. Tongue
had given in; that several had been employed in the doing of it, and that
several attempts had been made, and that they had missed several Opportunities,
but that now it was to be done, for if he were not taken out of the way, the
Plot would by his means go near to be fully Discovered, so that they should not
be able to bring their Design to pass; but would not discover to him the name
of the party: and also, that there was 4000 l. Reward to those that did it, and
no worse man then the Lord Bellasis had engaged for the payment of it. Upon
which he swears, that he promised to engage in it, and to meet him that night
at Somerset House, but that he went not according to his promise, knowing they
had a design to murder some body: then, page 31. he swears farther, that he
saw him not till the Monday night following, and then he was charged for his
breach of promise; to which Mr. Bedlow replied, he would not engage in the
Murder of any private Person, till he knew who he was, because he might be his
particular Friend. That Le Fair bid him meet him exactly at nine of the Clock
that night in the Cloisters at Somerset House, which he did, and that then he
told him, that he had done ill that he did not help in the business, but that
if he would help to carry the dead person off, he should have half the Reward.
That then he asked if he was murdered, and Le Fair answered yes: and upon his
desire to see the party, he took him by the hand, and led him through a dark
Entry into a Room, where he saw several persons, where they had a small Light
in a middle-siz'd Lanthorn, by which he saw a Corpse, over which something was
thrown, and one stepping to the Body threw off the thing that lay upon him, and
he went and looked upon him, and knew him presently to be Sir Edmundbury
Godfry. And page 32. swears that they then told him that they had strangled
him, and that the Cravatte about his Neck was so straight he could not get his
Finger in between it and his Neck. That they did not think that he knew him,
but told him that he was one that belonged to a Person of Quality. That he
would have persuaded them to have tied Weights to his Head and Feet, and to
have slung him into the Thames. But they did not think that so safe, but
answered, No, they would put the Murder upon himself. Then asking how they
would get him out, Le Fair answered in a Chair, and that Berry the Porter was
to sit up to let them out. That he then told them that about eleven or twelve
of the Clock would be the best time to carry him forth, and Le Fair then made
him promise upon the Sacrament, that he took on the Thursday before, to come
and help to carry him off at that hour; for after the Discovery of the Plot, he
swears, the Sacrament was adminished to him twice a week to conceal it. He also
swears, that he did not go, but went away for Bristol, and that upon the great
trouble and disturbance in his Conscience for this Murder and horrid Plot, he
revealed the same, etc. That upon his not coming they desisted from carrying
out the Body that night, and for fear lest he should discover them, he supposed
they caused it to be removed.

Mr. Bedlow also swears, page 33. that he never had any discourse with Mr.
Prance, from the time that he saw him with the Body of Sir Edmundbury Godfry
that night in Somerset House, and that seeing him in the Lobby, being taken
upon suspicion only, he knew him again, and accused him for the Murder of
that Gentleman. And page 23. Mr. Prance swears, that he never had any
conference with Mr. Bedlow in all his Life, which extremely strengthens the
Evidence, and that there could be no Conspiracy between them, to invent a Story
with so many agreeing circumstances. Then page 35. they prove, that Sir
Edmundbury's Body was found in the Ditch just as they had related it to Mr.
Prance, and also the dislocation of his Neck, the struggling, and contusion of
his Breast with some blows, and that the Wound made by the Sword could not be
the occasion of his death, by able Chirurgions: with several other
circumstances too long to remember now. So that all the circumstances are
proved as much as is possible by two several Witnesses, not knowing, or ever
discoursing one another: so that it would be the strangest Miracle in the
world, that they should both agree in so many untrue Circumstances. Had they
laid their heads together to contrive this Story, which is impossible they
should do without discoursing with one another beforehand, yet, there being so
many other several Witnesses, to prove several other circumstances, as their
meeting at Bow at the Alehouse, and the Maid swearing that Hill was at Sir
Edmundbury Godfry's House, and spoke with him that morning he was murdered,
and that he had the same Clothes on which he had then at the Bar, page 39. they
also must be thought to have conspired with them, to take away the Life of two
or three men without any provocation or reward; a thing so unlikely, that it
cannot enter into the thought of any rational man; nor can any Christian
believe, so many could join together to invent so horrid a lie, to take away
men's lives for nothing: nay if it were granted they might, I cannot believe
they could have contrived so many several circumstances without the least
variation, and without being intrapped by so many wise and judicious men who
sifted them; and the more, because of the strange obstinacy and denial of the
Criminals. Having therefore seriously considered all things, I cannot but
admire that any in England should doubt of the Guilt of these Murderers.

All I can find of any weight in their Defenses for themselves is of little
consideration to invalidate such strong proofs. That they all denied it very
stoutly to the last is true, but that is of no value against such plain
Evidence, and but aggravates their Crime. Hill would have invalidated Mr.
Prance his Testimony because he had denied it: but that has already been
cleared, and could no ways legally take off his Evidence, for he was no ways
perjured. But then to evade the matter, he brings several Witnesses, all of his
own Religion, to aver he was never from his Lodgings after nine of the Clock at
night: but these do it so mincingly and generally, that no stress can be laid
upon them, it being proved that they had several Keys to the Door, and that
Hill might go in and out without their knowledge, and one of his Witnesses
makes but a mistake of a whole month, page 55. and two of Green's Witnesses a
whole week, page 66. so ill had they calculated the Time which they intended to
speak to. There is nothing that can be thought to be of any moment in all that
the Witnesses said in behalf of the Prisoners, but what the Soldiers say in
behalf of Berry, page 68. and 69. who were placed at the Gate Sentinels, and
they say that they saw a Sedan come in, so far they agree with the King's
Evidence, but then they confidently aver none went out all that night. But what
is this to the matter of Fact, and to the Murder committed sworn in all
circumstances so punctually to? for the Sentinel might be from his post, and
Mr. Prance says (who knew of the Contrivance) page 16. of his printed Narrative
of this Murder, that Berry had beforehand got the Sentinel into his House to
drink, that he might not see the Sedan go out; and the Sentinel knowing he had
committed a great fault by so doing, was so wise; though not very honest, to
conceal it. And this is the most of color they could produce that might any
ways cause the least hesitation, and how far this single Testimony will go to
invalidate a Testimony so full, and not any ways to be contradicted, let the
world judge; I must confess it has given me full satisfaction, and I hope will
give the like to all others, who are impartial men, that shall read the same.

I must indeed declare that it seems somewhat strange, that nothing should work
upon these men to acknowledge their Crime at their death; but that they should
take it upon their Salvation, that they died Innocent of this Murder they
suffered for, as the Child that was newly born. But I fear they were under some
horrid delusion, and were so charmed and bound up by so many Oaths and
Sacraments, by their Ghostly Fathers the Jesuits, who had brought them to
this, that they durst not acknowledge the Truth, or that they thought by this
means they should do great service to the Romish Church, and be Sainted for it
in Heaven. And the Printed Account of Hill's Confession seems to make it plain,
for there was found in his pocket after he was executed a very formal
Confession, written not with his own hand, neither had he Pen, Ink or Paper all
the time he was in Prison, and his Wife witnessed it was not her Husband's
hand. How he came by it none could tell, but it was very formally drawn, and in
which I observe he stoutly denies the Fact, and calls God and Angels to witness
his Innocence, and that he is wrongfully put to death, and for that cause cites
all such as had a hand in his death, and particularly the Lord Chief Justice,
with the Jury and Witnesses, etc. showing a very wicked and uncharitable Spirit
in the Indicter, for I suppose this was given to Hill to con against the time
of his Execution, and of which Lesson he repeated as much as he could remember.
So that I cannot but believe the obstinacy of these men proceeds from the
Jesuits, for it is plain this Writing was prepared for him by some other, and
not by himself.

I shall also inform you of another trick invented by these men. Upon the
general report of the Plot, in some parts more remote from us, and where the
Informations were uncertain, lest it should spread farther, they had framed a
formal Writing, as under the Hand and Seal of a Person of Quality, with several
other pretended Authentic Witnesses, which was shown about in several
Borough-Towns, and noted places, as a Certificate to inform the people that
there was no such Plot in England, as had been invented by diverse factious and
seditious people, to the scandal of diverse peaceable people of the Romish Faith
in England, and that there had been no such person murdered as had been
reported to be, and that there was not any such person at all as Sir Edmundbury
Godfry, and that these reports were wholly false and all lies, raised by
malicious and factious people, to cause uproars in England, and to disquiet the
peace of the King and Kingdom, and such like stuff: which I hear has done them
notable service to take off the credit of the report of this horrid Plot, among
the ignorant and vulgar people: but, as I hear, some have sent Letters
purposely to the Recorder of London to be certified of the Truth of this.

Besides all these Trials and positive proofs of a most horrid and desperate
Plot, deeply laid and vigorously prosecuted, whereby the Plot very manifestly
appears to all men of sense and reason, and they must be wilfully blind, or
desperately deluded, that will not give credit to what has been so solemnly
sworn, and so openly made known, the Narrative published by Mr. Oats being 81.
Articles, all sworn to, and deposed by him, before Sir Edmundbury Godfry when
alive, and since, before the Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council, does yet
more manifestly set out the grounds and manner of this Plot, the progress and
discovery thereof, so fully, amply, and with so many concurrent Circumstances,
that it is the strangest thing in the world any should question the verity and
reality of the same; whenas none appears that can entrap him in contradictions,
or disprove what he has sworn to, and when he is backed by the testimony of
others: that yet I say any should be staggered with the confidence and
obstinacy of a few dying Traitors, and the whispering persuasions of the
Jesuits against the testimony of their own eyes and ears, against both sense
and reason it self, it is strange, and wonderfully strange, and makes me think
that they are infatuated, or strangely deluded.

For it is plain, that the design extended as well into Scotland and Ireland,
as through England; and Mr. Oats swears positively in the first Article, that
one Wright, Ireland and Morgan were sent into Scotland under the notion, and in
the disguise of Nonconformist Ministers, to preach up the Covenant, and to
promote Rebellion by that means: and Artic. 11. he swears that Letters were
sent to S. Omars, and to Leshee the King of France his Confessor, which
Letters he had seen and read, which gave an account that their Emissaries in
Scotland had stirred up the Presbyterians there into a Rebellion, and that
20000 would be in Arms if his Majesty of France would break with the King of
England. And Artic. 35. deposes, that he was by at a Conference with the
Jesuits in London, wherein they read the Order from the Provincial for the
sending new Messengers into Scotland, to promote the Combustions there; and
this was in July last. And Artic. 43. he farther swears, that on the 5. of
August two were sent away for Scotland, the one named Father Moor, the other F.
Saunders alias Brown, (for they have usually diverse names) with full
instructions how to behave themselves as Nonconformist Ministers, and to
preach to the disaffected Scots the necessity of taking up the Sword for the
defense of Liberty of Conscience: and these the Deponent saw dispatched. And
Artic. 74. swears he saw Letters from White the Provincial, dated at S. Ontars
4. of Sept. New Style, which gave an account to Rich. Blundell, that 12 more
Jesuits of that Nation were sent into Scotland, by order of the General of the
Society, with full instructions how to behave themselves like Nonconformist
Ministers among the Presbyterian Scots; and that they had 1000 li. given them
by Leshee the French King's Confessor: so that we may easily perceive by what
means the Rebellion of Scotland is promoted.

As to Ireland, where they have a far greater interest, they had sufficient
means and preparations there to stir up the Irish of their own Religion, and
under their thraldom and command, to Rebel. And Article 18. Mr. Oats
deposes, Letters came from the Archbishop of Dublin Talbot, which Letters he
saw and read at S. Omars, bearing date Jan. 1. 1678. New Style, which gave an
account how vigilant they had been in that Kingdom, to prepare the people to
rise for the defense of their Religion and Liberty, and to recover their
Estates, and that they would open a place there to receive the King of France
his Army when he should think fit to land them, and advised them to confer with
Leshee the French King's Confessor about the same. And he farther deposes,
that Letters were thereupon sent to Leshee about the same, who returned Answers
by the same Messengers, Nevill and Busby, one being Prefect of the Studies, and
the other Procurator to the Seminary, one of which to the Rectour of S. Omars,
Richard Ashby, the Deponent saw, which gave an account that the Father General
of the Society would contribute 800000 Crowns, to be paid in the month of June
next ensuing, and that his Holiness the Pope would not be wanting to supply
them when they had made some progress in that glorious attempt. And Article 21.
he there deposes, that he likewise saw Letters of Feb. 1. 1678. New Style, from
Whitebread, Keines, Ireland, Micho and the rest, to Richard Ashby Rectour of S.
Omars, to let him understand that they had sent William Morgan and F. Lovell
into Ireland, to see how affairs stood in that Kingdom; and that they had
instructions given them to encourage the Irish Natives to defend their Religion
and Liberty; and that they carried with them 2000 li. to supply their present
wants, and order to promise 4000 li. more in case there should be any Action.
And Article 27. he farther deposes, that in the month of April following, he
saw the Letters which Whitebread and the rest of the Jesuits in London sent to
Richard Ashby Rectour, and those of the Seminary at S. Omars; in which they
gave them an account that Morgan and Lovell were returned out of Ireland, who
gave them to understand, that the Irish were ready to rise at 10 days warning
with 20000 Foot and 5000 Horse, and would let in the Army of the French King if
he would land there; and also that in the North of Ireland, 15000 Horse and
Foot were in a readiness to rise, and that they were also very resolute; and
also that there were arrived Commissions from the General of the Society, by
virtue of a Brief from the Pope, dated Oct. 1. 1673. to several persons, and
that they once more resolved to cut the throats of the Protestants when they
should rise.

Thus we may perceive what provision they had made, and how well prepared they
were in those Kingdoms, to effect their horrid Plot and Conspiracy: but that
they might leave no stone unturned, and that they might everywhere work the
destruction of the Protestants, I find Artic. 38. Mr. Oats swears, that he saw
and read at Mr. Fenwick's Chamber in London, on the 11. of August, Letters from
S. Omars, from the Provincial Whitebread, that he had ordered 12 Jesuits to go
to Holland, to inform the Dutch privately, that the Prince of Orange did intend
to assume the Crown, and to be their King, and to bring them under his
Government: which was to beget an evil opinion of the Prince of Orange in the
Dutch, and so to cause a commotion against the Prince and his Party. Also
Artic. 56. he farther deposes, that the Letters came from the said Whitebread
and the rest, to John Fenwick and the rest; which Letters he also saw and read
dated 20. Aug. New Style, which gave account that the 12 Jesuits were safely
arrived in Holland, and were using all their skill and interest to make a
Commotion there; and that Appletree Will (by which they meant the Prince)
should not be great there, urging the Fathers in London to mind their business.

By all this you may perceive the general ruin of the Protestants was laid,
and the large extent of this Plot. Three Kingdoms at once were to be in a
Flame, and the Neighboring Provinces to be put into a Combustion. But this
Plot had been several years a hatching, and if Mr. Oats swears truth, (as
there is no scruple to be raised but he does, for ought I can see by any
objection raised against him) we now know the manner and Authors of the great
and famous Fire of London 1666. for Artic. 34. he deposes, that he had it from
the mouth of Richard Strange, who had been Provincial of the Jesuits, who told
him, that this Fire had been several times attempted by him and others in the
years 1664, and 1665. being assisted by one Green, and 8 others, under the
notion of Fifth Monarchy men; but that failing, and some of them being laid in
Newgate, they desisted till 1666. when they fully effected it by his means, and
by the assistence of Gray, Pennington and Barton Jesuits, and Keimash a
Dominican Friar, with one Fitz-Girald an Irish Jesuit, and one Neal of
White-Chappel, and 50 or 60 Irish-men, hired for that purpose to ply the work,
and sling about the Fireballs; and that one Everard kept them for them, being
one then in the King's Service, and looked after the Ammunition that was
carrying down to the Fleet in the Dutch War. That this Strange went then by the
name of Walker, and lay in Fanchurch-street, and with him lay Keimash the
Dominican; that Pennington and Barton lay in Shoe-lane, and that Gray and
Fitz-Girald lay at Neal's house in White Chapel, which Neal was one that was
to see the Fire carried along Thames Street: and also that as soon as the Fire
was begun, the said Neal knocked them up, and gave them notice about 12 a clock
in the night, and that there were in all about 80 or 86 persons employed in the
service, and that 700 Fireballs were spent in the service; and also that they
had others, both men and women, who were employed to plunder, and that they got
in Jewels, Plate, Fine Linens, Money, and other things to the value of 14000
li. and that they had a Warehouse in Wild-street to lay up such goods, with
many other particulars: so that you may now see by what means that famous Fire
was effected.

Then Artic. 49. the same Deponent swears, that he had it from John Grove's own
mouth, in Wild-House Garden, that he with 3 Irish men, having purposely
prepared certain Fireworks, went into the Borough of Southwark, where finding
an Oyl-Shop, they set it on Fire, and that they had among them 1000 li. reward,
that these Irish-men were procured by Dr. Fogarthy, and that they got 2000 li.
by that Fire; the same being also told to the Deponent at another time by
Richard Strange.

This is not sufficient, they had designed another general Fire, as the
Deponent swears, Artic. 71. that one Blundell, that was engaged in this
Conspiracy, showed him in Fenwick's Chamber a draught of London, and the manner
how it was to be fired anew, and to be carried on from Wapping to Westminster,
or from Westminster to Wapping, according as the wind sat, and named the
several parties, who were to carry it on from place to place; and that the
Deponent, with 7 others, had order to ply the business about the Armitage, and
for his reward he was to have 1000 li. and 80 li. more for former services; and
this paper was signed by Whitebread in the name of the whole Society. And
Artic. 77. he swears, that Richard Blundell, after that the Deponent had begun
to be discovered to desert them, was appointed to supply his place, and to take
care of carrying on the Fire at Wapping in his room.

These must be very strange and formal inventions of Mr. Oats his framing, or
horrid and black designs of these men's effecting; and certainly it appears by
all the agreeing Circumstances that the latter is true, and that there appears
nothing to make the first likely, but the stout denial of those who suffered
for the same. Artic. 28. he swears, that to the number of 50 Jesuits met at the
Consult at the White-horse Tavern in the Strand, being on purpose called by
Whitebread, for the effecting this Plot and horrid Conspiracy, now brought
almost to an head; and that from thence they all adjourned to several Clubs, or
private Meetings, at their several Chambers. And Artic. 72. he deposes, that
the Pope had issued out a Bull, showed to him the 30. of August, and bearing
date in November or December before, wherein he disposes of several dignitaries
in England, and there are named the several Archbishops, Bishops, Abbats,
Deans, etc. He also gives you a list of the chief of the Conspiratours page 58.
both of the Jesuits, and the other Orders of Priests, Secular and Lay persons,
both in England and beyond the Seas, concerned in this most horrid Conspiracy:
and also page 61. gives you a list of the several Lords, and other Commanders
or general Officers, Colonels, Captains, etc. in the Militia, making a full and
ample discovery of the same, to the great satisfaction of all people, excepting
those that are wilfully blind; and no doubt to the great trouble and
consternation of the Conspirators. And indeed it was no wonder, that the
Provincial Whitebread was so very angry and enraged against him, as he deposes
Artic. 77. and that when they had begun to suspect Mr. Oats, upon the first
noise of the discovery of a Plot, he asked him with what face he could look on
him having betrayed them, and box'd him and caned him in his passion, having
thereupon taken an order for the sending him the Deponent immediately beyond
the Seas to secure him; which they had done, had he not hid himself out of the
way, and been secured ever since from their Clutches. It Is very strange that
after all this, any, in England especially, shall openly say, and seem to
averr, that this is no Plot, but a feigned thing and Chimaera.

But it is too manifest, and you ought to give God thanks, and solemnly to
acknowledge his great care and mercy to your Nation, Government, and Religion;
and also to reward those who have been the instruments of this discovery,
whatever they were before, for by sin grace does abound. Much blood and many
murders have been prevented, which it is plain they intended; for otherwise
they could not have effected their design: and more especially the Death of his
Sacred Majesty was aimed at and contrived by these wicked and execrable men, as
appears by these Depositions of Mr. Oats; and they had contrived several ways
to do it, either to Stab him, Shoot him, or Poison him. For the first they had
chosen Conyers and Anderton, Benedictine Monks, and four Irish Russians; for
the second Groves and Pickering are prepared; and for the last Wakeman is
hired. Artic. 13. the Deponent swears, he saw and read the Letter from
Whitebread and others the chief of the Society, wherein they gave order that
Father Leshee should be wrote to, and informed, that they were resolved, for
the advancement of their happy design, to find an opportunity to take the King
from his Kingdom: or if they could not do that, they would take his Kingdom
from him. And Artic. 29. not long after the great Consult at London about
murdering the King, Whitebread being then come to S. Omars, he the Deponent
heard him say in his Chamber on the 11. of June to this effect, That he hoped
to see the King laid fast enough, for that he was grown secure, and would hear
no complaints against them. Artic. 68. Mr. Oats likewise swears, that Conyers
employed by these Jesuits to stab the King, showed the Deponent the Dagger
which he had bought on purpose to effect it, and cost him 10 s. declaring the
manner how he intended to effect it at Windsor; and (mark the great Providence
of God in preserving the Life of His Majesty) that being on his way thither,
with this bloody design in his heart, his Horse fell lame, that he was forced
to return, being almost five miles on his way. The several other attempts upon
the Life of His Sacred Majesty by Groves, Pickering, and the Russians, and the
intention of Wakeman, and reward, to poison him, were spoke to before, and
sufficiently evidenced.

Thus having given you at large an account of my Thoughts concerning this
horrid Plot and bloody Conspiracy, with the reasons and proofs that appeared
sufficient to convince me, and to make me believe that these Traitors that have
suffered were guilty, and justly deserved the punishment the Laws inflicted
upon them for the same, and which has in some measure convinced others, who
have seen and read them; I shall conclude with my Prayers for the prosperity of
the King and the whole Nation, that the one may enjoy an happy Peace, Liberty
and Prosperity; and that the other may continue with long life and all manner
of felicity; and that the care and providence of Heaven will protect them both
from all evil Conspiratours, and wicked Plotters; and that God will work upon
the hearts of some of those who are yet in Prison for this Conspiracy, and e're
it be too late, cause them to make a generous and free Confession of the whole
design, that the world may be better satisfied, and that there may be no
scruple left of the verity of these things. And I also hope it will be the care
of the Parliament, when they meet, to go on with their good intention of
securing the Nation for the time to come, and the Person of His Sacred Majesty,
from the Machinations and Conspiracies of the Jesuits and their Emissaries; by
not only reviving all the poenal Laws in that Case, but by making others that
may give a certain security to the Peace of the Nation. I will not stand to beg
your pardon, since your commands drew on you the trouble of this long Letter;
and therefore I shall only tell you, that I am,

Sir, Your Humble Servant, D. G.
S. Omars, June 24. New Style.
An APPENDIX to the foregoing Letter.
THE foregoing Letter being wrote and received before the Trials of the five
Jesuits, last executed upon the account of the horrid Plot and Conspiracy, and
of Mr. Langhorn for the same, and being thought by some judicious persons, and
lovers of the peace and welfare of their Country, fitting to be published for
the satisfaction of the people; the strange obstinacy and denial of these five
Jesuits, Whitebread, Harcourt, Fenwick, Gawin, and Turner, at their Execution,
calling God and Angels to witness of their innocence, and taking it upon their
salvation, that they were falsely accused, and knew nothing of any such Plot as
is pretended against them, having made a strange impression upon the minds of
some ignorant, and some well-minded people, who cannot believe they could go
out of the world with such a lie in their mouths, to the damnation of their
Souls, I thought it requisite to abbreviate also the Trials of these men, that
the truth may appear, that they had a just, equal, and legal Trial; and that
they could not be guiltless and unknowing of this horrid Plot, as they pretend,
but were legally and by full proof condemned for the same: for that many people
will not go to the price of their Trials, that would however give sixpence to
be satisfied. And therefore I shall follow the same method my Friend at S.
Omars did in the foregoing Trials, and point out to the plain proof and
evidence in the printed Trials more fully expressed. But I also advertise, that
here you shall find some evidence that has since come to light, and has made
things yet more apparent.

First, take notice that these Priests and Jesuits are not tried upon the
Statute of 27 Eliz. which would have made them guilty for being in Orders, and
remaining here in England; but they are tried as Traitors in conspiring the
death of the King's Majesty, and the utter subversion of the Protestant
Religion, and the bringing in of Popery, which was the end of this great Plot:
and now judge how it is proved against them.

The Evidences are long and tedious, but the main proof and what is positive
appears, first against Mr. Whitebread page 12. where Mr. Oats swears, that in
April 1678. Old Style, or May New Style, according to the order of the said
Whitebread Provincial, there was a Consult, in which were Whitebread, Fenwick,
Harcourt and Turner; and that all these did in his presence sign the resolve
for the death of the King. Against these four he swears positively: and that
Whitebread should say after he was returned to S. Omars, in the Deponent's
hearing, words to this effect, That he hoped to see the King's Head laid fast
enough. And page 16. he swears, that Fenwick on the 25. of August (78.) at his
Chamber in London, did deliver Mr. Oats some money for necessary charges, and
did then admonish him to procure some Masses to be said for a prosperous
success upon the Design. Then page 22. he swears, that Turner was at the
Consult in Fenwick's Chamber in London, and that there he saw him sign the
resolve of the King's Death. And page 15. he swears against Gawen, that though
he did not see him at the Consult in April, yet he saw his hand, and makes it
out how he knew it to be his hand, and that he gave them in London an account
how affairs stood in Staffordshire and Shropshire July 1678. and how the Lord
Stafford was very diligent, and how prosperous their affairs were in those
Countries, and that there was two or three thousand pound ready there to carry
on the design; and farther swears, that sometime in July he met Gawen at Mr.
Ireland's Chamber in London, where he gave to Father Ireland the same account
as he had before written, in his hearing.

The next thing I observe is a new Evidence, one Mr. Dugdale, whom the
prisoners do not endeavor to bespatter as they had done Mr. Oats and Bedlow:
and this man had no knowledge or acquaintance with Mr. Oats and Bedlow, and
could not conspire with them to take away the Lives of men that were innocent.
You will see how far he agrees with them, and what a positive proof he is
against the prisoners. Page 22. Mr. Dugdale swears against Whitebread, that he
saw a Letter from him to Mr. Ewers a Jesuit, and Confessor to Mr. Dugdale, in
which he gave him a caution, to be sure to choose those that were trully and
resolute, no matter whether they were Gentlemen, if stout and courageous: and
then shows how he knew it to be Whitebread's hand. And this he swears too
again, that he saw the words in express terms under his hand page 29. to kill
the King. Against Gawen he swears positively, that he entertained him to be of
the Conspiracy to murder the King, as one of those resolute fellows mentioned
by Whitebread. And page 23. he swears. that they had several Consultations in
the Country, in several places which he names, and particularly at Boscobel,
for the murdering of the King and the bringing in of Popery; (this sure proves
the Plot) in which Gawen was a chief Orator to persuade people into this
design. Another meeting to this purpose he swears was at Tixal, where Gawen
also was in September. 1678. and that the Consult then was, for the introducing
of Popery, and the taking away the Life of the King: and that he being a person
chosen for that purpose, was to be sent to London by Mr. Harcourt, to be under
the tuition of one Parsons; and that Mr. Gawen discoursed of it to him, and
encouraged him in it, page 24. And that he had given them 400 li. for the
carrying on of this design, and to pray for his Soul; and that he had promised
them 100 li. more, for which they told him he should be canonized a Saint. And
that this discourse of killing the King, and introducing Popery, was in the
Parlour in the Lord Aston's House, and in Ewers Chamber. And page 25. Mr.
Dugdale farther swears, he heard them discourse at one of these Consults, that
it was the opinion of those at Paris, who were concerned in this Conspiracy,
that as soon as the deed was done, that is the killing the King, they should
lay it on the Presbyterians, that they might by that means provoke the other
Protestants to cut them off, and then they might the more easily cut their
throats; and that they should have an Army in readiness to cut off all such as
were not (or would not be) Papists: and also that Mr. Gawen should tell him,
neither men nor money should be wanting from beyond the Seas, and endeavored
by several Arguments to prove the design lawful; and also, by Scripture, that
it was lawful and good to destroy any for the advantage of their Religion; and
showed the example of Father Garnet, and how that several of his Relics
beyond Sea had done great Miracles. And page 26. he swears, that he had
intercepted and read (for their Letters came under his Cover) an 100 Letters to
the same purpose, all tending to the introducing Popery and the killing the
King.

And now I am to take notice to you of a most clear and manifest evidence, that
Sir Edmundbury Godfry was murdered by the knowledge and contrivance of these
men, and which till now never came to light, and proves it as plain as the Sun
at Noon: for page 26. the same Mr. Dugdale swears, that on the Monday next
after the murder of Sir Edmundbury Godfry, he received a Letter directed to
Mr. Ewers the Jesuit, being in the Country, and which Letter came from London
by the Saturday-nights Post, the same night Sir Edmundbury Godfry was
murdered, from Mr. Harcourt, signed W. H. his usual mark, and that he knew his
hand; in which Letter these words were wrote, This night Sir Edmundbury Godfry
is dispatched: and that then, he the Deponent should say to Ewers, that very
thing would overthrow their design: and this was three days before any in
London (except those privy to the murder) could tell what was become of this
Knight: so as the thing is plain Harcourt knew of it. Then to prove this is
none of Dugdale's invention, one Mr. Chetwin was sworn, page 27, 28. who says,
that being at that time in the Country near where Mr. Dugdale was, the next day
being Tuesday October the 15. another Gentleman came to him, and asked him if
he had any news of a Justice of Peace in Westminster that was killed, for that
he had heard it so reported at one Eld's House, by Mr. Dugdale. Chetwin replied
he heard nothing of it, but that the next Saturdays Post brought him the news
of Sir Edmundbury Godfry's murder, and tells by good circumstances how he knew
it to be that very day: and also that he was not in Town when the murderers of
Sir Edmundbury Godfry were tried, or else he would have witnessed the same.
This is a clear evidence these men knew of this murder.

Against Turner, Mr. Dugdale swears page 30. that he saw him with others at
Ewers his Chamber, where they consulted together to carry on this design, and
that he agreed to all that he had sworn as to the Plot; that is the bringing in
of Popery, and the killing of the King. Then page 30. Mr. Prance swears against
Harcourt, that he told him such a day, when he bought an Image of the Virgin
Mary of him, to send into Maryland, that there was a design of killing the
King. Against Fenwick he swears page 31. that he told him in Mr. Ireland's
Chamber in Russel Street, Ireland and Grove being by, that there should be
50000 men in a readiness to carry on the Cause, and settle their Religion; and
that he asked Fenwick who should govern them, who then replied, the Lord
Bellasis, the Lord Powis, and the Lord Arundel.

The next witness is Mr. Bedlow, who gives an account why he did not before
give in his evidence against Whitebread and Fenwick, because he was then
finding out the Bribery of Reading, in behalf of the Lords in the Tower. But
now he positively swears page 32. that he had seen both Whitebread and Fenwick
at the Consults about this Plot, and that he heard Whitebread tell Coleman the
manner of sending the four Russians to Windsor to kill the King, and this was
in Harcourt's Chamber; and also, that he saw Harcourt take the money out of a
Cabinet, about 80. or 100 li. and give it the Messenger, by Mr. Coleman's
order, with a Guiny for the Messenger to drink Coleman's Health, which Coleman
left, as Harcourt himself said. And page 33. he swears that Whitebread told
him, that Pickering was to have a great number of Masses, and that Grove was to
have 1500 li. for killing the King. And page 35. he swears, that Harcourt
employed him several times to carry their Consults beyond the Seas, and that he
received, in Harcourt's presence, Mr. Coleman's thanks for his fidelity, and
that Harcourt recommended him to the Lord Arundel, who promised him great
favor when the Times were turned. Also, that he saw Harcourt give Sir George
Wakeman a Bill to receive 2000 li. in part of a greater sum, and that he heard
Sir George say, 15000 li. was a small Reward for the settling Religion and
preserving three Kingdoms from Ruin.

These are the chief proofs which are punctually sworn to, besides some Letters
found among Harcourt's Papers that gave some light of this Design, and
strengthened the Evidence very much, which I pass over. And in this Evidence
you may observe, that there is the Testimony of three, Mr. Oats, Dugdale, and
Bedlow, against Whitebread. And likewise three quite blank against Fenwick,
viz. Oats, Bedlow and Prance. And against Harcourt, very fully four, Oats,
Pugdale, Bedlow and Prance. Against Gawen, there is positively Dugdale and
Oats. And against Turner two likewise, Dugdale and Oats. Whereby the matter
of Fact is plainly proved, and the Evidence full and legal, notwithstanding
their denial of the same.

Now we will see what Defense these Learned men do make for themselves: and, as
my Lord Chief Justice says, they defend their Lives as they do their Religion,
with weak Arguments and fallacious Reasons, which take many times with the
Ignorant, seldom with the Judicious. As to the matter of Fact charged against
them, they can say nothing by way of disproof, excepting their stout Denials;
and they are not ashamed to contradict all Oaths, how punctually soever sworn
to, and in the face of the Court to charge them all with Perjury, but prove
nothing that can truly invalidate the Testimony that is brought against them.
All they endeavor is by way of Evasion, and to catch at circumstances, as to
Time and Place: and to disprove Mr. Oats, they came as to that prepared, as
they thought, and had brought a small Regiment of young Lads, well trained in
their Principles, who endeavored to have persuaded the Jury that Mr. Oats was
at S. Omar's, at the time he said he was in London, and that such persons did
not come over with him as he had sworn did. But supposing they had made this
Allegation good, still, I say, it depended upon the nice circumstance of Time,
which Mr. Oats might be mistaken in, and yet the truth of the Plot no way
invalidated, nor those matters of Fact charged against them by the other
Witnesses any ways disproved. But you shall hear their Defense, and how far
they could make this Allegation good, and how well Mr. Oats has defended
himself, and then judge.

The first thing that Whitebread and Fenwick Object is, That they had come to a
former Trial, and therefore thought, legally they ought not to answer for the
same Fact, page 4. But the Court cleared that to them, that though Indicted
they came not upon their Trial, and the Jury had them not in charge, and so
their Lives were not in jeopardy, and that it was the constant course of the
Law so to do, with several Reasons and Examples for the same, there more fully
shown, page 5. and 6. They then pleaded, as the rest, not Guilty. As to their
Evasions and odd Interpretations of the Letters, and their aspersions of Mr.
Oats and Mr. Bedlow as insufficient Witnesses, they are little to the purpose,
therefore I shall pass them by.

The main in their Defense, is their offering to prove Mr. Oats mistaken in
point of Time; for whereas he had sworn positively against them, that he was
with them at their Consult, wherein they determined the Death of the King, held
the twenty fourth of April, old Style, in London, they allege and endeavor to
prove by at least sixteen Witnesses, young Lads of the College or Seminary at
S. Omar's, that they saw Mr. Oats almost every day there in the College, from
December 1677. to the middle or latter end of June following, and that he was
never out of the College, but that they saw him every day, and conversed and
dined with him all that time, except two days and one night he was absent at
Watton, and two or three days that he was in the Infirmary, he not being well,
and that some of them saw and spoke with him in the Infirmary; and by several
circumstances they seem to make all these Asseverations good. So that if this
be true, and that they can persuade the Jury to believe this Testimony, (as
they ought, if no ways to be disproved) they have done their work, as to Mr.
Oats. And this they do page 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51. and so to page 63. so that
it is impossible that Mr. Oats should swear Truth, and that he should be in
London the twenty fourth of April at the Consult, if what these Witnesses say
be true, and that Mr. Oats was never out of the College, till some time in
June, from December before: and so his Testimony ought to be invalidate. Then,
whereas Mr. Oats had sworn he came over with Sir John Warner and Sir Tho.
Preston Jesuits, they endeavor to prove, and from page 60. to 63. the
Witnesses do confidently aver, that the said persons were not, the one from
Liege, the other from Watton in Flanders, neither April nor May, and so Mr.
Oats could not come over with them to England as he had sworn.

Let us now see how Mr. Oats does make good his Testimony, and what proof he
brings to contradict these Novices who came so well prepared. First by the way,
we must observe, that most of the Witnesses say, that Mr. Oats left their
College some time in June, some say the tenth, some at the latter end, etc. but
page 53. one Witness mistakes his month, and avers he is sure it was in July,
that Mr. Oats went away: and being told that he differed from all the rest, he
cried, he was sure he was there till after the Consult in London; which gave a
great light to what point of time these Novices were instructed to speak to,
and caused the people to laugh, to see the young man out in his part.

But to let that pass, we will see Mr. Oats his proofs, and he brings at least
seven substantial Witnesses, who swear they saw him in London in April and May
1678. the time they aver him to be at S. Omar's. Page 80. Mr. Walker a Minister
swears, that in April (78.) he met Mr. Oats in S. Martin's Lane disguised in a
Serge Coat and Gray Hat, which he wondered at, not knowing he was turned
Jesuit: and the next morning he relates the same to one Mrs. Ives, who in
Court swears the same, that in April the said Mr. Walker came to her Shop and
told her, that the day before he had met Mr. Oats at the upper end of Saint
Martins-lane, near Leicester-House, in disguise. So that you have here one
positive Witness, and a strong concurrent Testimony. Page 81. Mrs. Mayo swears
more punctually as to point of Time, that a week before Whitsuntide, or
thereabouts, which was in May, she saw Mr. Oats in Sir Richard Barker's
Courtyard in London, and that one of Sir Richard's men told her, that it was
Mr. Oats, and that he was either turned Quaker or Catholic; but that she said
he was no Quaker, because he then wore a Perriwig: and that about a week after
she saw him again walking in the Garden with another Gentleman: and swears this
Mr. Oats then in Court was the same man she had seen. The other young man that
the knew Mr. Oats was dead. Then page 81. one Page swears that he saw this Mr.
Oats in a Gray or Light-coloured Campaign Coat, and discoursed with him at Sir
Richard Barker's in May (78.) and tells a circumstance to prove his knowledge
that it was in May. Then Sir Richard Barker swears, that his Servants told him
that Mr. Oats was at his House about Whitsuntide, and that he was there in two
several disguises, once with short hair, and another time with a Perriwig, and
that they thought he was turned either Quaker or Papist. Then page 83. Sir
Richard Barker's Coachman swears, he was well acquainted with Mr. Oats, and
that he was at Sir Richard's House in Barbican in the beginning of May (78.)
with his hair cut close to his ears, in Gray Clothes and a Gray Coat, and then
enquired of him for D. Tongue; and that he knew him well for three years
before, and is very sure he in Court was the same man. Page 84. Mr. Smith,
Schoolmaster at Islington, swears, that in the beginning of May 1678. he dined
with him at his House in Islington, and, as he remembers, it was the first
Monday in May, and that he knew him well, for he had been his Scholar at
Merchant-Taylours School when he was Usher there: and that he stayed with him
three or four hours after Dinner discoursing of his Travels. Then Mr. Clay
swears, page 84. and 85. that he met Mr. Oats in April and afterward in May
(78.) at Mr. Howard's, who lived in one Corner of Arundel-House, and that this
was the same man he saw there: and this Mr. Clay, who testified this, is a
Roman Catholic; so that they are not all Protestants that he brings to annul
their Evidence, but one of their own Religion, who durst speak Truth. And now
let all the world judge, whether the Jury had any reason to think that Mr.
Oats his Evidence was any ways weakened by all that those Novices had averred,
knowing that the Protestant Religion allows in no case of telling a lie, much
less of swearing falsely.

As to their averring, that Sir Jo. Warner and Sir Tho. Preston were at their
several places of residence all April and May, and so could not come over with
Mr. Oats to England, as he had sworn, Mr. Oats not knowing of what they would
have insisted on, was not prepared with Witnesses to back that Testimony: but
it being a matter of little or no consequence, and they failing of making good
the more substantial part of their Defense, we may well believe they also made
a false Report in this latter, as well as in the former.

Then Mr. Gawen page 63. undertakes also to prove that he was in the Country in
Staffordshire all April, June and July, the time of the Consult, and the time
that Mr. Oats had sworn he saw his hand to the Consult: and for this he brings
several Witnesses from page 63. to 69. But, whoever considers well what the
Evidence says there in the Prisoners behalf, will find, that these Witnesses
were not so confident as those from S. Omar's, and that they speak so mincingly
and give so weak Reasons, that in truth it appears not by what they say, but
that Mr. Gawen might step up to London, and sign this Consult in few days,
without their knowledge; for they cannot but say, he was sometimes at the Lord
Aston's: but page 65. Mrs. Winford says, she knows he could not go to London,
because he had not his Linen with him: and this is all the reason, which is a
very weak one. To this Mr. Oats swears again, page 67. that he saw him in
London, either in the beginning or middle of July: then Mr. Gawen brings
several Witnesses page 68. and 69. that indeed prove he was not in London, but
at Wolverhampton the latter end of July, but as to the beginning or middle of
the Month, none of them can speak; so that the thing is plain he does not
contradict Mr. Oats his Testimony, for he might be in the Country all the time
his Witnesses aver, and yet be in London at the time Mr. Oats had sworn.

Then page 69. Mr. Whitebread offers Witnesses to prove that D. Oats had sworn
an untruth, and therefore he was not probus Testis a credible Witness, in that
he had sworn Mr. Ireland was in London the middle of August and beginning of
September, which he could prove was false: but the Court let him know, that
having already received a Verdict it ought not to be heard again: yet page 71.
they were so favorable as to hear his Witnesses, though to that point; and 72,
73. to 76. some Witnesses that were not at Ireland's Trial do aver, that Mr.
Ireland was in Staffordshire from the fourth to the twenty sixth of August, so
that it could not be true what Mr. Oats had sworn, that he was in London about
the middle of August. Against this Evidence you have not only D. Oats his
Testimony upon his Oath, but also Sarah Pain page 78. and 79. appeared in
Court, who there gave in the same Evidence she had done in the former Trial of
Mr. Ireland, that she saw Mr. Ireland going into Mr. Groves his House, and that
she made a Curtisie to him, about the middle of August, which is the time that
D. Oats charges him to be in Town. So that you have two Witnesses on Oath,
that contradict those brought by the Prisoners.

But since they have made a great talk of this Evidence, and have said that
they had several Witnesses against two, one of them being their Accuser, and
that some have thought this point not sufficiently cleared, I have for the
satisfaction of the world here published what has since come to my hands, and
not at the time of the Trials of these persons known, which is a very great
confirmation of the Truth of D. Oats his Testimony, and I hope will give much
satisfaction.

A Letter from Mr. Jennison, a Papist, touching Mr. Ireland's being in London
in August 1678. which more clearly proves, that what he asserted at his Trial,
and not only there, but in Articulo mortis, at the Gallows, and what his Party
affirmed in Court and offered to swear, (that he was in Staffordshire and out
of London from the fifth of August (78) to the seventh of September following,)
is a great untruth: which is a material strengthening to the Evidence against
him, and confirmation of Mr. Oats his Testimony. Which did come to light since
the death of Mr. Ireland, and is now published for the satisfaction of those
who might any ways doubt thereof, and think that the King's Evidence was not
full therein.
READING December. 19. 1678. Dear Sir,
YOurs I had bearing date the fifteenth of this Instant, and have not missed a
Post I could send to you by. I am not ignorant of the offer made by his
Majesty's Proclamation, and lay hold of nothing but pardon for concealing what
circumstances I have known so long: yet did not altogether conceal it neither,
for I told my Cousin Smith of it within two or three days, of the breaking out
of this damnable Conspiracy, which how much it weighs I am not sit to judge.
The speaking of Truth is an Action that rewards it self; and I would not, were
it to gain a million, nay a million of worlds if possible, draw the least drop
of Innocent blood upon me, for I know it is a crying sin, therefore I pray God
avert it from me. All that I can tell you, as I hope for forgiveness of my
sins, and eternal Salvation, is (if you will distinguish betwixt the times)
what follows. Being come from Windsor, where I promised my self the happiness
and satisfaction of seeing you, that I might take my leave before my Journey
for the North, which, to the best of my memory, was about the latter end of
August, I went to do the same to Mr. Ireland, whom then (with all the rest) I
did believe a man of the best conversation and life in the world; for you know
the Law does presume every man good, unless he be proved otherwise. After my
salute, and I had told him I had been at Windsor, his Interragatory or Question
was, What News? My return was the usual, No News but good. Then he proceeded to
ask me (to the best of my memory) How his Sacred Majesty and the Court
diverted. I replied, that I heard his Majesty took much delight in Hawking and
Fishing, but chiefly in the latter, which his Majesty followed early in the
morning, as I heard, accompanied only with two or three Lords, or other
Attendants. I wonder, says Mr. Ireland, why his Majesty should be so thin
guarded, he were easily taken off, or removed; or some words to that purpose,
so sounding. God forbid, I returned. No, subjoyns he, I do not say it is
lawful; and something else which I cannot call to mind, that did qualify the
former words, that I did then think his meaning was, he was sorry his Sacred
Majesty should go so weakly guarded. I then took it by that handle, having no
other reason, for I did believe him a Saint, never hearing him or any of them,
as I hope for everlasting life, defend or maintain in the least that damnable
Doctrine of Deposing Kings: but now I know that passage may be taken by the
other handle, and I Am not fit to judge how far; yet you know words are to be
taken in the milder sense, unless they be positive, which these with their
qualification that followed, and the time they were spoke in, I humbly
conceive, with submission to better judgments, were not; for if I had believed
they were, they should have seen light sooner. I suppose there is clearer
Evidence then this from Mr. Oats, that better knew him then I.

Taken from the Original Letter, June 21. (79.) Robert Jennison.

Some Observations or Remarks upon the foregoing Letter.
FIrst, the words spoken by Mr. Ireland to Mr. Jennison, though then with a
Plain-meaning man, and one ignorant of their Plot, though a Papist, they might
receive that candid interpretation he put upon them; yet since it has been
made known, we may very well have a suspicion that Mr. Ireland made those
Queries in relation to the horrid Design of murdering the King, which they
then expected to be effected by the four Ruffians, which made Ireland say,
hearing how slenderly he was guarded, that he might then be easily taken off.

But not to strain words against a man, when such positive proofs have been
brought to condemn him, we bring not here this Letter so much to prove the
Plot, as to be a very strong concurrent Evidence against Mr. Ireland, as to his
being in London in August, which he denied, and his Evidence seemed to make
good: and therefore as to that I desire you will consider,

That the King went to Windsor the thirteenth or fourteenth of August (78) as
is proved by Sir Robert Southwell and by Sir Tho. Dolman, at the Trials; it was
indeed the fourteenth.

That Mr. Jennison in his Letter writes thus, Being come from Windsor, I went
to take my leave of Mr. Ireland, before I took my Journey into the North: and
Mr. Ireland asked, What news from Windsor? How does the King pass his time,
etc? which notoriously proves that his discourse with Ireland was, when the
King was at Windsor, and after Mr. Jennison came from thence, and before he
went into the North, to wit, betwixt the nineteenth of August and the fourth of
September, and implies that it was immediately after his coming from Windsor by
the Question, What news from thence? And it is the more likely that it was
immediately after, because Mr. Jennison himself says, he is sure it was a good
while before he went into the North.

That this time nearly agrees with Sarah Pain's Testimony at Ireland's Trial.
See the Trial, fol. 57.

That Ireland was tried the seventeenth of December (78.) and Mr. Jennison's
Letter was writ from Reading in Berks (whither he was gone in obedience to the
Proclamation, being a Papist then, but has since Conformed) the nineteenth
following, so that he could not then have any knowledge of that Trial, or of
what Ireland had insisted upon.

That when Mr. Jennison wrote this Letter, he was under an apprehension that he
had offended, and was in danger for having concealed Ireland's discourse, of
the easiness of taking off the King at Windsor, which seems to be the main
occasion of his writing that Letter to his Friend in nature of a Confession.

I need say no more, for I question not but that all the world will say this is
a very great concurrent Testimony and strengthening to the King's Evidence, as
to that point of Mr. Ireland's being in London, notwithstanding what the
Staffordshire Witnesses had said in the Prisoner's behalf. And as to the verity
of this you may be easily informed, Mr. Jennison being a known person, and one
of credit and reputation.

Then page 87. Mr. Gawen starts a point of Law, whether as to himself he may be
legally condemned for Treason, being accused for one thing in Staffordshire,
and for another thing in London, so that there is but one Witness to either.
But the Court cleared this point to him by Sir Hen. Vanes Case, and page 88.
told him that the Law was settled therein, and that they two, though they were
Witnesses to two several acts done, in two several places, yet it was to the
same Treason. For Dugdale swears to his killing the King, altering the
Government, and bringing in of Popery; and Oats swears he saw his hand to the
Consult, which was for the same Treason, viz. for the Murder of the King,
raising an Army, and the bringing in of Popery, which is the same Treason: so
that it was plain there were two Witnesses against him, and his Plea not to be
admitted.

This is the whole substance of their Defense and what they have to say for
themselves. I need not use any Arguments to show the weakness of it, it is
obvious to all that read or hear their Trials. And as to the matter of Fact
which is so punctually sworn against them, they can say nothing, but only
their own constant denials of their Guilt, and asseverations of their
Innocence: but how far that will prevail with impartial men, I shall leave
themselves to judge: but I am sure there were twelve men of one mind, that
thought them guilty, and I am confident that there are twelve thousand of the
same opinion, and that all those who say to the contrary, must speak it out of
Ignorance or Prejudice.

As to the proofs against Mr. Langhorn, you will find them very home and
positive: and first page 6. and 7. Mr. Dugdale is brought to prove the Plot in
general, which he again swears to as to their several Consultations and design
of murdering the King, and massacring the Protestants, and bringing in of
Popery: to which also Mr. Prance concurs. Then as to the particular Charge
against Mr. Langhorn, Dr. Oats swears page 10. that he carried several Letters
from Mr. Langhorn to persons beyond the Seas, in one of which he saw under his
own hand, That now they had a fair opportunity to begin and give the blow, with
many other expressions plain enough concerning the Plot; and these he saw
signed Richard Langhorn: and then he farther swears, that he had Orders from
the Provincial to give Mr. Langhorn an account of the Resolutions and passages
that were formed and done at this Consult of the twenty fourth of April, and
that he gave him an account of the same, and of their Resolution of killing the
King; and that the said Langhorn lift up his hands and eyes, and prayed to God
to give to it a good success. Then page 11. he swears he saw in his Chamber, in
the Inner Temple, lying on the side of his Desk, certain Commissions, which he
had heard to have been sent over to him for several persons in England, which
they called Patents; and that upon Dr. Oats his desire to see them, he
permitted him to peruse several of them, which he did, and there saw one
Commission to the Lord Arundel of Wardour, and another to the Lord Powis, the
one to be Lord High Chancellor, the other to be Lord High Treasurer of
England, and to the Lord Bellasis to be General, to the Lord Peter's to be
Lieutenant General, and one for Mr. Coleman to be Secretary of State, and for
Mr. Langhorn himself to be Advocate of the Army: and that these were signed
Johannes Paulus de Oliva, by virtue of a Brief granted by the Pope. These
Commissions were signed with the Jesuits mark. And that Mr. Langhorn told him
he had sent one of these Commissions by his Son, to be delivered to the Lord
Arundel of Wardour's Son, and that it was delivered. And page 13. he swears,
that Mr. Langhorn being employed as Solicitour for several of the Fathers of
the Society, that upon his solicitation of the Benedictine Monks, they had
promised him 6000 li. for the carrying on of the Cause, and that Mr. Langhorn
promised in his hearing, to do his utmost for the procuring the said money. And
also, that he was much disgusted with Sir George Wakeman, because he was not
contented with 10000 li. to poison the King: and page 14. he swears that Mr.
Langhorn called the said Sir George Wakeman a covetous man, and that since it
was a public concern, it was no matter if he had done it for nothing, but that
he was a narrowspirited and narrow-soul'd Physician. Then an Instrument being
produced in Court, signed by Paulus de Oliva, Mr. Oats swore that the
Commissions he saw were signed by the same hand, and had all the same mark: but
they were all conveyed away, and this being only concerning an Ecclesiastical
business was left; however, this shows he used to receive Patents from, and had
Commerce with the Superior of the Jesuits in Rome. And this was found in Mr.
Langhorn's Chamber a long time after Mr. Oats had given in his Testimony.

Then page 19. Mr. Bedlow swears, he went with Mr. Coleman to Mr. Langhorn's
Chamber, and there Mr. Coleman gave him his Letters to Le Chese, and to the
Pope's Nuntio, and to others, open, to read, and to register in a Book by him
kept for that purpose; and that he saw Mr. Langhorn read these Letters, which
were concerning the design they had in hand, and that he registered them in a
Book in his Closet, whilst he and Mr. Coleman walked in the outer Room, and
that afterward Coleman sealed up these Letters, and gave them to Mr. Bedlow,
who was to carry them to Le Chese, the King of France his Confessor; and that
some of the expressions in those Letters were, That all things were now in a
readiness, and that they only wanted money: That the Catholics were now in
safety, and that all places and offices had been disposed to them, and that all
the Garrisons were already in their hands, or would be put into their hands
suddenly: And that now they had a fair opportunity, having a King so easy to
believe what was dictated to him by their party; and that if they mist the
opportunity, they might despair of ever introducing Popery into England. This
was the effect of most of the Letters, and with them Mr. Langhorn was made
acquainted, and registered them in a Book. Page 20. he swears he brought
Letters from Harcourt to Mr. Langhorn to be registered, which Mr. Langhorn
received, and registered accordingly; for he wrote by him to Harcourt, that he
had received the Letters by Mr. Williams, (which was the name that Bedlow then
went by) and that he would transcribe them, and return them to him again. Now
these Letters were one of them declared to be from the Rectour of the Irish
College at Salamanca, which specified that the Lord Bellasts, and the rest of
the Lords concerned, and the whole party should be in a readiness; and to have
it communicated with all expedition: for that they had sent some Irish
Cashiered Soldiers, with many other Lay-Brothers, under the notion of Pilgrims
for S. Jago, who were to take shipping at the Groin, and to land at
Milford-Haven in Wales, and there to meet and join with the Lord Powis. The
other Letter was from Sir William Godolphin, which Mr. Bedlow had brought out
of Spain, directed to the Lord Bellasis, which was about the same design, and
was also registered by Mr. Langhorn in a Book which he saw near 3 inches thick,
and that he guesses two thirds of the Book might be wrote out.

Now by this judge you whether the Indictment of High Treason be not proved
against Mr. Langhorn, and whether he be not guilty of this Treason and
Conspiracy of bringing in Popery, of levying War, and killing the King, by two
several witnesses, who have so positively sworn it against him.

The defense Mr. Langhorn makes for himself, is no other then what his Brethren
in Iniquity had done before him, to deny the fact, and to endeavor to
invalidate the credit of the Witnesses, by intrapping them in point of time and
place. And to this end page 14, 15, 16, etc. he asks Mr. Oats many questions
little to the purpose, and only to amuse the Auditors. Then page 27. he would
make Mr. Oats an Approver, as having been pardoned for the same Crime; and
that the witnesses had received rewards and gratifications for swearing against
them: thus making no defense as to the matter of Fact, only endeavoring to
support themselves upon the incompetency of the Witnesses. But all these
objections or cavillings were well answered by my Lord Chief Justice, who let
him know, that unless he could prove any reward to be given by contract or
subornation, it could not make an objection if there were any given, for that
allowance or sustenance was usually given of old to Approvers, etc.

The next thing Mr. Langhorn endeavors, is to invalidate Mr. Oats his
testimony, by making him to be forsworn in point of time; and he brings the
same witnesses from S. Omars, as were brought in the behalf of the five Jesuits
the day before, to prove he was at S. Omars April and May, and so could not be
in London; and they being the same evidence, and swearing to the same point, we
will not repeat them: only take notice, that one of them page 33. being asked
how he came to take more notice of Mr. Oats being at S. Omars all April and
May, and not in June and July as well, answers plainly, (not being well
instructed, or more simple then the rest) that it was because the question he
came for did not fall upon that time, which still gives more light to the
suspicion, that they came with their Lessons in their mouths to save the Lives
of these men, and not to speak truth. But to confront these witnesses, Mr.
Oats produced in Court the same that had the day before sworn they had seen
him in London both in April and May, so that he sufficiently cleared his
testimony by 7 Witnesses.

Then page 46. Mr. Langhorn produces the Woman that kept the White-horse
Tavern, where Mr. Oats had said the Consult was held, and she averrs that
there is no Room in her House would hold above a dozen, and that therefore
there could not meet 50 or 18 or 20 persons there at a time. To answer this
three several Witnesses strangers stood up in Court, and being sworn attested,
the first, that he knew sixteen to Dine often in one Room of that House: the
second, that he knew two Rooms, one backward, the other forward, where thirty
might Dine at a time: and the third, that at a Wedding he knew of above twenty
that Dined together in one Room next the Street. So that this Evidence did Mr.
Langhorn no kindness: for she that was so peremptory in this falsehood, might
give a suspicion that the rest of his witnesses might be false in their
averrments.

Then page 57. Mr. Langhorn goes about to prove by several witnesses, that Sir
Tho. Preston, Mr. Poole, and Sir John Warner did not come over with Mr. Oats
as he had attested, and this rests indeed on Mr. Oats his single testimony;
but this being only circumstantial, and not any way contradictory to the
matter of Fact, it ought not, nor could not legally invalidate his evidence:
For it is not much to the purpose, whether Sir John Warner, Sir Tho. Preston,
and Mr. Pool came over with Mr. Oats or no; or if he did commit any mistake
therein, these men not being indicted: but it had been more then a
circumstantial matter, to have proved Mr. Oats to have been actually at S.
Omars the time of the Consult, the 24. of April, and would have stuck against
him, had he not well cleared that matter by 7 substantial witnesses, who have
sworn they saw him in London about the same time. So that all this considered,
I think there is none, except he be much prejudiced, who reads these, but will
judge Mr. Langhorn to have had a fair Trial, and that the Jury proceeded to
find him guilty of Treason by the plain proof and testimony of two witnesses,
backed by other circumstances, among which, the Letter found amongst Harcourt's
papers was one, that proved the Consult to be the same time, and clearly hints
also the design to be of the same nature, as Mr. Oats had sworn it to be.

I think there is none that truly considers the fair Trials of these wicked
Conspiratours, and justly weighs every thing that has been proved against
them, that will think these men innocent, or that there has not been a most
horrid and hellish design amongst them, which they have not yet given over, and
which we yet hope God will more fully discover and bring to light in mercy to
this Nation, and for the glory of his Name. Will you still be wilfully blind,
and will you shut your eyes against all this clear light, and cry it is no
Plot? Do not you see them still endeavoring to Fire the City, as witness those
Servants hired by Stubbs, as has been manifestly made known, and almost
miraculously prevented? Do they not still go on in their wicked design against
the Life of His Sacred Majesty? and will you have your throats cut ere you will
believe? Shall the stout denials of those that suffer, and the obstinacy of
these Traitors, in confessing nothing at their Deaths, stagger you in your
opinion of their being guilty, against such full proof and evidence? Consider
the Principles of their Religion, and the Doctrine these Fathers of the Church
of Rome have publicly taught and maintained, the deposing and killing of Kings
for the sake of their Religion, and that it is lawful in that case to make use
of Equi vocations and Lies, and that thereby they do God good service, if it be
for the propagation of the Faith: and are not all Vows, Oaths and Sacraments
dispensed with by the Pope on that occasion? Have we not seen and heard of many
examples of the same, enough to have filled a Volume, and not untruly affixed
upon them, but what have been really and publicly committed by them? What heed
then is to be taken to the denials of these men at their Deaths? or what credit
to be given to their Speeches, when they have yet liberty given them to deceive
the people; and that by their obstinacy they may persuade them into a belief
that there is no Plot, till the Sword is at their Throats? But I will conclude
in the Recorder's words, that I hope the fair Trials these persons have had,
and the publishing of them for the satisfaction of all those who will look into
them, will not only confirm all who are Protestants, but will prevail upon
those whom they have inveagled into their persuasion, to desert such a
Religion, till such time as they alter their principles from the bloudiness and
inhumanity they are stained with, and which these men have instilled into all
their Proselytes.

FINIS.

