God give you Joy. THE HEARTY WISH OF A CHRISTIAN FRIEND TO THE BRIDEGROOM and
the BRIDE.

A Marriage-Present For the New-Married-Couple: Containing

Considerations and Advices, in order to persuade young Married people to begin
the Married life in the fear of the Lord.

With Directions and Prayers.

With plainness, intended for the meanest Understanding.

By one that desires to be a true Son of the Church of Christ, as by the Gospel
established.

As being heirs together of the grace of life, that your prayers be not
hindered, 1 Pet. 3.7. Printed in the year 1691.

God give you Joy. The hearty Wish of a Christian Friend to the Bridegroom and
the Bride.
THE INTRODUCTION.
IT becomes all that love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, to promote the
glory of God the Father, and according to their capacities to further that
great work for which Christ came into the world, by laboring to turn every one
from their iniquities, that they may obtain salvation through faith in him.
This is that blessing with which God sent his Son to bless the world; and which
all should endeavor to bring others to be partakers of. And therefore should
use all means possible to instruct and persuade all to receive, and follow that
Grace of God which appears in the Gospel; and teaches us to deny ungodliness
and worldly lusts, that we may live soberly, and righteously, and godly in this
present world, in every state and condition of life.

Therefore should we lay hold on every opportunity that may probably be fit for
that purpose. And I take this as a fit occasion, to put you in mind of that
duty you are bound to, in respect of each other, in the married estate; that
you may glorify God, in helping one another Souls, that so the prayers and
good wishes of your friends may not be in vain, but that your Joy may be full,
true Joy in the Lord.

God give you Joy is the usual salutation to new married people; and indeed it
is what every true Christian friend desires, That such may rejoice in the Lord,
and Joy in the God of Salvation.

The Love of Christ should constrain us to love others as Christ loved us, for
the souls good. And all that wish well to their Friends and Relations, that
wish them Joy, if they are in earnest, and know what they say, This is Joy, to
have the Lords favor, that is better than life it self. And therefore they
should use such means as Gods word teaches, to promote that Joy they wish, the
Joy that God gives.

But experience shows us, that too many are either ignorant or dissemblers in
that wish, which is turned for the most part into a cold formality, and words
of course. And we also see the ill methods that too many new married folks take
to make void such good wishes, and oppose their own true joys and real
blessings.

Therefore I put this Paper into your hands, as becomes a Christian friend that
desires to be a friend to your souls, to admonish and entreat you, that you
make not void the good wishes of your friends by neglecting of God at first,
nor oppose your own joy by a careless and ungodly life. But that you take such
care, that the beginnings of your mutual love may be seasoned with the Divine
love. And that your first resolutions on your meeting together in the married
state may be, so to abide with God, and so to live together in his fear, that
God may live with you here, and you with him both here and hereafter.

However it may have been with you in the single and unmarried state, we
usually call marriage a changing our condition; It Is my hearty and earnest
desire, that your change may be for the best; and that you may so begin the
world together as not to abuse it, but in the changed condition you may attend
to the Lords service, to your souls true comfort and joy.

In every change of condition, we in some sort do begin a new course: so that
we may justly apply our Saviors precept to all beginnings, so to enter on
every state of life, that in the first place and chiefly we regard the fear of
the Lord; Seek first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; he joins also a
promise to it, that outward blessings shall be added, Mat. 6.33. Therefore in
so great a change as Marriage is, it highly concerns you, that the married life
should be begun in the Lord. Your first and chiefest love should be to him from
whom you have your being, and on whom you depend for all things, both present
and to come; to whom you should live, and who is glory should be the design of
all your actions, because his you are, and not your own; Redeemed to him by the
precious blood of his Son Jesus Christ: And before that Great Judge you must
give up an account of your selves at the last.

If you have been piously educated, then have you need to be careful, that the
change turn not aside your heart from God. But as you have been charged by your
Parents, Remember to live in the fear of the Lord, and abide with God in the
married as well as in the single life. Remember the Apostles caution, 2 Timothy
3.14. Change of family, and acquaintances, and neighbors, are great occasions
of good or evil; as those families, relations, or kindred, acquaintance, and
neighbors are, amongst whom you happen to come. If they be ungodly and vain,
you had need beware they tempt you not to leave off the way of Godly living.
That which seems pleasant to the flesh, is a strong persuasion to bring you to
comply with vain worldly ways, especially in beginning the married estate; they
think it strange you will not do as others, in worldly vanity; and by degrees
bring you to think it strange you should not, and by degrees to consent to join
with them; and by unsensible degrees, and unperceived methods, will they lead
you from the good way, and you will leave your first love and good practice,
and fail of the grace of God. Therefore you had need beware you change not to
the worse: Or if there be among them but some ungodly, you had need beware you
join not with them on worldly accounts rather than with the Godly, because
poor, or on other accounts despised.

If they are Godly and Religious Friends and Neighbors among whom you come,
Take heed you do not disgrace your pious education by growing slight and
careless after marriage.

But if your education has not been in the nurture and admonition of the Lord,
to look after true Godliness, then indeed you had need look to it, that the
condition may be so changed, that the married estate may be a state of
Godliness. Marriage should be in the Lord; only in the Lord, says the Apostle,
1 Cor. 7.39. It Is this only that makes marriage truly honorable and
comfortable. And if you have neglected that great thing, that one necessary
thing till then, it is surely high time to begin the change.

When I ask young married people, if they desire and intend to live together in
Godly love, and the fear of God; they usually answer, They hope so to do. And
surely it would be impudent folly and sin, to dare to say otherwise. But I
think it is plain in too many, that there is not really such an heart and
hearty desire in them; but that they regard little more than brutish
satisfaction and carnal enjoyments; Nay some behave themselves to each other,
as if they married only to be in a capacity to torment and vex one another, to
do the Devils work, to hinder each others comforts both in soul and body.

I desire you would now put that forementioned question to your selves:

Do you desire and intend, and will you endeavor to live together in Godly
love, and in the fear of God, so as to be meet helps for each others good both
in soul and body?

What answer can you think reasonable to that question, Ay or No?

If you answer Ay; and think fit, that such answer should be taken should be
taken for true, and no lie, that answer then gives judgment of your duty, what
you ought to do; and if not brutish and senseless, must engage you so to do. The
chief design of this Paper is to persuade and direct to begin the married life
in the due fear of God, so that you may continue in the same. We call marriage
a beginning of the world; and we may make it (if we use it aright) the
beginning of the Kingdom of Heaven. The beginnings of Grace continued in, will
surely end in Glory.

Sect. I. Some Questions to Conscience, in order to convince the Judgment, and
prepare the mind to receive the following Advices.
THat your Judgment may be settled aright, to approve the best things, and to
choose the most excellent way, I shall offer several things to your
consideration by way of Question, and let Conscience give the answer.

1. First, I earnestly entreat you in the fear of God, and as in his presenco,
to think seriously, and ask conscience, Whether an holy and heavenly love and
life be not best to spend your days together in? As having God to dwell with
you; to have a sense of his good providence over you, and that your prayer may
not be hindered, but that you may ever have a grounded hope of his everlasting
love?

2. Whether Marriage thus ordered may not be esteemed as the greatest earthly
comfort? or on the other hand, Whether an ill managed Wedlock is not the
greatest cross of humane life?

3. Whether God by his providence has not put it into the hands and power of
married people to make themselves happy or miserable, as to this world at
least, and in great measure also their souls in the world to come?

4. Whether you come together as Christians, or as Heathens? and without a holy
endeavor to live in godly love, what do you more than Heathens?

5. Whether there be any love as Christians, if it be not with respect to the
soul; and whether that can be meet help, for man or woman, that does not help
the soul?

6. Whether Husband or Wise could take it well to hear the other say, I love
thy face and thy fortune, thy beauty and estate, thy body and flesh, but for
thy soul I care not if it be damned and go to the Devil. Whether such words
would be taken as charming expressions and signs of love?

7. Whether an ungodly life and unholy practice be not as much as to say, they
care not for the souls of one another, when they labor not to live together
religiously, and so to keep each others souls to God?

8. What answer can thou give to thy own conscience at death, if thou have
not endeavored to live a religious life, whether married or single?

9. Whether that mystical union between Christ and his Church, his love in
giving himself for it, as Ephesians. 5.25. And also that relation between God and his
people, whom he has married unto himself, Jer. 3.14. both which being
represented in that mutual union in the married state, do not intimate much of
argument, for true and spiritual love, and to persuade you to labor to cleanse
each others souls, and to keep each other without spot, and blameless, as for
the coming of the Lord?

Read these questions over again, and ask one the other the Questions; and
persuade and engage one another to consider seriously of these things. And if
on serious consideration these questions being truly answered, according to
conscience, in truth and soberness, do so far convince your judgment, and
persuade (as I hope they will) that your hearts must at least secretly confess,
and say, surely godly love, and a godly life is best; to love for the souls
good is only true love: Then confess and own it to one another, and promise
seriously so to live together as to help one another souls, and to endeavor
each others Salvations, and then proceed to read the Advices following.

Sect. II. Containing Advices to new-marriea People, with Arguments to
persuade, and Helps to perform them.
THe Advices I have to offer to begin the married state should be few, lest the
beginning be past before they be read. Yet if the beginning be past they cannot
be useless, because they are always of use in the married state. But in
particular to new-married people, especially if young, they are such advices
whereby they may lay a good foundation, and build thereon solid comforts,
family comforts, lasting Christian comforts. Such as being continued, and daily
followed, may render every day a day of comfort and good things; and if good in
the beginning, cannot but be so in continuance; and spiritual good being
followed, always increases to more abundance.

Adv. 1. First therefore, I advise you to begin the married life in the fear of
the Lord, with holy resolutions so to live together. I hope the former
Questions have almost (at least) convinced you, that it is your duty so to do.
Let therefore good resolutions follow your convictions. Resolve, that your
first living together shall be as Christians indeed. And let not Satan tempt
you to delay, lest you quite forget. Resolve and endeavor, that your first
love may be as love in the Lord.

To help and encourage you thus to resolve in the beginning, remember these
three things.

1. Remember, that the love of the flesh, or as led by the flesh, is not of
God, as in 1 John 2.16. Appetite and desires of the flesh bring beasts together.

2. Remember, that kindness and good nature, company, and to be helpful to one
another in outward things, as of this life, are what become men and women as
being rational creatures; and that these things may be found, and doubtless are
found amongst Heathens, such as know not God in Christ Jesus.

3. Remember, that love in the Lord from a purified heart in earnest, fervency,
and sincerity, as 1 Pet. 1.22. with desire to do good to each others soul, and
to help in the way of salvation, is that which becomes Christians, and not at
all shortens, but rather increases and perfects kindness and good nature. And
this is indeed marrying in the Lord, as 1 Cor. 7.39.

Therefore receive one another to the glory of God, as Christ received us, Romans
15.7. And look on that providence that brings you together as ordered by the
Lord. A prudent wife is from the Lord, says Solomon, Prove. 19.14. And we may
add, a prudent husband. A religious and good husband or wife is from the Lord,
his provision or gift of his providing; whereas houses and riches, lands and
inheritances, Joyntures and Portions are the gifts of Fathers, provisions of
men, and as such they may decay or be lost: but the gifts of the Lord will
abide for good; and such a gift by Gods grace you may be to each other.

Resolve then and endeavor at first to put forward and encourage one another
to love and good works; as such as are come together, and appointed by Gods
good providence in a particular manner to be helps to build up one another in
your most holy faith, and to keep one another in the love of God, that you may
together comfortably expect the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal
life, Jude 20, 21. If this be the duty of all Christian friends, much more then
is it the duty of such as are joined so near in the Covenant of the Lord, a
Covenant of love and unity; so near an union, that (in the opinion of St. Paul)
it resembles and may be compared to that love between Christ and his Church, as
in that similitude before offered to consideration, Ephesians. 5.25.

Adv. 2. Secondly, I advise, That having resolved (which I hope you will do)
put those good resolutions in practice. Do not think that it is enough to
approve and purpose, but set about the work in earnest, and that immediately;
setting your selves at first to live together in Gods way, the way of Religion,
that you may always so continue. And let your daily conversation be in the
Lord, abiding with him according to the rule of the Gospel, persuading each
other always to do that which is of good report, and as becomes the servants of
God.

These things are general, but the practice consists in particulars, and
therefore to those particulars I proceed.

Adv. 3. In the third place, I advise you to pray together daily; speak unto
God, call upon God for his favor and blessings. Begin this course as soon as
you come together. Rising in the morning, remember each other of prayers, and
so with united hearts direct your prayer unto God, Psalm. 5.3. So likewise every
evening before you go to bed: the seasons God; people used, Psalm. 55.16, 17.
This is the practice of all that are Godly, Psalm. 32.6. so often commanded and
commended in the Scripture, that I think there needs no more to persuade you
that it is your duty. Those words of our Savior, Mat. 26.41. watch and pray;
or those of St. Paul, pray without ceasing, 1 These. 5.17. are command enough to
all that believe the Scripture to be the word of God. These general precepts
contain your duty in particular; for what God commands all, he commands every
one; and those words of St. Peter, 1 Pet. 3.7. that your prayers be not
hindered, suppose praying to be both the duty and practice of married people.

And if there had been no command to make prayer your duty, yet reason will
advise you to it, as your interest, since God is pleased to give you leave. I
therefore advise you to pray, as one of the best things you can do for one
another, whether for soul or body. Because all that good you or your friends
wish or desire for you, is from God; his gift, his blessing; without which all
your own labor is in vain, as is plain from the whole 127th Psalm. Except the
Lord build the house, their labor is but lost that build it. It in vain to
rise up early, to sit up late, and to eat the bread of carefulness. Whatsoever
business you go about, whatsoever hopes of comfort in each other you may
propose, whatsoever designs you may have of thriving in the world together;
without Gods blessing all will be in vain. In vain are all those seeming wishes
of Joy from your friends, unless the Lord say Amen. If you begin not thus, and
at first ask Gods blessing by prayer, how can you expect it? Nay you hinder
your selves of that good your friends desire for you, and you seem to desire
for your selves, until you seek it at the hand of God by prayer.

But if you will set your selves at first to seek Gods blessing by praying
together, there are promises in the Scripture sufficient to encourage you to
hope; such as these: Those that seek me early shall find me, Prove. 8.17. Ask
and it shall be given you, Mat. 7.7. If two of you shall agree on earth, as
touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my father
which is in heaven, Mat. 18.19.

What should you learn then from these Scriptures, but that you agree betimes
to pray together, and with united hearts to go to God, and ask in hope.

O that I could persuade you to receive this advice, and heartily engage you to
call upon God, that the Lord may be with you, and bestow his blessings upon you
and yours! What can hinder you from this great duty and privilege?

I know nothing that can be said against this advice; but by way of excuse,
some will talk of their weakness, and not being able. But this is for the most
part but a trifling pretense, which Satan teaches the unwilling in heart to
plead: For I am fully persuaded, that God requires nothing of his creatures,
but what he knows they are able to perform, with his grace in using the means
he has afforded; and so it will appear in this particular, if you consider the
helps you have, and the nature of the duty, as reason and conscience must judge.

And first in respect of helps. If you have not been accustomed to this, but
are strangers to God in that great and comfortable duty of Prayer, you may ask,
how shall we call upon God, that are ignorant and cannot make prayers? Tho such
thoughts savor of great ignorance, yet I will answer in your own way. That is,
you may make use of some form of prayer, in some good books, of which sort
there are many printed among us. If you have not a better, nor fitter for your
condition, you may use such as I have added at the end of this book.

If you say you cannot read, neither of you to help the other, your case is to
be pitied; and then I advise you to try to learn. I have known several, of a
willing mind, who have learnt to read when grown in years. The advantage is
great, to be able to see at any time the will of God in the concern of thy
soul, in his own word, in thy own language, and also to be able to use any
choice form of prayer, suitable to your condition, and so powerful to move your
affections, and draw forth the desires of your hearts toward God, tho beyond
your ability to compose.

But if you cannot learn to read, or in the mean time till you can, you are not
without help; for you may get some honest godly friend or neighbor to read
over a prayer to you, so long till you have learnt it, that you can say it your
self.

But then you must take heed, that this saying over one form turn not to plain
formality; that you should think as a child, that having said over the words
you have prayed, tho your heart spoke not to God; and so look on a prayer as a
charm, as if God was bound by those words in general, to show his goodness to
you, when your heart has not made one request or petition to God; that is, you
have uttered words, but had no desires. This is an usual mistake, and dangerous
error; so that in using forms of prayer, your care must be to keep your heart
to the duty, earnestly desiring with your heart what you request with your lips.

But tho you have none of these outward helps, so that you can neither read,
nor are furnished with a memory able to keep a form of words in mind; yet know,
that the nature of the duty is such, that these wants will no way excuse you:
Neither should you suffer this want to trouble you, if you are willing and
desirous to pray, much less should you suffer it to discourage you, and hinder
you from duty, and keep you from God, because you cannot say over a form of
prayer: For consider, forms are but words, but prayer indeed is the speaking of
the heart to God, whether there be voice heard, or words uttered, or not; and
without the heart, both the best composed form, and the greatest ability to
utter words readily in extemporary free prayer, are utterly to no purpose. And
if from thy heart thou speak to God humbly, reverently, with understanding,
as sensible of thy wants, sincerely, as by faith depending on him through Christ;
thou needst not be troubled for want of well placed words, for God wants not
words, but knows the language of the heart and spirit, Romans 8.27. he is the God
of the spirits of all flesh, Numb. 27.16. It Is true indeed, that we want words
to express the desires of our souls, and to quicken our affections, especially
when praying with others. But when marriage has made you no longer two, but one
flesh, and your interest and desires should be one, and the same that your
prayers may not be hindered; tho the words are not so well placed as may
recommend to men, yet from a sincere and united heart they may recommend both
to God. And to remove that bashfulness, and being ashamed of words in one
another hearing, remember it is not to approve your gifts and parts to each
other, but to approve both your hearts to God; so that the fear of this want
should not discourage, and so keep you keep you strangers from God.

Consider then the good things you have and enjoy, and be thankful. Remember
it is fit to beg of God the continuance of them. Consider what evil things you
either fear or already suffer; and beg the Lord to deliver. And if there be any
thing in particular that either of you want or desire, this should be made
known to the other, that praying together you may join in that one thing, and
pray one for another, as well as one with another. And if you are indeed truly
sensible of your wants, and have an heart to go unto God, you have a God to go
to, who will help your infirmities, even he who made man's mouth; he will put
words in your mouths, and teach you what to say, so that you shall not want
words for supplication and thanksgiving, to make your requests known unto God.
And when you come thus to God with a sincere humble devout soul, in the name
and mediation of Jesus Christ, this is prayer indeed, to which all forms
whether set or extemporary (where such an heart is wanting) are no way to be
compared. This is the language of the soul, the heart poured out to God in
prayer.

Adv. 4. The fourth advice I give you, is to read the Scriptures together, the
word of God. It Is the great comfort and help of your souls, and a blessed
advantage of our Nation and the present time that we may; and that thereby we
may have in our own Houses that word, promise, and Gospel wherein Christ, and
through him life and immortality and salvation is made known. Search the
Scriptures for therein ye think you have eternal life. Jo. 5.39. So search that
the word of Christ may dwell richly in you, in all knowledge and Spiritual
understanding. Col. 3.16. Therein is abundance of hid treasure, the
unsearchable riches of Christ. Something of this should be read every day.
Reading the Scripture should accompany Prayer, at least in the evenings. And
let this practice be kept as a constant custom, unless some extraordinary
providence, as sickness or the like hinder it. If you begin this at first it
will with more ease be continued, till duty becomes delight, and having tasted
the sweetness and found the advantage, you will look for it, and think it as
necessary as food or sleep. Job. 23.12.

And to this I add this further advice, that you read often good, sound, and
plain books of practical Godlyness. That is at such times as the business of
your calling or trade does admit: and tell each other of what good books you
have read, and what good you have received by them.

But especially on the Lords day in the vacancy of public ordinances, when you
are not at Church then should you read, and not only read, but also encourage
one another in an holy practice of such good things as the Scripture teaches,
and other good books set before you, according to the holy Scripture.

Remember that if the husband cannot read, and has a wife that can, to account
her worthy of double honor, and, if possible, of double love, on that account.
But let that wife beware she be not puffed up to despise her husband, but know
that she may yet learn of him, as in respect of Judgment, and understanding. 1
Cor. 14.35. She must not think her self his teacher, nor usurp authority over
him. 1 Timothy 2.12. though in this particular a meet helper and great advantage to
him.

So also if the wife cannot read, and has an husband that can, let her prize
him the more on that account, as a greater treasure, with whom she may have the
comfort of a Christian conversation according to knowledge, and living together
as heirs of the grace of life. 1 Pet. 3.7.

If neither can read, then you had need be more diligent to spend such times of
leisure, in holy and enlivening discourses, considering each others estate, as
in the respect of your Souls; and call on one another, that both together may
call on the Lord.

And if neither can read it is further advisable, that you endeavor to get
acquaintance and familiarity, with some godly Christian neighbor that can
read, whither you may often go, and spend the evenings (especially before
Children come on to hinder) not to wast time as the worldly custom is, to talk
of news you little understand, or of the affairs of the town, or parish that
little or nothing concern you; but to desire them to read some portion of the
Scripture, or other good book, to help you in the great concern of your Souls.

Or if your business in the world be such as admits of taking prentices or
Servants, labor to have such as can read, they may on that account be of more
advantage to the family then their bodily labor.

And this I always look upon as duty, that, if Servants cannot read, you
endeavor that they may be taught; and if they can read, it is your duty to keep
them to reading at fit times: and it is prudence so to do, as it is profitable
to your selves and family.

I shall conclude these two last advices with a caution which I hinted before:
that you be not ashamed of weakness and inability in private before each other,
either in respect of reading or praying. I mean not to neglect these private
duties, because you think you cannot do them well enough, and therefore do not
do them at all, because one shall not take notice how weak or ignorant, the
other is.

This oftentimes is a snare, and great occasion of neglect, and if not
carefully avoided, may make all the advices here offered, to be to no purpose,
if you suffer this sinful bashfulness to hinder the beginning or setting about
the work, till you think your selves better fitted and more able. Satan and
your own evil hearts will be ready to suggest this often, as a means to promote
delay, and so it is made too often a continual hindrance.

But to prevent this, if possible, I propose these Considerations.

1. First consider, that marriage having now made you one flesh, there is no
reason to be ashamed of doing your duty, though you perform it but weakly,
because you ought in Justice to think, that so near a relation as part of your
self, will not despise, but rather pity, and help as one flesh. And as they
ought, will cover with the robe of love, the infirmities that possibly may be
discovered. Because now that which is the shame or disgrace of one reflects on
the other, and so becomes the disgrace of both, and for one to despise the
other, is to dishonor themselves, and none ever yet so hated his own flesh.

Two members of the same body, may be touched with grief for the weakness of
each other, but not with shame, but rather help and bear the more of the
burden, if either be weak; so the poor beasts drawing in the same yoke, are
not ashamed to help though not so strong as their fellow. So though thou art
sensible that thou can not do as thou would, yet do this duty as well as
thou can, and be not ashamed, for it is thy duty.

2. Secondly consider what great folly it is to pretend to be ashamed to do thy
duty, because thou can do it but weakly, and therefore to leave it undone
when thou art not ashamed of thy sin, in neglecting such plain and necessary
duties, which tend so much to the glory of God, thy interest in Christ for thy
Souls good, and are so chief a part of Christian love to thy yoke fellow. Let
Conscience tell thee which is worst, to do duty willingly and sincerely though
weakly, or to let it alone undone. Sure that is shame indeed.

3. Consider, that it is only want of use and exercise in this duty, that makes
you bashful, and therefore you are loath to begin, but if you will begin and
master those first reluctancies, you will find that practice will make you
daily both bolder and abler.

4. This pretended shame and bashfulness will be a continual hindrance till you
begin. This will make you draw back when convinced of duty, and Satan will hold
this argument fast, and use it long in the war against thy Soul. And when there
is nothing else to hinder but shame, if ashamed to day, the same argument will
hold to morrow, and the like the next day, and so on, as a continual pretense
for neglect, till you begin; but then no longer. For if once you have begun,
shame is broken, and troubles you no more, or at least but weakly.

Now consider every one has a beginning: and beginnings, in all, are usually
weak in respect of after improvements, and performances. Be not then longer
ashamed to begin, it is God commands, the necessities of both your Sou's
require, Christ has prepared the way, Heb. 10.19. Therefore put on boldness,
and you will grow more able, and find more comfort.

Adv. 5. The fifth advice I give, is that you sanctify the Sabbath, the Lords
day, join together in this at the first, and take the more diligent heed to do
this, because you cannot but observe that it is generally too much neglected;
notwithstanding that plain command of God. Ex. 20.8. Therefore as God has set
that day apart from others, for himself, and commanded you to do so also, do
you set that day apart to be spent by you in the Spiritual business of God and
your Souls.

And if you know that either have neglected before marriage, then you have the
more need to deal faithfully; in warning one another, and telling each other
plainly of the Sin in that particular: especially if you have been the occasion
to one another of neglecting the Sabbath. This too often is the Sin of people
of a mean or low condition (though not of those only) that make their wooing
visits, appoint such meetings for idle walks mixed with folly and profane
discourse or idle chatt on that day. An ill beginning, and possibly may be the
cause in great measure of so many unlucky marriages, which afterward go on in
ungodly living, and tend to increase of misery.

If this then has been your case, you have the more need to bring one another
to a sense of that sin, and to a speedy change and newness of life, when you
have been the occasion of ensnaring each other in so great an evil.

Wherefore spend not your first Sabbath in idle and needless visits, to see new
cousins and new neighbors. Neither spend that nor any other Sabbath at home in
sloth and folly, under pretense of reading a chapter. But go both together to
Church to the ordinances and public assembly of Gods people, and never neglect
as the manner of too many is Heb. 10.25. unless hindered by some extraordinary
providence. And when you are returned home from the Ordinances, spend your time
religiously: in reading some portion of the Scripture, or other good book. Or
talking together of what you have heard read or preached in the public, how it
concerns or may concern either of you, and persuade and encourage one another
to an holy and serious praetice, and conclude as you begin the day with prayer.
And so comfort your selves together and edisie one another. 1 These. 5.11. And
by no means make it your custom to wander abroad on the Sabbath evenings,
unless it be to some Religious neighbors, that mind the things of God, and
keep up some good duty, as reading or repeating of Sermons or the like. And
learn of such how to govern your family in the fear of the Lord, as every good
man should. Josh. 24.15.

Or else on good and warrantable accounts, you may go and carry some good book
to a neighbor that cannot read. And read to them and their family, for their
Souls good and comfort.

Or else in the same Spiritual manner, visit such as can read, but do not; who
you may justly doubt are careless of their Souls. And buy a book for that
purpose, so may you do good both to your selves and them.

Or if you cannot read, not find a neighbor family to join with, that usually
does so spend the Sabbath, labor to procure one that can read to go along with
you in those Spiritual errands before mentioned.

Or if, as Gods providence calls, you visit ^^^h as are sick; (a thing usual on
the Sabbath day, and not to be discommended) yet be not as idle lookers on:
only with Complement and how do you do: but bring unto them some Spiritual
present from the Church, from Gods house, some word of exhortation, or comfort,
or instruction as they may need. And supposing there be no elder grave and
serious person that will speak as a Christian, do you speak as becomes Christ's
servant, for their Souls good, and discharge of your own Conscience.

O, if you have but an heart toward God, how many ways have you to do good
for your selves and others, and to spend that day in Religion and Piety, the
exercises of Charity, works of Mercy, and holy love! A joy and comfort that the
ignorant dark world are strangers to.

Adv. 6. One further advice I give in the sixth and last place, and that is,
that you admonish and stir up one another to the Solemn and serious coming to
the Lords Table, there to receive together the Holy Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, thereby to renew your vow in Baptisim; on your entrance on your changed
condition in the married state. Therefore take the first opportunity after you
are married, and help each other before to prepare for it. You are now become
one, discover therefore freely the state of your Souls, to each other, your
thoughts and knowledge in this matter, your hopes, your doubts and fears, and
pray for one another, and direct and assist each other to understand and to do
as God in his word requires, and promise together to watch over one another in
the love and fear of the Lord, and to help each other to walk answerably to the
Covenant; that being joined to each other, you may both be united to Christ,
one with him, and he with you.

But especially if neither have received the Sacrament, as it is too often the
sinful neglect of young people, forgetting their Baptismal vow, and covenant of
their youth: it is then more necessary to call on one another, and a great token
of true love to labor to bring each others Soul under the bond of the
covenant. To see the Sinfulness of their neglect, and make one another sensible
of it, and hasten that it may no longer continue.

Yet beware that you come not slightly and carelessly to attend there, and, by
mistake, take the Sacrament for a ceremony, Custom, fashion in Religion, or you
know not what, and so come ignorantly and without faith, and so not only
unprofitably but to your danger; But help each other to consider what the
Sacrament is; why appointed; and how useful to you in every condition.

Learn to know that it was appointed by Christ himself as a solemn remembrance
of what he has done and suffered for the Redemtion of mankind: and to be as a
Seal of confirmation, to all true believers, of their share and portion and
interest in Christ, as indeed given to them according to the Covenant.

And on our part the Seal of renewing our Resolutions of accepting of Christ,
and giving up our selves to God according to the Covenant of God in his Grace
and Mercy, as we promised or was promised for us at our Baptism: so we come to
receive Gods renewed promises, and to renew our own. And so it becomes (through
Gods grace) a means of stirring up all Christian graces in us, and of keeping
down the power of Sin, by the Spirit of Christ (according to the promise of
God) and Divine assistance. And this it is indeed to all that come sincerely
and in earnest, desiring to be and to continue true members of Christ's Body,
united unto him, and continuing in the Communion of Saints in steadfast Faith,
and holy obedience, and joyful hope, and thankful love.

Come then together as fellow heirs of the same grace: and renew your Baptismal
vow and engagement, with knowledge and understanding, thankfully and sincerely
accepting of, and receiving Christ as offered to your Souls by God the Father
in the Gospel; believing the whole word of God, and resolvedly and thankfully
giving up your selves to God through Christ; Heartily and sincerely consenting to
the covenant, to be Gods people, and to take him for your God; his Son for your
Savior; his Spirit for your Guide, and Sanctifier; his Word for your
Direction; his Promises for your Comfort, Hope, and Trust: Renouncing all
other, the devil and his works, the world and its vanities, the flesh and its
lusts, that in heart and practice you may so live, as the Gospel teaches, in
comfortable expectation of the Gospel-promises through Christ. For further help
in this matter, read those Chapters which contain the institution; as, 1 Cor.
11.23. Lu. 22. Math. 26. And such Books of that subject as you can have, as Mr.
Glanvil on the Sacrament. The Key of Knowledge short and plain. The whole duty
of Man, Sunday 3d. Some one of these, read together, and talk together, and
enquire of each others Souls welfare, of knowledge, says, repentance, charity,
and resolution of holy obedience, by renewed life, in the married estate,
giving up your selves to God through Christ, and promise this to each other, and
both to God.

And if you have never been at the Sacrament, then after such private
preparation, go together to your minister whom Gods providence has set over
you, to watch for your souls, and desire his help in settling the case of your
souls, for increase of knowledge, strengthening of faith, quickening repentance,
and directing your practice in every good thing. And so receive to the renewing
of your Covenant, and to be further strengthened in Grace.

But when I say, go to your Minister, I suppose him such an one as you may
think a fit guide for your souls, honest, holy, and a lover of God, and the
unseen Jesus, and for his sake a lover of souls. Such as the Apostle describes
1 Timothy 3. and 2 Timothy 2.15. Or if you cannot discern all this in him, get one
that is religious, given to Piety.

But if so be that your habitation be where a sot, or trifler, has thrust
himself into the Ministry, or creept in by ways not allowed of in Gods word,
nor the Constitutions of the ostablished Church, grounded upon that word; who
spends more time in idle company, or vain sports, and fleshly pleasures, then
in the things of God, that denies in life the power of Godliness. I cannot, I
dare not advise you to go to such an one, nor to commit the care and conduct of
your souls to him, that regards not his own, which may indeed more hinder then
help your soul: But as that Exhortation in the Book of Common Prayer provides,
to some other discreet and learned Minister of Gods word. That so by his
assistance and Spiritual counsel you may come worthily, and renew the Covenant.
And in all be sure that you be sincere, in earnest, and deal faithfully with
God and your souls, which will end in comfort, and go far to cover many
infirmities.

These are the Advices which I now give you, and which I therefore give because
chiefly necessary, and therefore I heartily entreat you to Consider of them at
first, and enter betimes on the way of living together in the fear of God.

There are diverse other things, the duties of married persons, which it is not
my purpose to speak of now: you may find them in several good books, and at
your leisure read them, for the quickening of Christian love and holiness, and
increase of Grace. And unless you set about these chief things betimes, and
betake your selves in earnest to God at first; it will be in vain to set other
duties before you. But if it please the Lord to open your hearts to set on the
practice of these things betimes, I doubt not but you will find the comfort and
advantage both of these things, and others also, as you may partly perceive in
the next Section.

Sect. III. Showing the advantages that newmarried people have to begin to live
together in a Religious course of life. And the Benefits of such a beginning.
THat I may further prosecute these my wishes and advices, I will here add
something of persuasion that may incline you to take this way of holy love, and
life, and joy, by entering betimes on a course of religious living. I shall
therefore in this Section, endeavor to show that it is both, what you may do
with most advantage at first, and also that in which you will find many
advantages and comforts afterward.

And therefore for encouragement I will make it plain that this may be done at
first with most ease. It Is not a dissicult task (one would think) at any time
to begin to be good and do good. It always carries its own encouragement and
advantage along with it. But we find by experience that corrupt nature is not
so easily changed; yet there are some particular advantages in beginning
betimes, and new-married people have some peculiar advantages at their first
coming together in respect of doing this good work, entering on this good way
with more ease, which favorable circumstances they are not like to find
afterward, if they let slip the present Opportunity.

Some of those advantages most easily observed are such as these.

1. The first advantage is the change of your condition: for however it has
been with you before in respect of life and conversation; yet upon marriage you
are put upon a change as to the manner of life: and that is like being come to
a turning way, you may as easily go to the right hand as to the left, if you
are but willing. If you have been seasoned with Grace before marriage; no doubt
but the way of God will be more easily turned to. But if you have not; yet now
on your change you have a new choice, and being to begin the practice of your
living together, you may as easily begin in a religious and holy, as in a
prosane and irreligious way; you are not yet prejudiced by former carelessness
in that manner of life which is but now beginning. But if you now at first
neglect, you loose the present advantage, and prejudice your selves against the
good way of the Lord, and every days neglect or evil practice will make the
work seem harder to be set about.

2. The second advantage is, that at first it is most easy to persuade one
another, the affections are then most yiedling and complyant. So that Then you
may have the greatest hopes to prevail one with the other, and so engage
together in a holy and religious life. Especially if one have been accustomed
to the way of true Godliness before, this may now the more easily prevail with
the other to join in the good and the right way. The influences of the first
love are great, and newmarried people are prepared (for the most part) to suit
themselves to each others tempers and inclinations, and do most easily yield to
each others defires as in promising to leave off something that is offensive to
the other; or to do something that is pleasing. And we are sensible how strong
and prevailing the persuasions of new-married people are to each other, in that
they work great changes upon some. Now the persuading to follow such advices as
these, being to those things that are undeniably good, must necessarily meet
with the less opposition, when the husband stirs up the wife, or the wife the
husband, to that which is for the souls good, and comfortable to it in this
present life.

3. A third advantage you have at your first coming together is, that some such
thing is expected; in doing of this, you do what is looked for at your hands.
In a Country where the Gospel is professed, new kindred, friends and
neighbors, will be enquiring as to matter of Religion, and something they will
expect, though they are not in earnest with it themselves, and will make some
Judgment of your life hereafter, by the manner of your first beginning to live
together. Your partner and yoke fellow, will be looking for this; and if bred
up Religiously, will think it strange that the way of Religion should not
continue; and although not bred up so; yet the man will expect that the woman
be well inclined, and though he regards not Religion himself will expect that she
should at some time speak something of that Nature. And the woman that regards
her husband, in respect of his Knowledge, will look that he should help and
assist her in Spiritual things, and that he by this should give the first
testimony of true love. And what indeed can professed Christians offer better
then true Christian love to souls, in the way of God, and sincere Religion? The
best is expected; and this being offered at first, will be accepted, and
esteemed (as indeed it is) the best we can offer. So then the way is prepared,
and this makes it easy: It Is easy to do that which is generally expected you
should do. And indeed you may well wonder at your selves if Satan should so
deceive you, that you should fall short of your own Expectations.

4. The fourth advantage that young married people have to set about Religious
duty's both secretly and in their families, at their first coming together is,
that then those hindrances of Children, and a great deal of worldly business is
not justly to be pleaded in excuse, which afterward may; though there is no
reason, that these or any thing else should keep from God in Christ, in whom
and on whom we live. Nothing can excuse you from the care of your souls;
without that no good can come, nor profit be expected, though you should gain the
whole world. Yet the corruption of nature, and the policy of Satan, being
joined will make such arguments appear reasonable: and experience shows us,
that such vain pleas are too prevailing, and in time raise such difficulties,
as are hardly to be removed, but may with ease be prevented at first, when they
cannot be pretended.

Let these advantages then persuade you to try what you can do at first to
engage each other to promise to be faithful to God, and one to the other in
living together religiously: praying and reading together, and helping one
another Souls, and watching to prevent sin, in each other, and in resolving to
rule your family as the Lords Servants. Consider what comfort you may have in
persuading and engaging one another to these things, when you know not but
hereby you may be the means of saving each the other.

And if either of you can prevail for a promise (which I can scarce doubt if
sincerely desired at first) then let each write their name or make some mark at
this place for a remembrance of the promise. And look on it sometimes to
quicken to continuance in mutual duty, and to comfort you, in that you have
begun to look in earnest toward the Lord. And in case of coldness and neglect
of Duty, that one may show it to the other as a gentle and silent admonition, a
token whereby to remember the early holy promises of Your first Love. It may be
a means to keep you from backsliding, and make you ashamed to fall off from so
good an engagement and promise, so as having begun in the Spirit to end in the
flesh.

But before I conclude this Section, I will set before you some of those
benefits you may obtain by early beginning in this holy way. I hope I have made
it manifest to be easy enough to a willing mind. And I also hope, that what
follows of the benefits which will come thereby, will yet give further
encouragement, and incline your hearts to be willing to enter on so comfortable
and hopeful a practice.

1. There is the benefit of credit and reputation in the world. Though Religion
be generally too much slighted, yet we may observe, that most men will commend
those that on marriage, break off from their evil ways, and settle themselves
to mind and do that which is good.

2. Next there is the benefit of hopeful proceeding. A good beginning
generally has got the reputation in the world, as giving the most probable hope
of a good ending. A good foundation gives the promise of a lasting building.
And in any thing to have begun well is esteemed more then half the work.

But it is not only hopeful in the judgment of men, but God in his word both
commands and commends early beginnings. So that this is Gods way, and in his
way you may justly expect his blessing, and that beginning betimes, you shall
continue in the good way. Train up a Child in the way he should go, and when he
is old he will not depart from it. Prove. 22.6. That is, such do not usually
miscarry, though sometimes they may. So also begin the married state in the fear
of God, and persuade and engage one another at first to set your selves in the
good and the right way, and then you will not easily depart from it afterward,
but more easily continue living in the Love of God and each other when you are
old.

3. A third benefit you will have because early beginnings in good, prevent
those ill habits, and customs in evil which are so hard to be changed, and
difficult to be broken. And in this case a resolved beginning in a Religious
way, will prevent those corrupt inclinations to slight God and his way, and the
living as beasts, without God in the world, and prevent that hardening of heart
against the word preached, and all that danger of delaying sloth, which usually
grows by continuance.

4. A fourth benefit is, that the beginning in a Religious way to live
together, and going on constantly, though weakly, will make the practice easy and
natural, and custom comes up to a second nature: This takes off all that
indisposition and reluctance, which must sometime or other be removed before it
will be well with you; and the sooner the better; this will make the practice
of holy living, not only easy but pleasant, as skill and knowledge increases;
Therefore the advice is good (though of an heathen) choose the best way, and
custom will make it easy, and delightful. And you will look for reading and
prayer, as you do for your meat or sleep. And what seemed difficult at first by
use and practice will become easy, pleasant and necessary.

5. The fifth benefit is this: the beginning at first to exercise a Godly love,
to endeavor to bring each other to the knowledge and love of God and Christ,
and the holy Spirit, by a serious practice of Religion, will best settle true
and lasting affection toward each other; for that love which is on the
Spiritual account, and for the Souls good is like to be lasting. We are apt to
judge of each other by our first most intimate and familiar converse, what
appears before may be the effect of Caution, but the intimate familiarity of
marriage makes discoveries without reserve: and when you find in each other,
when most retired, a sober conversation, tending to piety, virtue and true
Religion, in the life and power of Godliness, and consider that the end of such
a conversation is Christ and lasting love, The same yesterday, to day and for
ever; There are peculiar charms, and a winning sweetness in such a discovery,
which will cause you to value each other the more, when one or both may say
with a well grounded confidence: God has given me one of his children to be my
yoke fellow.

6. Lastly to all there may be added the Spiritual benefit, or advantage of the
divine help. Which never fails such a course of life, Those that seek me early
shall find me. Prove. 8.17. And the sooner this is obtained, the better it will
be for you: for in this is union to Christ, and through him to God; and if you
abide in this Spiritual love to one another, you abide also in the love of God,
and are under the comforts of his promises of blessing: so though there may be
troubles, losses, disquiets, as to outward things, yet herein is the hope and
assurance of being within the everlasting Covenant of God, ordered in all
things and sure. There are also promises of outward prosperity, to encourage to
this. Godliness has the promise of the life that now is: as well as of that
which is to come. 1 Timothy 4.8. The Tabernacle of the upright shall flourish.
Prove. 14.11. By acquaintance with God, peace and good are obtained. Job. 22.21.
He gives all things needful and makes not his gifts sorrowful. His blessing
makes rich, and he adds no sorrow with it. Prove. 10.22. Entertain him, and he
will preserve you. Remember him, and think upon his name, and your name shall
be written in his book of remembrance. Mal. 3.16.

But those that will not entertain God, but say to him depart from us, and what
can the Almighty do for us? Job. 22.17. It is vain to serve God, and what
profit is there that we have kept his ordinances? Mal. 3.14. To what purpose is
it to pray, or read, or look to keeping of the Sabbath, to hinder us in our
business, and take up our spare time, that we shall have none for pleasure and
recreation, they are well that have time for these things, they may do them,
thus they call the proud happy.

Such triflers may (if they please at their peril) enjoy the delights of the
flesh, and the honey moon of carnal earthly pleasures, and may slourish for a
time, chearing their hearts in their youth, and walking in the sight of their
own eyes. But all that time they are laying up a curse, which shall one time or
other spoil all their worldly delights, their house shall spew them out, and
it self shall be overthrown with the curse. Prove. 14.11. Which at last shall
bring them to the King of Terrors, who shall deliver them over to the just
Judgment of the Almighty Then shall they know that there is a difference
between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serves God, and him
that serves him not. Mal. 3.18.

More benefits and Spiritual advantages might be showed, and indeed these
Spiritual arguments are of greatest weight, but those, that are not sensible of
the force of these, will not be able to discern those of a finer and more
Spiritual nature. Therefore I will say no more on this Section, only this: Now
is the time most fitting, and so it offers it self as every way favored with
circumstances of advantage, and gives hope of continuance and prosperous
success, if as soon as you come together, these may be some of the first, as
they are really the best expressions, of true love. But if these advices are
slighted now, and the time slipped, and put off ( Felix like) till a more
convenient opportunity, it is greatly to be feared that you will never find it.

And so it will appear in the following Section.

Sect. IV. Showing the disadvantages that new-married people put themselves
under, by putting off, and delaying to enter on a course of Religious living
together at first.
THE entertaining of excuses in your family, is a sign of an unwilling mind,
and if excuses prevail to put off longer, you will find them real hindrances,
though the heart is convinced of the usefulness of such a course. For if you only
approve of it as fit and convenient, but own it not as necessary; your family
will suppose you are not yet settled, and therefore not prepared enough, and
you will think that hereafter you will set about it, when all (as you think)
hindrances are removed.

It Is therefore fit to bring these excuses under the censure of Judgment and
conscience, and then I am persuaded you will find delaying the greatest
hindrance: and in setting about the work the Lord will so help, that all those
fancied hindrances will appear little or nothing.

But if you suffer your selves to delay, and pretend to gain fitter time; you
will find that to be no advantage, but the means of finding more arguments
still to put off further, till at last it come to a settled course of neglect,
and then will you slight all thoughts and purposes of piety altogether.

Those that will not suffer themselves to be made clean, as soon as they know
of their being dirty, nor use the means to heal a wound as soon as they are
sensible of their smart and danger, they allow filth to harden, and corruption
to spread further, and themselves become less able to suffer a cleansing or
searching cure than they were when they first excused and neglected.

That therefore you may more plainly see the disadvantage of delaying, by
multiplying arguments for excuses and hindrance, I shall show this in
particular.

1. While you delay, excusing your selves by hindrances, consider that what you
think to be hindrance at first, may continue to be so always: as suppose on
the new married State, the hindrances are visiting, or being visited, new
acquaintance among new kindred, it will be the same on any change of dwelling:
New neighbors and new acquaintance; so that this may be always. And if you
allow so much time necessary to be taken up in pretended civility, and think
you are thereupon excused, and that therefore there is no time needful for real
religion, but because you allow so much time for complement with the world, you
have no time to be in earnest with God; the very same excuses or those very
like them, will be hindrances as long as you live. For other excuses will
succeed on as good, and it may be on better reasons. As particularly, you will
think so much time has been spent in these visits, that now all is little
enough to recover your worldly business that you are cast behind in, and when
that is recovered, then you will set about a religious life: but before that
comes, something else uses to intervene, to such excusers, and they seldom come
to the end of the line, so as to have no new excuse.

But as delay breeds this disadvantage, so pray consider, it is only the token
of an unwilling mind, and you are utterly without true excuse both to God and
your own consciences: for these visitants (who give the first seeming ground of
excuse) do not use to accompany you to your chamber and observe your bed; So
that in the greatest of your straits if you have a willing mind, you may begin
to pray together, and the bed side is no unfit altar for such a morning and
evening Sacrifice.

2. The delay at the beginning may be still continued by sickness, in breeding,
and the coming on of children. Poor young infants must be looked to; sickness
or frowardness in them will be accounted a just and reasonable hindrance, and
is used too often as a pretense, when it meets with a delaying and unwilling
mind, when indeed there is no just reason so to pretend; as in the fourth
advantage in the last Section. It Is easy to find an excuse for what we have not
a mind to. It may indeed be allowed sometimes as an interruption, but cannot be
allowed as a continual hindrance, while there is the cradle or the mothers
breast to keep peace and quietness for the time of reading and prayer.

3. A third disadvantage is the possibility of an increase of worldly business,
and this may succeed as a continual hindrance; when company and visits can be
no longer a pretense, as in the first Paragraph of this Section; So that if you
begin not at first, when business is less, how can a beginning be expected when
business is really more.

4. The ill custom of negligence will make the heart more dull, and dead to all
that is good; confirmed habits are not easily to be removed; you will be apt to
fancy, that so long you have done well enough without prayer and reading, or
any religious duty, and may still do so.

And then though there be no excuse left, yet you will continue in the neglect;
and this at last will turn to contempt, and so you will cast it off quite.

5. Fifthly, a great disadvantage of delaying and putting off, may arise under
a seeming good pretense, that is of being fitter and more able hereafter. You
will be apt to think that knowledge and ability will come with age, you are yet
too young, when elder you shall be more able and then it will come of it self.
But this is a sore delusion of Satan, for you will labor still under the same
disadvantage, and be as unskilful in the way of righteousness when old, as when
young, unless you begin to practice, when young. And when you find ignorance
and inability still continue, whereas you thought it would be otherwise; you
will be apt to judge this work is not to be done: and then to think it is not
required, at least of you, but of the better learned and more able: and you
will be ready to say; God requires no more then he gives, and he knows you
cannot, when indeed it is not the want of ability but of a willing mind. And the
fault is your own negligence, who would so long delay; your own sinful
negligence, that whereas in that time you have delayed, you might have been
able by use and exercise; yet are you as far to seek, as when being young, and
delayed to that time of age. Heb. 5.12. Still to seek for a beginning and still
complaining of that, which you pretended hindered you at first. Whereas if you
had begun in due time, you would have found that use and practice (through Gods
blessing) would have rendered you able and knowing, now by neglect you find your
selves both weak and ignorant. And so though it is possible that one may be more
capable of learning a trade at five and twenty years old, then at fifteen, yet
we see none put off learning so long. Because then is the time to use it: and
use by that time makes those that begin early, then to be masters; which if
they had deserred on hope of better ability, they had certainly been as much to
seek then as at fifteen.

But these particulars are as it were more immediately from your selves, but
there are other disadvantages of an higer nature; it is true indeed they are
disadvantages caused by your own neglect, but now depend more immediately on a
superior power, and stand as brazen walls, a disadvantage next to impossible
to be overcome. And that is the long slighting the offers that God has made,
provoking him to withdraw his divine influences, and to leave you without
further calls, admonitions and helps. When the holy and blessed Spirit has long
waited to be gracious, and it will not yet be, that you will be persuaded, but
are still delaying, and shifting off duty with excuses, he then departs as
grieved Ephesians. 4.30. The striving and inward motions of the Spirit cease as
quenched. 1 These. 5.19. Then as a ship forsaken of the wind thou can not
move. You can do nothing without Christ. Jo. 15.5. And he has offered and
called, but you would not consent, and he that only can help is now departed in
displeasure. O what a sore and dreadful disadvantage is this, procured by
neglect and sinful delay! And what danger are you in lest you should be hardened
and undone for ever! God has called for your first love, and you have put him
off with trifing excuses; And can you think that what you would not have on
invitation is so cheap a trifle, that you cannot miss it, but it must be
allowed you when you will? No no, trifler, it is not so: this is such a
disadvantage as may make them tremble that are under it, and if well considered
will set you upon timely endeavors to prevent the Danger.

7. Lastly there is another disadvantage of the same sort with that last
mentioned, and that is the curse of God that the negligent lie under all that
time that they refuse God and Christ, and the holy Spirit, and blessing to
dwell with them. While you neglect the serious practice of Religion in private,
you lose all the benefit of the public ordinances, and the private
instructions and good wishes of your friends. You hear the word preached or
read, but it is in vain while you neglect to practice it. You do but deceive
your selves Jam. 1.22. And put your selves further under the curse of God. And
from this neglect the curse grows more heavy, though you perceive it not. Here is
indeed that dreadful disadvantage as the Apostle tells us. Heb. 6.7.8.

Those that receive the dew of heavenly instructions from Gods word read or
preached, or from such books as this, and yet bring forth only briers and
thorns, excuses and neglect, they are nigh to Cursing.

And this is indeed a dreadful state; But I have spoken something on this
account before in the last Paragraph of the former Section, and therefore
conclude this.

Sect. V. Showing that married people ought to take care of each others Souls,
and to persuade each other to the practice of holiness.
I Have set before you the good and the right way, to make the married life a
comfortable, joyful, happy state; I have showed you the advantages of entering
on those offered joys betimes, and the disadvantages of delaying; even the
long losing the most comfortable part of the married state, and the danger of
losing your Souls for ever. Now some may think it a very needless thing to add
more to persuade; But while Satan and Corrupt nature are so prevailing, and
true Christian love appears so little, there is reason to fear, that many will
not be prevailed upon by this, and much more also. True Christian love is grown
so rare, that often it is not found among those called Christians in the same
family, and nearest relations; the love and care of each others Souls, is that
which is least regarded, and of all duties of Relations and Kindred, this is
neglected or forgot. Men readily entertain Satan's Suggestions in this respect,
and the best arguments are of no force, when opposed by such thoughts as these.
It Is not my duty: I am not bound to it: I think it may go down well with them
that so live together as you have advised: I think I should like to do so; But
as for persuading my partner, my wife, or my husband, I have nothing to do with
that. To preach is the Ministers work; let every one look to themselves, each
take their own way; we may do well enough without joining in Religious duties,
or at least without persuading one another to them. Such are the thoughts of
poor corrupted creatures, not willing to join with Christ in the way of Gods
appointment. Now to prevent the stop which such thoughts may cause, and that
without doubting or shifting by excuses you may with full purpose of heart
cleave to the Lord; I desire you would consider these things.

1. Consider seriously of such thoughts, as in the presence of God. Can you
verily think that God will allow of such a plea, and excuse? does Gods word any
where approve or favor it? Nay does not his word direct and command the
contrary? what else is the meaning of those texts: Comfort your selves
together, and edify one another. 1 These. 5.11. Exhort one another daily while
it is called to day. Heb. 3.13. Consider one another to provoke to love and to
good works. Heb. 10.24. If these and the like texts make it the duty of
assemblies, and communities of Christians, to persuade one another for their
Souls good, much more then is it the duty of nearer relations, and becomes a
command of greater force to such, and renders those that neglect it utterly
without excuse. Consider what is the meaning of that word of the Lord Genesis
4.10. What have thou done? The voice of thy Brothers blood cries unto me. It Is
the Lords reply to that froward rash answer, and inconsiderate excuse of Cain,
who said, am I my brothers keeper? And let conscience judge if the like word
may not be spoken to you, if you endeavor not to preserve (if possible) a
nearer and bosom relation. Beware then lest the voice of a perishing Soul cry
against thy sinful negligence.

2 Consider, though it were not thy plain Christian duty to endeavor to win thy
companion, to Gods way by persuading; yet be sure it is not thy duty to forbear
persuasions: And where there is but a probable appearance of doing good, common
human prudence will set you on persuading, if indeed you love. But if you
reply, that these things best come of themselves, and that persuasions are for
the most part of small purpose: consider if men are hardly brought to the way
of piety by persuasion, will they more easily be brought to it by having
nothing said to them? for shame blush at such folly.

3. Consider, if lawful possible promises do bind to duty, ought you not to be
as good as your word, and to do what you promised? Now on that account of
promise, it is certainly your duty both in sight of God and man. You have
solemnly promised as in the presence of God, and God requires it of you, and
all true Christian friends, and sober Christians are looking how you will
behave your selves.

That you may more distinctly remember your promises, I advise you to take
these helps.

1. Read over sometimes the office of Matrimony as in the Common Prayer Book,
and with seriousness and consideration, think on your marriage Vow; and what
you promised to each other when you consented to the married state. That is to
live together in love according to God; holy ordinance. I suppose you know that
is to be meet helps to each other, this is the appointment of God from the
beginning. And does this Ordinance or appointment of God respect help only in
order to the good of the Body, and not help for the Soul also? I am fully
persuaded that none dare say so, but that it fully includes the help for the
Souls good also. And then think whether it be not your duty to defire each the
other, and endeavor to persuade each other to take the good and the right way
for your Souls good, to live together according to Gods holy ordinance, as you
have promised.

2. Read over the prayers then to be used, and think whether you did then truly
desire those things, or else minded them not, and so mocked God. Or do you yet
desire those things indeed? If you do, you must acknowledge it your duty to
endeavor to engage each other to that holy practice, so to live together in
holy love, according to Gods Law, and that you may see your Children
Christianly and virtuously brought up, to the praise and honor of God, that
you your selves hinder not those blessings you then begged of God.

3. Read also those well chosen Scriptures, that teach the duties of husbands
and wives to each other, and let them be as notes of memorial to bring you to
your Bibles, and so to bring you to your duty, to persuade each other, that you
may through Christ Jesus come together to God.

I wish these things may be considered and prevail also. I know they are
sufficient (if seriouslly considered) to incline the mind, and if that be but
made willing, I make no doubt but that I shall convince you that you are able,
and that you can do much by way of persuasion, if you please.

Sect. VI. Showing that young people are able to persuade one another, (if they
are indeed willing) to enter on Gods holy way.
I Might now justly leave it to your consciences to judge; and am confident you
must approve in the general of what I am persuading you to. But I know that
though you are convinced, that is, fully persuaded, that you ought to do so, yet
while corruption prevails, the unwilling heart will find some thing to hinder
from doing: And though at last you are convinced that it is your duty, and that
you ought to call upon, and to persuade each other to lead a Religious life,
yet you are ready to say, or think, that you know not how to do it, and
therefore there is but small likelihood that you should prevail, and therefore
you resolve to let it alone altogether. You may say, I am periwaded that I
ought to do it, but I cannot tell how to do it, and therefore I will not do it.

Thus an unwilling mind is easily discouraged in this matter; especially in
such as have not before some savor of Religion and liking to a Religious life.

To such I answer and say, you may endeavor if you are willing indeed: to
endeavor is certainly in your power, especially at first, when all
circumstances make such endeavors more easy and hopeful in respect of success;
as I showed before in the former part of the third Section.

Besides you have endeavored in other things when there was as little
likelihood of prevailing, and in cases to which you were as much strangers, as
you are in this: so also may you endeavor now in this, and how can you tell
but you may prevail?

If you enquire what you may do to win each others love to the Lord, and to
persuade each other to walk in his ways, call to mind what ways you took to
gain the affection of each other for marriage, the like method of entreating
and entertaining, followed with equal diligence and care, in all probability
will be succesful, and may be as effectual in this matter as in the other.

1. Remember what ways you took to get acquaintance, and to find opportunities
of favorable acceptance. So now be as watchful to procure opportunities to
bring each other to God. And when alone in secret, seek to persuade to this:
And observe which is the fittest season to bring either to a promise.

2. Remember how careful then you were, to do nothing to displease one another,
but that you might still find the same favorable countenance. So now much more
labor that all your carriage may be so pleasing, that all things on both parts
may be so ordered, that the duties of Religion may be delightful and not seem a
burden.

3. Then you could forbear many things which you knew were displeasing to each
other; so now also forbear all that may hinder each other in this good thing.
Let the man avoid all unnecessary spending of time abroad, and let the woman
avoid all negligence at home, that all things may be in order for reading, and
prayer, at the hour appointed.

4. Then you could talk of love, and almost nothing else, and make great
pretenses at least, now then talk as much and as often of the love of God, and
his love to Souls. and of your love to the Souls of one another, and talk of
the Goodness of God and of his holy ways; that thereby you may excite and
inflame each other with love to God, and goodness, and what you could talk of
without any help but natural inclinations, now in this you may have the help of
God, his word, his grace, and holy Spirit.

5. Then you could use arguments to win love, and propose advantages, enquire
reasons of denial, and answer their objections. So may you now use arguments to
win each other to the love of God: show each other the advantages of an holy
and heavenly living together. How it will strengthen natural affection, end
enable to bear all crosses, and worldly troubles: Ask what should hinder a
resolution to join in so good, so comfortable a design, and answer what may be
said against it with the Spirit of love and mildness.

6. Then you would take no denial, but ask again and again. So may you now to
win each other to the ways of God. And be not wearied, for this is well doing.
Continue to use the fittest opportunities, till you have persuaded each other,
to be willing to embrace the ways of God, to go to God together, to go to
heaven together.

Can you deny me this? (you may jnstly say) this that is so much for our
comfort, both in sickness and in health, and even in death it self? I will
never leave asking till I have obtained.

7. Remember how then you could bear with patience, all peevishness, and mourn
at refusal, without anger: so now wait in the Spirit of meekness, endeavoring
to win.

Could you then beg, and wait, and entreat acceptance, and rejoice, if at last
you obtained consent and agreement, and cannot you do so now? without some such
endeavors as these, where is the love you talked of? where is that true love
to thy partner, and dear yoke fellow? Where is thy love to thy own Soul? And
where is thy love to thy dear Lord? And especially if either find the other
backward, and yet lost in the flesh, and either in words or actions,
discovering an enmity to a Godly life: They had need mourn for their condition
in secret, and pray for them in secret, but give not over as lost, but wait and
woo with patience, and hope, and prudence. How know thou but at last it may
prevail, and that God may make thee the happy instrument of saving the Soul of
thy Partner? 1 Cor. 7.16.

I shall now conclude with some few considerations to encourage to this duty:
or serious endeavors at least. You are hereby in a probable way of reaping
much comfortable fruit.

1. Consider, if this be attained to, that both are willing, and desirous, and
resolved thus to seek the Lord, and to live in his way as in covenant with him;
how great the blessing of holy peace and comfort, will be at present in this
life; God dwelling in such families, where his Worship is set up, and his holy
way followed. God promises to such and says I will walk among you, and will be
your God, and ye shall be my people Lev. 26.11, 12. And if you love indeed and
seek the welfare of each others Souls, this must needs yield the pleasant fruit
of mutual comfort, in each other at present. And without that all worldly
advantages and seeming comforts will be but bitter troubles.

2. Consider, when you have won each other to this holy practice, there is
comfort in hope, a well grounded hope, of which you will be able to render a
reason to any that may ask you. 1 Pet. 3.15. Hereby in this present life you
are laying a good foundation, for an holy family, if God hereafter shall
increase you with Children, and Servants: you have chosen for them the best
portion, the most secure protection, even the Almighty preserver. And in some
measure have done your duty, answerable to your prayers, in taking care that
your Children may be Christianly and virtuously brought up, to Gods Glory: and
may justly expect such a prosperity that may not be a snare, but that your
Souls may prosper, or a sanctified adversity for you and yours. And then in the
end of life, and finishing your days on earth, how great a comfort will it be
to think, that all shall meet in heaven, pleasant and comfortable in this life.
And the more pleasant in this, that in death you shall not be divided, neither
one from another, nor either from God. And then the comforts, already tasted,
will be enlarged to the full.

Methinks this consideration singly it self, is enough to quicken and persuade
to endeavor, that is, the having a grounded hope of meeting together in the
glories of heaven, and joys of the blessed, and of being instruments of
bringing and establishing that good in a family, which death cannot destroy.

3. Consider it will be matter of comfort to those that do endeavor, whether
man or woman: whether they prevail or not. If you prevail with an ungodly
husband, or wife, to turn from the error of their ways, to do that which is
good, and right, in the sight of the Lord, you shall save a Soul from death.
Jam. 5.20. And cause joy in heaven, which is at the conversion of a sinner.
Luc. 15.10. A comfort in it self. Besides the benefit your self enjoy, in the
holy conversation of one renewed, of whose renewing you your self have been the
happy instrument, through Gods Grace in the Lord Jesus. But though you prevail not,
indeed that consideration is sad, where there is love to a Soul, to have spent
much labor in vain; Yet there is comfor in this, that it is not in vain in the
Lord. This was the comfort of the great Prophet Isaiah complaining for want of
success, and may be yours, surely your Judgment is with the Lord, and your work
and reward with God. Is. 48.4. If the filthy will be filthy still, and the
ungodly will be ungodly still, their blood shall be upon their own head, and
you that endeavor to persuade with sincerity, have delivered your own Soul,
and shall ever bea^ in your bosom that comfortable testimony of a good
conscience, and peace from God, that passes understanding, shall keep and
comfort your hearts and minds through Christ Jesus. P^il. 4.7. And he that shall
come, will come quickly, and his reward is with him, to give to every one
according as their work shall be, Even so come Lord Jesus. The Grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ be with you. Amen.

An ADVERTISEMENT To such as have been long married.
IT IS possible these papers may come to the hands of such as have been long
married, or at least so long as to be past the title of newmarried people; and
may therefore think that that this does not concern them; But I desire such to
consider that it concerns them much every way. For either they are such as have
lived according to Gods holy way, or not.

1. If they have indeed lived together in that holy love, which these papers
persuade to, then they speak peace to them from God. And give them the joy and
comfort of all the blessings proposed as motives, and advantages. And I doubt
not, but that they have experience of the comforts of an holy heavenly life,
and must testify the truth of what is here advanced. And doubtless they do
find encouragement enough to go on in that way to the end,

2. But if they have not so lived together, then they find themselves spoken to
in every advice and motive; especially in the fourth and fifth Section. Every
line calls more loudly to such in the words of the Apostle. Ephesians 5.15. Awake
thou that sleep, and Christ shall give thee light.

Have you so long neglected so great a blessing, and continued under the curse,
and tempted the Almighty to give you up to hardness of heart? O see the
goodness, and patience, and long suffering of God! Give judgment your selves
between God and your Souls! Have you not neglected the best way too long? And
shall not his patience lead you to repentance? shall not the time past suffice,
to have lived without God? should not the love of Christ constrain you to this
holy love of each others Souls? Let it do so then now at the last. And set
about what is here advised to, as new married people should, and reap at last
the too much neglected blessings. It Is never too late to begin to do well. Nay
you should labor the more earnestly, considering how you have blockt up your
own way by your sinful neglect. Repent therefore, and bring forth fruits meet
for repentance.

Prayers for Gods blessing and assisting grace to the married couple. These
first in order taken out of the public Office, and fitted for private use.
When you are come home on the Wedding Day, or at Evening, and so for some
days after, read first those Scriptures declaring the mutual duties of man and
wife, or else some other portion of Scripture with attention. And then kneeling
down together, endeavor to lift up your hearts to the Lord and say.
O Eternal God, creator, and preserver of all mankind, giver of all Spiritual
Grace, the author of everlasting life, send thy blessing upon us thy servants,
who have this day consented together in holy marriage, and have engaged our
word in truth to each other, to live together as man and wife according to thy
holy word, and have received a public blessing in thy name. Bless us O Lord we
beseech thee in secret, and grant that as Isaac and Rebecca lived faithfully
together, so we may surely perform and keep the Vow and Covenant betwixt us
made, and may ever remain in perfect love and peace together, and live
according to thy Law, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, bless preserve and keep
us; O Lord mercifully with thy grace look upon us, and so fill us with all
Spiritual benediction and grace, that we may so live together in this life,
that in the world to come, we may obtain life everlasting. Amen.

O God of Abraham, God of Isaac, God of Jocob, bless us thy Servants, and sow
the seeds of eternal life in our hearts. Help us to attend diligently on thy
holy word, so that we may profit and learn thereby, and be doers thereof. Look
O Lord mercifully upon us from heaven, and bless us. And as thou did send
thy blessing upon Abraham and Sarah, to their great comfort, so vouchsafe to
send thy blessing upon us thy Servants, that we obeying thy will, and always
being in safety under thy protection, may both abide in thy love, and in holy
Christian love to each other, to our lives end, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.

O God who by thy mighty power have made all things of nothing, who also (after
other things set in order) did appoint that out of man (created after thine
own image and similitude) woman should take her beginning, and knitting them
together, did teach that it should never be lawful to put asunder those whom
thou by Matrimony had made one: O God who have consecrated the state of
Matrimony to such an excellent mystery, that in it is signified, and
represented, the Spiritual marriage betwixt Christ and his Church; look
mercifully upon us thy Servants, whom thou have brought to join together in the
marriage covenant. That I may love this my wife according to thy word, as
Christ does love his Spouse the Church, loving and cherishing her as my own
flesh. And also that this woman, whom thou have given to be my wife, may be
loving and amiable, faithful and constantly obedient in all Christian love, and
in all quietness and peace, be a follower of holy and godly Matrons. O Lord
bless us both, and grant us to inherit thine everlasting Kingdom, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

O Almighty God who at the beginning did create our first parents, Adam and
Eve, and did sanctify and join them together in marriage, pour upon us the
riches of thy Grace, sanctify and bless us, that we may please thee both in
body and Soul, and live together in holy love to our lives end. Amen.

These you may use, or so many of them as you think best, only take heed that
you may with the words express the true and hearty desires of your Souls to
God, always concluding with the Lords Prayer, as our Savior in his Gospel
has taught us to pray saying:
OUR Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name; thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them, that trespass against us, and
lead us not into temptation: but deliver us from evil: for thine is the
kingdom, and the power, and the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

And then add,

The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, and the fellowship of
the holy Ghost be with us evermore. Amen.

A prayer to obtain Children, to be used by those for whom it is necessary.
O Merciful God and heavenly Father, by whose gracious gift mankind is
increased, we beseech thee assist us both with thy blessing that we may neither
of us be barren, but both of us fruitful in Children: and also may live
together so long in godly love and honesty, that we may see our Children
Christianly and Virtuously brought up, to thy praise and honor, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.

Or instead of these you may make use of either of those that follow, which of
them you shall think most suitable to your condition, to make known the desire
of your heart to the heart-searching God.
The married persons joint request unto God, taken out of Mr. Hieron's help to
Devotion.
THou (O most blessed God) did first ordain the married state: and it is thy
providence, by which we which were two, are now made one flesh, having mutually
resigned our selves either to other by our entrance into this holy League. It
is the desire of our Souls to live together to thy glory, and to the
contentment each of other. This we cannot do without thee, (for of our selves
besides sin we can do nothing) unto thee therefore do we commend our most
earnest and humble suit, that it may please thee so to besprinkle our Souls
with the dew of thy grace, that from thence may spring a plentiful increase of
Sobriety, of righteousness, and of holiness in our lives. Allay in us all
sensual and brutish love, purifying and sanctifying our affections one toward
another, that we may in nothing dishonor this honorable state, nor pollute
the bed of marriage, which thou thy self in thy word have called undefiled; but
may use this thine ordinance in that holy sort, that carnal lusts may be slaked
and subdued, not increased or inflamed thereby.

Endue us with a godly care to acquaint our selves with thy blessed word, that
we may know and understand what duty is required at our hands, what authority
tempered with love and compassion, and freed from all bitterness is committed
to the husband; what obedience and submission with reverence is commended in
the wife; what faithfulness in matrimonial duties either to other is enjoined;
what providence and care is expected of the man, and what assistance and help
of the woman.

And when we know, and have learned these things, grant that it may be our
study to practice them, that so the husband may be as a faithful guide to his
wife, and the wife a crown and credit to her husband.

Make us wise to observe the natures and dispositions one of another, that in
all lawful things, the one may seek to please and content the other; the one
may know how to bear with, and to forbear the other, not winking at any evil in
one another, but discreetly choosing the fittest opportunities for mutual
admonishing, without all shows of tyranny in the one, or of presumption in the
other. Open our hearts, that we may faithfully and cheerfully communicate one
to the other, that sweetness which we find in heavenly things, that sow may go
hand in hand toward heaven. And that our chief love and delight either in
other, may be grounded upon the hope we have, that we are heirs together of the
grace of life. In our family link us together in one common care, to oversee
the ways of our household, to seek the promoting and advancing of thy Kingdom,
the good instruction and education of our Children and servants.

Finally O Lord so unite and join us together in fidelity of affection, that we
may ever devote our selves to the procuring of the present and eternal good one
of another: that so living here comfortably, we may reign with thee
perpetually, in that thy Kingdom, which the blood of thy Son has prepared for
those that love and fear thy name. Unto which Kingdom, O Lord, reserve us, even
for thy Son's sake, and for thy mercies sake. Amen.

Another to the same purpose.
O Lord our God who art pleased to look in mercy on thy poor creatures through
the Lord Jesus Christ, and do promise to hear the prayers made to thee in his
name: we beseech to hear our prayers and supplications, incline our hearts to
pray, and be pleased to hear, and answer us graciously, for Christ Jesus sake.
Thou, O blessed Lord, have ordained the state of marriage; and by thy good
providence have brought us together in that holy bond, that we might be meet
helps for one another. And now O Lord we beseech thee frame both our hearts to
holy desires, to be helpful to each other both in soul and body. And help us by
thy Grace, that we may live together in holy love, and assist each other in
faith and repentance and sincere obedience to thy holy word and will. That we
may live together in thy fear, and be both of us ever in thy favor. Put it
into our hearts (good Lord) daily to pray, and call upon thy holy name, one
with another, and one for another. Enable us to read thy holy word diligently;
enlighten our understandings, that we may thereby know thy will; and quicken us
by thy Grace, and good Spirit, that we may be doers of thy Word. And that being
taught thereby, we may learn truly to sanctify thy Sabbaths; and to give up
our selves to thee our God, heartily and entirely in frequent, serious, and
solemn renewing the Covenant, at thy holy Table, in the blessed Sacrament of
the Lords Supper; and that we may live together as in Covenant with the Lord,
and do all that good thou have appointed us in this state and condition of
life, to which thou have called us.

Pardon we beseech thee all our Sins for Christ Jesus sake. And all that vanity
whereby we may have ensnared each other, since our first acquaintance, either
in thought, word or action, savouring too much of the flesh, and unbecoming
Christian purity. Keep us henceforth in holy Spiritual love, that we defile not
the honorable marriage bed, by desires too sensual, but that we may be
instruments of each others chastity and purity, both in Soul and Body.

Take from us all dullness of mind and backwardness to Religious duties, and
both teach and enable us so to order our worldly affairs, that our minds and
hearts may be always free for thy service and worship.

Give us we beseech thee, the Spirit of wisdom and of a sound mind, that with
all gravity and soberness we may govern and rule our selves and families, in
thy faith and fear, and love (as becomes those that are followers of the holy
and blessed Jesus) as taught by thy holy word.

Be pleased to make us both instruments of good to others, especially to our
kindred and neighbors to the comfort and releef of those that are in want, to
the instruction of the ignorant, to the reproving and reforming the ungodly,
and to the good of all. We pray thee also to make us diligent in our calling,
not ^lothful in business, but as serving the Lord. And so bless our labors and
honest endeavors in worldly things, that we may have a competency for our
selves and ours; and to give to those that want.

And further O heavenly Father we humbly entreat thee, to give us both thy
Grace, that with pure hearts we may fervently love one another, and provoke one
another to love and good works, and watch over each other for the Souls good.
And deal faithfully with each other, not suffering one one another in
carlesness of our Souls, or in any sin, without due, serious, seasonable, and
compassionate warning, in thy fear. And good Lord give each of us such an
heart, that we may be willing to be warned of our sin and danger, and desirous
to be reformed. And good Lord help us so to live together, as abiding in Christ
Jesus, that which ever of us thou shall please to call out of this world first,
may leave the comfort of a well grounded hope to the surviver, that both at
last shall meet, in purer and undefiled love and joy, in the inheritance of the
promises, together with the Spirits made perfect through the blood of the holy
Jesus, in thy heavenly eternal Kingdom. For the sake and through the mediation of
Jesus Christ our only Savior and Redeemer. Amen.

A prayer to be used in secret by the married man or woman in respect of each
other.
O Most merciful Father, and eternal God, who have appointed, and sanctified
the state of marriage, by thy Command and word, and by thy good providence have
now joined me with a partner and companion for the married life. Guide me I
beseech thee by thy good Spirit, that I may do my duty in this state of life to
which it has pleased thee to call me. That I may not make the liberty thou
give me, an occasion to the flesh, nor through weakness turn thy permissions to
sensuality. Pardon, I beseech thee, all my infirmities and failings in that
matter, and help me that in all circumstances, I may keep a conscience void of
offense, both toward thee my God, and toward men. That I may sincerely
perform my duty toward thee, and with a pure heart be fervently affectionate
to my dear yoke fellow. That I may be a good guide, and example to my family,
and in all quietness and sobriety, patience, and prudence, a follower of those
who have served thee with godliness, and walked in thy Commandments blameless.
And guide I beseech thee, my dear yoke fellow, and endue ( him or her) with thy
Grace and blessing both in Soul and Body. O keep ( him or her) I beseech thee
from all temptations, and all inclinations to evil: Give ( him or her) an heart
to hear and obey thy holy word, and keep ( him or her) from all sickness and
bodily dangers. And so keep us both, in thy fear, and holy love to each other,
that we may receive good and religious counsel of each other, and truly follow
the same, and watch for each others Souls good. So that at the end of a chaste
and holy conversation in the Lord we may together enjoy the promised felicity
of thy chosen, in thy everlasting Kingdom through our dear and only Redeemer the
Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

A prayer to be used by the woman when conceived with child.
O Merciful God, and heavenly Father, who have made all things and preservest
all things and have appointed marriage as the way of continuing the generation
of mankind: I desire to be thankful that thou have called me to the holy state
of marriage, and in that state have given me the blessing of the marriage bed,
even strength to conceive with Child. The fruit of the Womb is a blessing from
thee, O God, alone, which all the treasures on earth cannot purchase: And now O
Lord I beseech thee continue thy blessing, giving me strength both to bear and
bring forth, let the sickness and illness attending conception bring me more
seriously to consider of the sin of our first parents, how the woman was in the
transgression, and thereby my sorrows multiplied, that I may be truly humbled
for my natural corruption, which, Lord, in thy mercy pardon and cleanse me from
through the blood of Jesus Christ; and give me comfort, in that gracious promise
of the Seed of the Woman, that should break the Serpents head. Lord I humbly
beg that the expectation of pains and sorrow in travel and bringing forth, may
bring me to more serious thoughts of my Soul and my duty, and may quicken me to
repentance, and stir up my heart, to lay faster hold on Christ Jesus by a
lively faith that all my sins may be forgiven; and that I may be more watchful
to all Christian duties of my place; and that I may wait with patience the
appointed time, and be prepared for life or death, as thou shall be pleased to
appoint.

And that I may be saved in childbearing Lord strengthen me with thy grace, and
keep me by thy power, that I may continue, in faith and charity and holiness
with sobriety. And when the time appointed for delivery shall come, help me
patiently to bear the pangs and thro's and sorrows. And let them be sactified
to the humbling of my Soul and bring me through all I beseech thee, by thy power
and goodness. And give me a living child, with all its parts, limbs, and senses
in due order. And grant me in due time a safe recovery of former strength, that
I may no more remember the anguish for joy that a man is born into the world,
to become a member of Christ's Church: that I may be glad in the Lord, who is
pleased to make me a chanel of blessings to my husband and family.

Or if thou see fit, to finish my life by this danger in child bearing; be
pleased to receive me to life eternal in thy heavenly Kingdom. But if it be thy
blessed will, I desire humbly to live to see my young one brought up, in thy
faith and fear. That I may dedicate it to thy self in holy Baptism. And
instruct it betimes in thy holy word, that I and those thou give me, may be
thine for ever. Lord hear and help thy poor handmaid, that has no help but
thee. To thee I desire to make my request's known, with thanksgiving for all
thy mercies. To thee O Lord, I commit my whole concern, as to a faithful
creator. Do thou O Lord hear and help and forgive me, and do for me what in thy
heavenly wisdom seems best. Even more then I can ask or think; and all for the
sake, and through the mediation, of thy beloved Son, the Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

A prayer to be used in a family, either morning or evening, by changing the
conclusion.
O Lord! Almighty God, King of Glory, who from the height of thy habitation
do behold all the inhabitants of the earth, considering all their ways, and
providing for them of thy goodness: we, O Lord, have received abundantly of thy
bounty, and loving kindness, for which we desire to return praise and
thanksgving. And now we beg the continuance of thy mercy to us. Thou command
us to call on thee. And Lord whither can we come but unto thee, O Lord our
strength and our redeemer? O shed abroad thy love in our hearts, and stir up
our Souls to lay hold on thee, that we may not seek thy face in vain. Lord give
ear to our prayer, and answer us graciously.

Lord we confess we are unworthy to call on thy holy name, by reason of those
many sins with which we are defiled; full of corruption by nature, having sin
dwelling in us, and always present with us; by which we offend daily both in
thought, word, and deed. We have broken thy holy law by neglecting those duties
which thou have commanded us, and doing those things which thou have forbidden.
And we have added to our sins much slightness and contempt, not regarding thy
wrath; much impenitency, being unsensible of the filth of sin; and carelessness
in not seeking to be cleansed from sin through the boold of Christ Jesus, though
thy mercy has provided that redemption for us: O Lord to us belongs
confusion of face, because we have sinned against thee, should thou, Lord,
be extreme to mark all that is done amiss who could abide it?

But with thee there is mercy and forgiveness that thou may be feared: thou
have appointed to poor sinners an Advocate, thy Son, Jesus Christ, the
Righteous who is the propitiation of our sins, and sits at thy right hand to
make intercession for us. In his name O Lord, and for his sake we beg that thou
would pardon all our sins, and blot out all our transgressions. Give unto us
that true and lively faith, that sincere and hearty repentance, that true
conversion and new obedience, that our sins may be blotted out, and we
justified freely by thy grace through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ. And
being reconciled unto thee through the blood of thy Son, be pleased to take us
into thy protection, and defend us against all the power of sin, and deceits of
Satan. O let not sin reign in our mortal bodies, that we should obey it in the
lusts thereof, but let the blood of Christ purge our consciences from dead
works, to serve the living God. That every one of our Souls may be zealous of
doing good to thy glory. Teach every one of us to know our several duties, and
by thy grace enable us to do them to thy glory, and the good and Comfort of one
another.

Bestow upon us the blessings of this life, so far as may be for our Souls
good; give unto us, continue with us, and renew for us bodily health, and
strength, and all our senses. Provide for us food and raiment, and make us
content with the portion thou give, and what in thy wisdom thou see fit to
deny us in the things of this life, teach us to bear the want with humility and
contented submission, and be pleased to make it up unto us in Spiritual
blessings, that we may use the world without abusing it, and improve every
providence to thy glory.

Good Lord prepare us for our latter end; enable us so to love that we may die
in the Lord, and live for ever with our God.

Be pleased to bless thy whole Church, especially this nation, in turning every
one of us from our iniquities, that our sins may be pardoned, our Souls
sanctified, and our lives reformed, to thy glory and praise, so that we may
enjoy peace and truth in our days, having thy Gospel still continued among us.
To that end we beseech the bless all our governors with holy wisdom, and all
the ministers of thy word; especially thy Servant under who is ministry we are,
that he may faithfully deliver thy word, to the edification of our Souls.
Comfort all the afflicted with mercies suitable to their distresses,
particularly such as we know, or those that desire to be remembered by us. Lord
Sanctify all their afflictions to their Souls good. Bless all our friends and
relations with renewed sanctified hearts and lives, that we may have Godly
comfort in them, and they in us, and all of us in Jesus Christ our Lord.

Conclusion for Morning.
WE bless thee O Lord for that thou have kept us in peace and safety this last
night, and refresht our bodies with quiet rest and sleep: we pray thee continue
thy goodness to us this day, keep us in all our thoughts words and actions from
all sin. Enable us for our work and business, that we may do good in our place;
keep us from sickness and every sad providence, and bring us to the evening in
peace, that our Souls may praise thee. And in the end of our lives receive us
to thy everlasting kingdom for the sake of Jesus Christ our Lord; in whose name
and words we sum up all our desires, as himself has taught us, to pray saying:

Conclusion for Evening.
WE thank thee O Lord for thy good providence over us this day past, for
keeping of us, and providing for us. Pardon we beseech thee all our sins, and
failings this day; keep us in peace and safety this night; refresh our bodies
with sleep convenient for us; bring us to the morning in peace, and be present
with us when we awake. Guide and preserve us the next day, and all our days,
and nights, that we may finish our lives in peace in thy fear, and holy joy,
and enter into thy everlasting kingdom in heaven, for Christ Jesus sake our
only Lord and Redeemer, in whose holy name and words we conclude praying as
himself has taught us, saying:

OUR Father, which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy Kingdom come. Thy
Will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread. And
forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass against us. And
lead us not into temptation; but deliver us from evil: For thine is the
Kingdom, And the power, And the glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

