A SHORT ACCOUNT Of the Bank of ENGLAND.
CONSIDERING the multitude and variety of Opinions, which are received and
entertained, concerning the Bank, it may be thought a Service to the Public to
give the following Account of it; whereby 'twill appear to the World, That the
Bank, notwithstanding all the Cavils, which the Wit, Labor, and Malice of its
Opponents have raised, is one of the best Establishments that ever was made for
the Good of the Kingdom. For how plausible soever their Objections may seem,
it is manifest they proceed in some from Aversion to the Government, in others
from Prejudice, false Insinuations, or mistaken Notions, but in most from
Self-Interest.

The Bank is a Society consisting of about 1300 Persons, who having Subscribed
1200000 l. pursuant to an Act of Parliament, are Incorporated by Virtue
thereof, by the Name of the Governor and Company of the Bank of England, and
have a Fund of 100000 l. per annum granted them thereby, redeemable after 11
Years, upon One Years Notice; which 1200000 l. they have paid into the
Exchequer, by such Payments as the Public Occasions have required, and most of
it long before the Money could have been demanded.

The Subscription to the Bank were made by virtue of a Commission under the
Great Seal of England, grounded upon the said Act of Parliament, of which
Public Notice was given, and the Commissioners were appointed to take all such
voluntary Subscriptions as should be made on or before the first day of August
last, by any Person or Persons, Natives or Foreigners, Bodies Politic or
Corporate, toward the raising the said 1200000 l. and there was a Proviso in
the said Act, that if 600000 l. or more of the said 1200000 l. should not be
Subscribed on or before the first day of August then next coming, that the
Power of making a Corporation should cease, and the Money be paid into the
Exchequer by the respective Subscribers and Contributors. And notwithstanding
all the Endeavors of its Adversaries, to the great Astonishment as well of the
Friends, as of the Enemies of the Bank, the whole 1200000 l. was Subscribed in
10 days time, though if the Subscriptions had not amounted to 600000 l. the
Subscribes would have had but a bad Bargain, and such a one as no Body would
have taken off their hands for 20 per cent. loss of their Principal, and yet
they would have received 8 l. per cent. per annum for their Money, as they do
now, nor would the 1200000 l. have been any thing near Subscribed; but upon the
Prospect of their being Incorporated to be the Bank of England.

It Is observable, That the Promoters of the Bank have proposed no Advantage
thereby to themselves above any of the other Subscribers, all the Profit being
only pro Rato, according to their Stock; and though it cannot be imagined but
that they intended to be largely concerned, yet it is so settled, that those who
have but 500 l. have One Vote, and those who have never so much can have no
more; and the Directors have no Salary fixed, for their Pains and Attendance,
but submit themselves wholly to what a General Court will think fit to allow
them; and any 9 Members having each 500 l. Stock, may call a General Court, and
turn out the Governor, Deputy Governor, and all, or any of the Directors, and
choose others in their places. Which are Provisions so wise, and effectual to
prevent Fraud in some, to the prejudice of the rest, that it hardly leaves room
for any doubt of that nature.

I shall not attempt to enumerate all the Advantages which the Nation will
receive by the Bank, they will best appear by the Practice, however I will
mention some few, which alone are sufficient to recommend it, viz.

1. The Bank, besides the raising 1200000 l. toward the Charge of the War,
cheaper than it could otherwise have been done, (and like the other Public
Funds, tying the People faster to the Government) will infallibly lower the
Interest of Money, as well on Public as Private Securities, which all other
Funds have advanced, and which has been raised to an Exorbitant Rate, as to
the Public, by those who have made use of its Necessities, and are now angry
at the Bank, because that will reduce it. And the lowering of Interest, besides
the Encouragement it will be to Industry and Improvements, will by a natural
consequence raise the Value of Land, and increase Trade, both which depend upon
it; but it cannot be expected that Land should rise much whilst such high Taxes
continue upon it, and whilst there are so great advantages to be made by
lending Money to the Public.

2. The Bank gives Money for Tallies on Funds, having a Credit of Loan by Act
of Parliament, and which are payable in 2 years time, for the growing Interest
only, without any other Allowance, on which there was used to be paid for the
Change, as much or more than the Public Interest: For even on the Land Tax,
which is counted the best of all the Funds, there has been frequently given on
Tallies payable in 3 or 4 Months time 1 l. 1, 1, and 2 per cent. premio, over
and above the Public Interest, and Tallys on some Funds, on which but 18
Months ago there was 25 l. and 30 per cent. given over and above Public
Interest, are now taken by the Bank for nothing, and instead of allowing Money
to change them, there is now Money given to procure them; so that Tallys are
become better than Money, because there is 7 or 8 per cent. per annum. benefit
whilst they are kept; and they are paid by the Bank upon demand, to all those
who desire to have Money for them, which is in effect so much Quick Stock which
the Bank has already increased to the Nation, besides what it will farther add
by its own Credit.

Thus by a regular course, and without any violence, the Bank has made Tallys
current in Payment, which is what has been so long wished for, but could not
have been effected without the Bank, (although there had been a Law to compel
it,) and this, has given such a Reputation to all Tallys, even those which are
the most remote, that they are now currantly taken by private persons at 6, 8,
10 and 15 l. per cent. less allowance, than what was given but some few Months
before the Bank was Established, all which Losses on Tallys was paid by the
Public, for it cannot be supposed but those who are to allow 15 or 20 per
cent. for discount of their Tallys, make provision accordingly in the Price
they are to have for their Commodities.

3. The Bank will likewise facilitate the future Supplies, by making the Funds
which are to be given, more useful and ready to answer the Public Occasions.
and upon easier terms than what has been done during the War: for it is said,
they will Lend Money on the Land Tax at 6 per cent. per annum, nay some say at
5 per cent. per annum; which will save the Nation a great Sum of Money in
Interest as well as what was usually paid for Gratuities and other Charges to
procure Loans, a Method that some of the Opposers of the Bank have been well
acquainted with.

4. It will likewise save the Nation 30 or 40000 l. per annum, in remitting the
Public Moneys; and if the Bank had been settled in the beginning of this War,
the Kingdom might have saved already at least a Million and half, if not Two
Millions by it, besides what will be saved for the future on the Prices of
Commodities, Loss on Tallys, Public Remittances, Excessive Interest, and other
Exorbitant Allowances, which the Public has formerly paid for Money, (to say
nothing of the Advantage which might have been gained on the Enemy, by having
more early and regular Provisions made for our Fleets and Armies;) for the same
Money raised and paid by the Subject, may and will have a quite different
effect in carrying on the War, by the speedy or dilatory payments of it; and it
is evident that the same Money has done much greater Service to the Public in
the Bank, than it could have done by being in private Hands. and that the
Extravagant Rise of Interest was not altogether occasioned by the Scarcity of
Money, but has been much increased by the Art and Contrivance of those who have
mediated between the Borrowers and the Lenders, and the Encouragement that the
Monyed Men have had to keep back their Money in hopes of a greater advantage,
which they have generally obtained by reason of the Necessities of the Public:
But now the Bank is Established, and that all who want Money, and have
Securities, know where to Apply themselves and be Supplied, there cannot be
such Advantages made on the Public or Private Men's Necessities for the future.

5. The more Credit the Bank has, and the more Money is lodged in it, the more
it will lessen Interest, for want of Occasions to improve it; and those who
Lodge their Money in the Bank have it as much at their disposal as if it were in
the hands of the Goldsmiths, or in their own Cash-Chest, and there is a greater
Value than the Money which is deposited in the Bank, that circulates by their
Credit as much as if it were stirring in Specie: And the Bank-Bills serve
already for Returns and Exchange to and from the remotest parts of the Kingdom,
and will in a little time do the like in Foreign Parts, which will lessen the
exporting of Bullion for the paying and maintaning our Armies abroad during
this War; and if the Bulk of the Money of the Nation which has been Lodged with
the Goldsmiths, had been deposited in the Bank 4 or 5 years past, it had
prevented its being so Scandalously Clipped, which one day or other must cost the
Nation a Million and half, or Two Millions to Repair it.

6. Those who are concerned in the Bank cannot fail to lessen the Interest of
Money, for its their own Interest to do it, else they cannot employ it; and
their Fund being settled at 8 l. per cent. per annum, the lower they bring all
other Interest, they make the Stock of the Bank the more Valuable; and it must
be allowed, That it is the only Fund that ever was settled in England which has
lessened the Interest of Money. And its very observable, That any resolution
that the Concerned in the Bank have taken to be more serviceable in
accommodating the Public or private men's Occasions, has always given it a
farther Reputation, and increased its Value; and the more they serve the
Interest of the Nation, so much the more they serve their own, they being under
this happy circumstance, That they cannot do good to themselves but by doing
good to others.

7. The Nation pays for the Annuities 14 l. per cent. per annum for 99 years,
and for the Lottery 14 per cent. per an. for 16 years, besides about one Tenth
part which was Expended in Charges, the Funds of Wine, Vinegar and Tobacco,
East India Goods, Joint-Stocks, Paper and Parchment, and New Impositions, are
all at 8 l. per cent. per annum as well as the Bank; and yet there has been
given from 20 to 30 l. per cent. Loss on Tallys upon several of these Funds,
besides the Public Interest; the like has been done on the remote parts of the
2/3 Excise and 3/4 Customs before the Bank was Established, and thereby the
Nation has Paid 12, 14, 16, 18 and 20 per cent. per annum Interest for Money,
which if it had continued must have Ruined the Kingdom; but now that they who
have made these Advantages by the Public are prevented of the like for the
future, they will be more ready to Lend Money on Private Security, or to
Purchase Lands, for want of those Occasions to Improve their Money to so much
better Advantage.

8. Its a matter which is very surprising and without any Example, that after
the Nation has been Six Years Engaged in such a Chargeable War, and has been at
near Thirty Millions Expense, and such quantities of Bullion have been
Exported, besides the Loss of several Millions which the Enemy has taken; that
after all this, instead of the Interest of Money rising, (as has been usual in
all Wars) there should now be such a fall of Interest, which must be
acknowledged to be wholly owing to the Bank, and that it could not have been
effected without it; for till the Bank Exerted it self, the Interest of Money
was rising apace, and would have continued so, and have come to a strange
Exorbitancy ever this, if the Bank had not been Established.

9. The Bank being thus useful to the Public, extends it self likewise to
accommodate all Private Men's Occasions; for they lend Money on Mortgages and
real Securities at 5 l. per cent. per annum, and their very Publishing they
would do it, has given a Check to the raising the Interest on them from 5 to 6
l. per cent. per an. as was attempted; and if the Titles of Lands were made
more secure, Money would be Lent thereon at 4 l. per cent. per an. and in time
of Peace at 3 l. per cent. per an. Foreign Bills of Exchange are discounted at
4 per cent. per annum, and Inland Bills and Notes for Debts at 6 per cent. per
an. and those who keep their Cash in the Bank, have the one discounted at 3 per
cent. per an. and the other at 4 per cent. per an. And Money is lent on Pawns of
Commodities which are not perishable, at 5 l. per cent. per annum, for which
some in their Necessities have paid more than double as much, to the Ruin of
many great Traders.

Money is likewise Lent on the Fund of the Orphans of the City of London, at 5
per cent. per an. which will hinder several, who are necessi^ous, from being
forced to Sell their Interest at Under-rates.

And its said they have agreed to set up a Lumbard to lend Money on small Pawns,
for the Relief of the Poor, at One Penny per Month for 20 Shillings, for which
they are now forced to pay Six Pence or Twelve Pence every Week: And its
probable, if the Bank was not restrained by Act of Parliament, they might take
into Consideration the Exchanging Seamens Tickets for Money, for a very small
Allowance, for which they have often times been forced to pay 7 or 8 shillings
in the Pound.

10. The Bank will reduce the Interest of Money in England to 3 per cent. per
an. in a few years, without any Law to enforce it, in like manner as it is in
all other Countries where Banks are established, whereby the Trade of the Nation
may be driven upon more equal Terms with the rest of Our Neighbors, where Money
is to be had at so much lower Rates than what we in England have hitherto paid:
And as the lessening the Interest of Money will Infallibly raise the Value of
Land, it had been worth while for the Nobility and Gentry who are the
Proprietors of the Real Estates in England, to have given a Land Tax for the
Bank, of double the Sum which was raised by it, if they could not otherwise
have obtained it; for the falling the Interest of Money to 3 l. per cent. per
annum, to which Rate the Bank will reduce it, will unavoidably advance the
Price of Land to above 30 Years Purchase, which will raise the Value of the
Lands of England at least 100 Millions, and thereby abundantly reimburse the
Nation all the Charges of the War, and will not only enable the Gentry to make
better Provision for their Younger Children, but those who now owe Money on
their Lands, to pay off their Debts, by the Increase of the Value of their
Estates.

11. The Ease and Security of the great Receipts and Payments of Money which are
made by the Bank, (where Peoples Cash is kept as it is at the Goldsmiths)
together with the safe depositing of it, are such advantages to recommend it,
that they ought not to be past over without some Observation; especially
considering how much Money has been lost in England by the Goldsmiths and
Scriveners Breaking, which in about 30 Years past, cannot amount to so little
as betwixt Two and Three Millions, all which might have been prevented, had a
Bank been sooner Established.

These are such Services to the Nation in General, which have been (and will
be) done by the Bank, as could not have been done without it, and such
Arguments as these arising from Fact, are better Demonstrations and more
Convincing of the Usefulness of it, than mere Speculative Nations urged by its
Opposers, can be to prejudice others against it; and therefore it would be an
unaccourtable sort of Policy, to endeavor to deprive the Nation of those vast
Advantages, which it now does and will receive by it.

Having given this short Account of the Bank, I shall consider the Objections
that have been made against it, and who they are that make them; in which I
shall chiefly take notice of those who would cloak the Opposition they make out
of Private Interest, under some other Specious Pretenses; amongst which there
are some who would be thought the most Zealous for the Government, who at first
pretended to dislike the Bank, only for fear it should disappoint Their
Majesty's of the Supplies which were proposed to be raised by it; But since the
whole 1200000 l. has been so readily Subscribed, their opposition has
increased, and their being now so Zealous against it, can only proceed from
their fear that they shall not have the like Opportunities as they have had, to
impose on the Public, by whose necessities they have made so great Advantages;
and they now threaten what they will do to destroy the Bank this Session of
Parliament; as if what past in the last, were to be undone in this.

There are others, who are for forcing a Currancy of Bills, or Tallys, and
think they may pass as well as Bank Bills; but they do not consider, That its
nothing makes them current, but only because all those that desire it, can go
when they will, and fetch their Money for them; and to force any thing to pass
in Payment but Money, would soon end in Confusion: For it cannot serve the
Nations Occasions at home, much less our foreign Negotiations with other
Countries abroad; seeing all those who take Bills of Exchange on England, are
too wise to accept any such sort of Payment; but will be sure to have them made
payable in Sterling-Money in specie, in like manner as the Bills which are now
drawn on Spain, are made payable in old Money, as before the Pragmatica: which,
together with the late Essay of Copper Money in Ireland, might be sufficient to
show, that all such Attempts will be ineffectual.

And besides, the Confusion it would make, the danger of their being
counterfeited, is an Objection that cannot well be answered; and all that it
would cost to exchange them for Money, would be certainly paid by the
Government: For it would be considered by those who sell their Goods, in the
Prices of them; and though but a small Sum were paid for the Loss of exchanging
them for Money, by every one through whose hands they should pass, yet there
might be more than the whole Value lost thereby in less than one Years time:
and the very Proposing such an Innovation, is of dangerous consequence, and
tends to destroy the Public Credit. For if it should be attempted to make any
thing current in Payment but specie Money, no body would trust the Government
on any Loans for the future; and it would put a stop to the discounting Tallys,
or Bills of Exchange, Lending Money on Pawns or Mortgages, or indeed to the
giving any Credit, but upon the undoubted Assurance of receiving the Payment in
Specie: for on all other sorts of Payment there will be a Loss to exchange them
for Money; and it would discourage our Friends, and encourage our Enemies; by
proclaiming to the World, That we are not able to continue the War, and this
would put an End to it: for we should be forced to submit to such Terms, as the
French King would think sit to grant us.

It Is very observable, that all the several Companies of Oppressors are
strangely alarmed, and exclaim at the Bank; and seem to have joined themselves
in a Confederacy against it, out of pure Zeal (as they pretend) for the Good of
the Public: whereas it is nothing but their Private Interest, that has so
nettled them to see their Craft and Trade of Oppression endangered; for
Extortion, Usury, and Oppression were never so attacqued, as they are like to
be by the Bank: and it is that which has engaged them, to use all the Arts and
Tricks they could invent, to blemish it: and amongst the rest, to make those
that owe Money uneasy at it, great Sums have been called in; especially if any
have happened to be due from those, whose Public Stations might make their Anger
the more significant: pretending, that the Bank has m^de such a Scarcity of
Money, that none is left, to be Lent on Land, or other Securities; though if it
really did what they pretend, they would be far from being angry at it;
scarcity of Money naturally producing a High Interest, and a difficulty for
those that want to be supplied with it: which are the best Arguments that can
be used, to extort double the Price for Procuration and Continuation, Crimes
that would easily be forgiven by those men. But the Bank, on the contrary,
makes a plenty of Money, and renders it easy, for those that want to be
supplied with it, at a moderate Interest, as well on Public as Private
Securities; without paying any thing, either to procure or continue it.

There are others, who pretend to be against the Bank, lest it should hereafter
join with the Prince, to make him Absolute, and so render Parliaments useless.
But though that may at first seem frightful, yet when it is considered, there will
not appear any cause for such Fear as is pretended; and its morally impossible
to be attempted, the concerned in the Bank being restrained by Act of
Parliament, from advancing any Money to the Crown, but upon such Funds only on
which there is a Credit of Loan by Parliament under the Penalty of each
Person's forfeiting treble the value of all the Money Lent; the 1/5 to the
Informer, and the other 4/5 cannot be pardoned by the King, but are to be
disposed of by Parliament: nor can it be the Interest of the Bank, to make any
King absolute; seeing they have no Security for their Fund, nor for the Money
that is lodged in the Bank, but the Protection of the Laws: For if they should
contribute to make any King absolute, they canhave no assurance that he would
not, (nay they may be confident that he would) seize on their Fund and their
Money by violence; lest that they who contributed to make him Absolute, should
afterward endeavor to reduce him to a conformity with the Laws of the Land.
And certainly there is more danger of such a Design from 12 or 14 Goldsmiths,
who were used to have most of the running Cash of the Kingdom: Or from other
Corporations, who depend wholly on Prerogative, and are under no manner of
Restraint. Nor could such a Design ever be attempted by the Bank; for the whole
Court of Directors, which consists of 26 Persons, must be made privy to it; and
some of them to be sure would be against it: and it could not be kept secret,
but would soon be divulged; and any 9 Members of the Corporation may call a
General Court, who would infallibly turn out those that should incline to
favor such a Design: For it is not to be supposed, that such a Body of men
should agree to ruin themselves and their Posterity, by losing their Estates
and their Liberties, when it is in their power to preserve them. And seeing the
Triennial Bill is past, a new Parliament must be chosen, and Sit once in 3
Years* and during the War, there is no danger but they will Meet oftener.

There are others who are against the Bank, pretending, the Fund from which its
Revenue arises is prejudicial to the Nation: but if that were an Objection, it
might as well be urged against the Annuity for Lives, payable out of the same
Fund, and settled by the same Act of Parliament: But as this is not made an
Objection against the one, no more ought it to be against the other; for the
Bank would be the same, out of whatsoever Fund the 100000 l. per an. were
payable; and if it were ill for the Kingdom, the goodness of the Fund would not
make it the better; nor if the Fund were a bad one, would that make the Bank
the worse.

There are others, who are against the Bank, because they pretend the concerned
have too good a Bargain; though if it were really so, the Nation pays but
100000 l. per an. for 1200000, which is no more than their Agreement; and it is
much less than must have been paid for that Money, if it had been to be raised
in any other manner: But if there were any weight in this Objection, it might
be proper to be considered 11 Years hence, when their Term expires, in case
they should endeavor a longer continuance. It never was thought to be an
Objection against those who have the Fee-Farm Rents, that they have had too
good a Peniworth, though they now Sell at 21, 22, and 23 Years Purchase: And
though great part of them were paid for by Debentures, and old Debts due from
the Crown, which were bought for little or nothing: nor is it objected, that it
was a thin House when that Bill past, though upon the Division there were but
42 Members present.

Some find fault with the Bank, because they have not taken in the whole
1200000 l. which was Subscribed; for they have called in but for 720000 l.
which is more than they have now occasion for: But however, they have paid into
the Exchequer the whole 1200000 l. before the time appointed by the Act of
Parliament; and the less Money they have taken in to do it with, so much the
more they have served the Public: For the rest is left to circulate in Trade,
to be lent on Land, or otherwise to be disposed of for the Nations Service; and
its better for the Bank, as well as the Public, to have 480000 l. in the
Subscribers hands, ready to be called for as they want it, than to have had it
lie useless by them: And it is very observable, that few of those who make this
Objection, either do or would trust the Bank, though the whole 1200000 l. were
actually paid in by the Subscribers, as they would pretend to have it. And though
they are so careful, lest the Bank should not have Credit; yet at the same time
they pretend to fear its Credit will so far prevail, that it will engross all
the Money in the Nation. So that, it seems, as if they who would have 480000 l.
called in, wanted a pretense to find fault with the Bank, for having thereby
made Money scarce, by calling in the Remainder of the whole Subscriptions, when
they did not want it; unless they would show by some new-discovered Rules in
Arithmetic, that the calling in 480000 l. more, would make the Bank have the
less Money lodged in it.

It Is pretended by others, that the Bank is prejudicial to Trade, because there
are some under such unhappy Circumstances, that the Bank cannot relieve them in
their broken Fortunes, and who have been sinking before the Bank was thought
of. Indeed they who have not Credit to borrow Money at Interest, nor to draw by
Exchange, and who have neither Tallys, Bills of Exchange, nor good Bills for
Debt to discount, Goods to Pawn, or Land, or Houses to Mortgage, must be
allowed to be in no very good condition, and must continue to pay as exorbitant
Allowances for Money to supply their Necessities, as they used to do before the
Bank was established. What has been observed of Discounting Foreign Bills of
Exchange at 3 per cent. per annum, Inland Bills, and Notes for Debts, at 4 per
cent. per an. Lending Money on Pawns at 5 per cent. per an. Exchanging Tallys,
and lowering Interest of Money, its supposed is sufficient to answer this
Objection.

It Is alleged by some, that the Bank will ingross all manner of Trades. -- But
this is an Objection (like many others, which are) made against it by those who
do not understand its Constitution; for, if any Person Trades on Account of the
Bank in any other thing than taking Pawns, or in Bills of Exchange, or Bullion,
or consents that any other should Trade, such Person so Trading or Consenting
to such Trade, incurs by the Act of Parliament a Forfeiture of Treble the Value
of all that is Traded for.

The Goldsmiths have been guilty of Engrossing most Commodities themselves, and
they have also been great Merchants and Traders. -- And whereas they pretend
that the Bank has bought up all the Silver, upon Enquiry it appears, that
there has not been 12000 l. worth bought by the Bank, and the greatest part of
that was Pieces of Eight, and the rest Bars and Piny Silver, which came from
Spain; though some particular Refiners and Goldsmiths have since that Shipped
off more than double that Value in Bars of English Melting, and have likewise
sold much greater parcels to others which have been Exported. -- And it may be
a matter well worth Enquiry, where those Mines are which have produced that
Silver?

And though it be made such a Crime for the Bank to be concerned in the Public
Remittances, it is no more than was done by a Goldsmith before the Bank
undertook it; nor is it looked on as a Fault in the Goldsmiths to deal by
Exchange, seeing some of them do now draw or remit Money almost every Post.

And since the Nation has suffered so much by the Goldsmiths Monopolizing
Goods, and Trading with other Men's Stocks, it may seem highly Reasonable, That
as the Bank is restrained from Trade for fear of those mischiefs which the
Goldsmiths have practiced; so the Goldsmiths in like manner should be limited
to the Selling Plate and Jewels, which was their ancient and proper Trade.

As to the Pretense of the Bank setting a Price upon Guineas, and having
engrossed the greatest part of all that are in the Nation; it is answered, The
Bank has always received and paid Guineas, at a Penny or two Pence a piece at
least, under the Price which the Goldsmiths have put upon them; and has been so
far from Buying up any, that they have only received such as have been brought
them in Payment; and have constantly paid them away every Week, at the same
Price they have received them: So that if they make any benefit by the advance
of the Price of Guineas, it is chiefly on those which were received at the
taking the Subscriptions; which cannot come to any such quantity as is
pretended: And it is a matter wholly owing to some, or all of these Causes:

1. To the Goldsmiths, who have raised the Price of them: Or,

2. To the badness of our Silver-Coin, which is diminished every day: Or,

3. To those great quantities which have been exported into Foreign Parts.

There are others, who make a mighty Complaint against the Bank, because 2 d.
per Day is allowed on Bank-Bills, and the Money which was used to be lodged in
their hands for nothing, and made use of by themselves, is now paid into the
Bank by the Owners, but they, its supposed, will not find fault with receiving
2 d. per Day, for that Money, for which before they had nothing; and so one may
be set against the other.

It Is pretended, the allowing 2 d. per Day, hinders some from Purchasing, or
Lending Money on Mortgages; and makes others, who are Traders, and owe Money,
bad Paymasters.

But it may well be supposed, there are none who intend to Purchase, or Lend
Money on Mortgages, who will leave their Money in the Bank at 3 per cent. per
an. when they can have a Purchase to their minds, or a good Security at 5 per
cent. per an. and there are few who would not leave their Money lying dead,
rather than lay it out on the Purchase of an Estate they do not like, or lend
it on a bad Security.

And as for its making men bad Paymasters; they must consider their Credit or
Interest but little, who will delay paying their Debts, for the getting the 2
d. per day, per 100 l. which is allowed on Bank-Bills; for in their future
Dealings they would pay a much dearer Interest. -- The Money which is lodged in
the Bank, is only the Money which can be spared, and was wont to be left with
the Goldsmiths: and it is strange, that 3 per cent. per an. which is allowed on
Bank Bills, should do all this Mischief; and that the great Advantages which
have been made by the Public Funds, should never be made an Objection.

But the plain truth of the matter is, that the Goldsmiths are angry at the
Banks allowing 2 d. a Day per Cent. because that by this means the Money is
drawn out of their hands the faster, and paid into the Bank, for Bank-Bills.

And if the allowing 2 d. per Day on Bank Bills, be looked on to be such a
Crime, its very probable the concerned in the Bank will be willing in time to
remove the Objection; seeing it will ease them of the Charge of 36000 l. per
an. which the Interest amounts to, and which they have given the Nation out of
their Fund, for that Money, for which the Owners used to have nothing.

Notwithstanding all these Objections, which are made against the Bank, there
are some now, who in opposition to it, talk of nothing less than Settling a New
One, with 4 d, a day per cent. Interest, which is double as much as is now paid
by the Bank: nay, others are for Setting up a Bank in every City, or in every
Market Town: Which shows after all the Cavils against the Bank, that a Bank is
good for the Nation in general, and that the greatest Objection against the
Bank of England, is, that they who find fault with it, are not concerned in it;
for many of those who Clamor against it, do it only in hopes of coming in the
Cheaper.

But the Honor and Justice of the whole Nation (on whose Credit and Authority
the Subscribers are Established to be the Bank of England for 11 Years) is too
much concerned, to admit a supposal, that any such Designs should receive
countenance or encouragement: For what past in the Last Session of Parliament,
and their refusing to admit any other Lives to be added to the Annuities, lest
it should be thought to lessen the Security on which the Money was contributed;
(though they were not intended to take place 'till after the Lives in being
were extinct) shows the great care of the Honorable House of Commons, to
preserve the Public Credit, and to avoid any the least Occasion which might
make it suspected; and gives the whole Nation a sufficient Assurance, that they
who are the Preservers of the Peoples Rights and Properties, will never suffer
any thing to be attempted in that AUGUST ASSEMBLY, that may seem but to weaken
the Security, or lessen the Encouragements which they have given the
Subscribers to the Bank, and which they themselves have Established by so solemn
and inviolable a Sanction: And all Insinuations to the contrary (though under
never such specious Pretenses) are of dangerous Consequence to the Government,
tending to raise Doubts and Scruples in the minds of the People, and to lessen
the Public Credit: For if the Parliamentary Securities, on which all Men, both
Natives and Foreigners, firmly relying, have hitherto so freely contributed
their Fortunes, for carrying on the War, were now made precarious and
uncertain, no body could trust them for the future: and during the War, the
Government cannot possibly subsist without Credit.

And besides, the seeming Injustice which it would be to those who have
Subscribed, and contributed their Money upon the Encouragement given by the
Act, of their being the Bank of England for eleven years, to have another
established before those eleven years are expired, for which this Bank is
settled; it would be so far from being like the having of several Shops to go
to, to be better used; (as is by some pretended) that it would be a means to
hinder either from being serviceable in the supplying the public or private
men's occasions: And the Nation must pay the dearer for Money; for one being in
opposition to the other, there would be a sort of Civil War between them; and
the Bank being a Bank of Credit, neither of them, by their jealousy of each
other, would venture to extend its Credit; but would Bury the Money of the
Nation, instead of increasing and quickening its Circulation, as the Bank of
England does, and will do.

To conclude, the Instances which have been given, (in the foregoing Account)
of the Usefulness of the Bank, may, it is supposed, suffice, to convince such as
were prejudiced against it; upon the Mirepresentations which were so
industriously made, by those who appeared the most barefaced and violent in
opposing it. But it may perhaps be objected, That the Bank is so far from being
an Advantage to all Trades, that it is Prejudicial to some: for it seems to be
admitted, That the Bank will be injurious to a dozen or 14 Banking Goldsmiths,
and to some Scriveners, Usurers, and Pawn-Brokers; because it will hinder them
from Exacting such Oppressive Extortion, as some of them have done formerly;
and it will quite ruin the whole Trade of Tally-Jobbers.

Now if the Clamor of a few, (whose Trade has been to make Merchandise of the
Nation, and to Enrich themselves by the Necessities of others) shall not only
prevail against the Benefit of a Community legally established, but even of the
Kingdom in general, and the Credit of a Parliament, then the Enemies of the
Bank may hope to subvert it: But until the Public Good be postpon'd to Private
Interest, and a small number of Oppressors be too hard for the Nobility,
Gentry, and Traders of England in general; it will and must be preserved and
maintained, because of its great Use to the whole Realm; and the Benefits which
already accrue by it in its Infancy, are a good Earnest of those greater
Advantages, which the Nation must receive from its future Progress.

FINIS.
LONDON: Printed for John Whitlock near Stationers Hall. 1695.


