Astrologia Reformata: A Reformation of the Prognostical Part OF ASTRONOMY,
Vulgarly Termed ASTROLOGY.

BEING An Experimental Detection, and clear Demonstration of the hitherto
greatly mistaken, and dubiously controverted Grounds and Principles of that
unvaluable Science.

And to this First Essay is also annexed the (Never yet publicly given) true
Positures at the Birth, and a Prediction of the Death, of the present French
King.

By ROBERT GODSON.

LONDON, Printed for George Sawbridge, at the Three Flower-de-luces in
Little-Britain, 1696.

To the Most Illustrious Brotherhood of Wisdom, the Royal Philosophical Society
of London.
Gentlemen,
IT can neither with Truth nor Modesty be denied, but must (and will by all
truly Ast^^philar Spirits) be freely and thankfully Acknowledged, that those
many accurate Observations of the places and motions of the Heavenly Bodies,
which have been happily and industriously made in the present and some late
preceding Ages (after Mankind was awaked from that Monk-rock'd Security in
which it had been lulled for several generations, and Learning and Religion in
some measure restored to their genuine use and design, of being means to attain
to a due knowledge of God, and even sensible conviction of his Nature and
Attributes, and to be profitable helps to direct us in our Affairs and
Conversations,) have by the diligence and Industry of sundry Learned Men of
great skill and Dexterity in Cosmometrical Rations, Proportions, and
Operations, been so well and ingeniously used and improved to the end intended
by the laborious Observators, that they have greatly advanced that part of
Sydereal Science, above what it had ever before attained to, if not almost to
its utmost pitch of perfection.

Yet is it also but too bewailably manifest that the Institution of Celestial
Observations, and the thence detection and deduction of Planetary places and
motions, and composure of Astronomick Tables, have of late been generally
undertaken, by persons little skilled, if not rather wholly Ignorant, of
Sydereal significations; and such as knew little else concerning the Heavenly
Bodies, beside an uncertain and imperfect notion and account of their number,
order, revolutional periods, the quality of their orbs, and frame of the
Mundane system, and the craft of wielding a Quadrant or Telescope, and of
performing the ordinary Trigonometrical operations; With which imperfect stock
of Astral Skill, many have of late undertaken to frame Tables of the Heavenly
motions, and do as confidently set up for Astronomers, as if they had the
knowledge of Daniel or Abraham. A pretense altogether as Absurd and ridiculous,
as if one should take upon him to write a Medical Dispensatory, without any
farther knowledge of Herbs and other Simples, than only a lame and defective
notice of their number, color, shape, places of growth, yearly seasons, and
other mere sensible accidents and outward Circumstances.

And in regard of the great mysteriousness of uranical portentations and the
consequent difficulty of truly understanding them; which requires not only
common Reason and Discretion, and a fameor-gain-spurr'd diligence and Industry,
by which alone the Metrical or Mathematical part of this Science may be
laudably practiced and cultivated, and accordingly nowadays commonly is so;
But also a particularly adapted Temper and Capacity ( Astronomers as well as
Poets, being rather the handiwork of Nature, than either of Art or Education:)
A propension to it purely for its own sake, and a spirit unbyassed by lucre and
partiality, without which the greatest endeavors will prove utterly vain and
fruitless. And finding also that the unhappy thirst of secular gain, and of the
frothy reputation of various knowledge, is now so predominant in the minds of
the far greater part of the pretended Votaries of Wisdom, and (amongst the
rest) of the Professors and pursuers of this Science; Instigating (or rather
seducing) them vain-gloriously to tamper with so many several Studies, and
those also utterly unnecessary, and widely irrelative to each other, any one of
which (to be duly skillful therein) were alone enough to employ the whole time
and faculties of any one Man, That they never become competent, and much less
perfect in any; but are generally so weak, imperfect, and insufficient, that
their practice is commonly successless or pernicious to their Clients, and no
less Ignominious and discrediting to themselves. It may still be sadly said and
lamented, that Astronomy is but (or hardly) half restored, being but (as Adam
before his Inspiration) a mere Body without a Soul.

For we live in an Age wherein as well the matter as the methods of Study and
Learning are chosen rather for their fashionableness, and for their public
esteem among Gowned or Estated Men, especially who have long practiced and
professed them (though a Divine Pen has long ago assured us, that great Men are
not always Wise, nor the Aged universally Men of understanding) than for their
own Intrinsic dignity or excellency; And rather for their promisingness to the
secular Fame, Promotion, or advantage of their Professors, than their tendency
or necessity to the Benefit or Utility of such as consult or employ them. And
wherein Youth is by the modern unhappy methods of Education, kept so long in
the Porch of Wisdom's Temple, in Learning a parcel of silly mis-called Arts and
Old Foreign Tongues, little or nothing necessary for any but wrangling Clerkers
(who are but a small and the most needless part of the Professors of Science)
and in Conning and Contemplating those Paganish Fictions, Dotages, and
Macrological Impertinencies, contained in the Books commonly used for that
purpose; That they never are permitted to enter her inner Courts, or have but a
very small time to abide there, and much too short to gain a true knowledge of
her solid mysteries. Beside that their native faculties are so distorted and
depraved by such frivolous and Sophistical (pretended necessary) preparations,
and their Heads and Fancies so stuffed and cloyed with Idle and Abstracted (and
mostly or generally Erroneous) Notions, who leave no time nor room for sound
and practical knowledge: That if the Laws of the Land, or the weakness of their
Patrons or Clients did not contribute to ensure them an ample or competent
livelihood, the solidity of their knowledge, and success of their practice,
would never be able to procure it, either by Physic, Astronomy, or Divinity,
the three great branches of Mystical Science: Each of which may abundantly be
proved to be extremely corrupted and erroneous, even where they are vulgarly
reputed and most confidently pretended to be most pure and Orthodox.

Neither indeed can it possibly be otherwise, when such an invincible variety
not only of speculative, but even of the profoundest and most difficult
practical Arts and Studies, are undertaken by one individual Person, for whom
any one of them alone were sufficient, though as highly fitted and qualified
for it, as God and Nature do enable any to be; nothing being now and for some
Ages passed more common, not only in Colleges and Universities, but in other
places abroad in the World also, than for one and the self same Person openly
to Study, Profess, and practice Arts and Sciences so vast in themselves, and
mostly or wholly so irrelative to one another, as are Medicine, Logic,
Rhetoric, Natural Philosophy, Astronomy, and all the several parts of
Mathematics and Geometry; Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Chaldee, Syriack, and sundry
other both Ancient and Modern Languages, sometimes a dozen or fifteen together;
Music, Drawing, Painting, Physic, Astrology, and some others; or at least
such a considerable plurality of these, as that any modest and honest minded
Man, who will not belie his Capacity to advance his Reputation (as it is too
plain very many do) may easily perceive and will freely confess them not
masterable to any competent perfection (save only to make an empty noise and
show before such as little understand them) by any one Man whatsoever. And some
of which are not only impertinent too, but even inconsistent with a due
prosecution and intellection of the other; for what use of Logic, Rhetoric,
or Geometry is there in the practice of Physic, which also is of it self alone
a Science large enough for any one Man to master, and the like might be said of
sundry others. And albeit that Astrological Information may be of good use to a
Physician, (as well as Medical Instructions to an Astronomer, and to many other
kinds of Persons and Professors beside) yet does it not therefore follow that
he must of necessity Study both Sciences himself, (for then every Man should be
master of all Arts and Trades, because he has oftentimes use for them.) But he
rather should in his practice of the one, derive and receive all necessary
helps by the other, from such as make it their whole Study and Profession; and
the same may be said of Tongues, and all other Arts and Studies: for while Men
apply their Minds to so many several Sciences, each of which is so vast and
profound, and so little pertinent or related to the rest, they only become mere
prattling smatterers in all, but are really Dexterous and sufficient in none.

Hence it comes that this transcendant Science, the most precious gem amongst
the Treasures of Wisdom, the clearest Glass to behold Almighty Power, and the
only Image of Divine Omnisciency; which the unbounded goodness of its supreme
Eternal Author, has ordained for the use and instruction of Man, to direct his
steps in this vale of trial and Tribulation, wherein he is wholly left to his
own fate and discretion, and to his native will and disposition in the choice
of good or evil, to shift for himself the best he can, though not without
gracious premises of providential reliefs and affistances upon his humble and
earnest prayers to obtain them, in all such times and cases of extreme
affliction and adversity, wherein his own Wit and industry fail him; and to
enlighten his understanding clearly to see into the dark corners of distance
and futurity; that he may not run blindfold into places and enterprises, nor be
taken unawares like a Bird in a snare, when an evil time comes suddenly upon
him: Is become so utterly depraved and corrupted, that what now commonly passes
by its name, is very little else but a heap of folly and falsehood; and so far
from any appearance, and from showing any effects of a divine and beneficial
ordinance, that many are Opinion'd there is no such Science in nature; whatever
others do affirm of its truth and excellency, is nothing but Fancy and
Delusion; whereby this sacred Lamp of Divine and infinite Wisdom, which affords
all satisfaction that the mind of Man can desire, concerning any thing past,
present, or future, is dwindl'd into smoke and snuff, and fallen to the lowest
degrees of contempt with many even of good knowledge and capacity, the sacred
and venerable name and Title of Astronomy, being nowadays wholly attributed
to and arrogantly assumed and usurped by the bare Metrical or Mathematical part
of it, which is no more but its very husk or shell. It being sadly and
shamefully observable, that the Professors of this as well as of other
mysterious and profound Sciences, do, through a base thirst after advantage and
applause, and a sordid itch to gain the repute and benefits of a great and
fashionable variety of skill and knowledge, not apply their Minds so wholly and
solely to this sublime and immense Science, (the known fame and benefits of
which alone if duly known and understood, were enough to satisfy any one
modest Man) as is requisite to a full or competent perfection therein. To which
they afford but some small part of only their spare hours, though vast and
profound enough to employ their whole time and faculties, so that their skill
and practice cannot but be as they are, and as I am even unwilling to think,
and very much more to mention. --

The displeasing observation of those dis-ingenious proceedings, and the sway
of a strong inclination and affection (by many affirmed to be the certain
symptom of an equal Adaption) to this tallest and beautifullest bravch of
natural knowledge; occasioned by the sight of some rutilous specks of Truth
discovered and found to be yet unextinguished, in stirring up the modern
rubbish of its ruins, have prevaild with me to relinquish other employments
more promising to my secular advantage, and for some considerable time to
sequester my self almost wholly from the World, so as to be but little
publicly concerned therein, that so I might gain the greater leisures and
opportunities to dive into the depths of this Science; for the certain
discovery of whose sublime and excellent mysteries, rejecting the fictitious
Volumes and veluminous fictions of mere guessing pretenders, as well ancient as
modern; and laying aside all other practical Arts and Studies no way pertinent
nor serviceable to this; I have closely applied my thoughts for several years
together, to an experimentary examination of the Heavens immediately
themselves, by a careful and impartial collation and discussion of sundry
significant celestial faces and positures concerning one and the same
particular, the only true method of making and gaining experience: And this not
only for the ad-invention of the practical rules of this Science, but also for
the trial of its principles and rudiments, to find which of those now variously
delivered by sundry Authors for such, or whether none of those, and what others
beside, are the only true and genuine. And herein as my ends have been honest,
my affections impartial, my endeavors great, and my desires vehement, so by
the favor and aid of the sovereign Author of Wisdom, my Travels have been not
unproportionably successful, but effectual to the discovery of many great
Truths never hitherto known in the Christian World; and to the perfection and
clarification of many others, whereof though some in former days have had some
fleeting glimpses, yet was it with so much dimness and uncertainty, as rendered
them wholly useless and unprofitable.

And though I shall not yet lay claim to such a degree of perfection therein,
as to make all the predictions, and answer all the enquiries proper thereto and
possible thereby (for what one Man can be sufficient for these things, who
found the Science so defective and corrupt as I did) yet I shall I undertake to
disclose and unfold so many great Truths and excellent Mysteries therein,
hitherto utterly concealed and unknown, and many others heretofore but darkly
and dubiously understood, as shall be abundantly pleasing and acceptable to all
who impartially examine and make use of them, and which shall be at least as
conducive to advance both the Truth and Credit of the prognostical part of
Astronomy, as even the very best of the many late observers and discussers of
celestial motions have contributed to the present improvements of the
Mathematical; and shall abundantly prove to all who are endued with Reason,
Judgment, and Modesty, that the great pains and expenses employed by many, in
making such observations, and correcting and perfecting the Doctrine of the
said motions, are useful and serviceable not only to the mean and shallow arts
and purposes of Geography, Navigation, and the civil distinction of Years,
Months, and Days, (all which low and inconsiderable ends, which wholly or
mostly tend rather to the gratification of Luxury and a needless-curiosity,
than to promote any of the genuine ends of true knowledge, may be sufficiently
served without any such great exactness;) but to other ends as great and
excellent as the Heavens are high, their face illustrious, their greatness
stupendous, their courses and motions constant and harmonious, and Men's
endeavors to discover them expensive and laborious; and that the excellent
Mysteries contained in and discoverable by this unparalleled Science, even
though we should wholly lay aside all prognostical use thereof (which yet may
be very great and beneficial) but using it only as an ingenious speculation (as
is all or most of that kind of Philosophy now in chief repute,) displaying that
exact and wonderful harmony which Almighty God has ordained between the motions
and positions of the Heavenly Bodies, and the actions and events of all
sublunary creatures, is a thousand times more valuable and worthy to be prized
and affected by all who delight to consider the handy works of God, than that
fanciful Foolosophy now so much in vogue, of making blind guesses at the secret
undiscoverable reasons and causes of both the ordinary and extraordinary
effects and appearances in nature (such as Comets, Magnetism, Winds, etc.) and
at the meaning and design of old defaced Inscriptions, and new found Relics of
Antiquity, and many other such trivial and useless matters, which many
nowadays make a great noise and stir with; or I may rather say it does as
much exceed them, as the Heavens surmount the Earth, and the Wisdom of God
transcendeth that of Men.

Neither do I doubt but strongly and reasonably hope, and with God's Assistance
fully purpose, by the use and help of due means and endeavors, to raise it to
that degree of claritude and perfection, that all who apply themselves
hereafter thereunto, with honest and sincere affections and intentions, and a
desire to be thereby serviceable to their generation; and who by certain and
never failing rules which shall fully and faithfully be given for that purpose,
do find themselves duly qualified and capacitated for this Study, shall by
their own experience and endeavors be speedily able to supply what is wanting
from mine; and by their honest and ingenious practice and exercise thereof, and
daily demonstration of its excellent use, and of the great good that may be
done thereby, declare it as fit and necessary for the Courts and Dominions of
Christian Prinoes, as it was and still is reputed to be (though but very dimly
and imperfectly understood) in these of Heathens and Mahometans. This said
Mantical or Prognostical part of Astronomy (commonly though less properly
termed by another name,) being a Science wholly consisting of real wonders, as
great as ever the power of God did expose to the sight of Mankind; who may
thereby daily behold the Tragedies and Comedies of secular affairs pre-acted by
the Planets on the Stage of Heaven, in a far more exact and elegant manner than
they are usually re-acted in Earthly Theaters; and thence may attain to a
competent Assimilation of his Maker's Omniscience, in the Knowledge of
whatsoever his Mind or Spirit can desire concerning any thing past, present, or
to come: And this by Means far more sure and infallible, than the ordinary ones
of History, Report and Conjecture.

As a Testimony of my Successes and Improvements in this Science, and an
Earnest of what I promise and purpose further to perform therein, I here offer
to Your Sagacious Worthinesses (whose several distinguishing Titles and
Dignities I shall not now insist on) the following Observations and
Experiments; not by craving Your Patronage, and by the Prefixure of Your Name,
to concile unto them any greater Favor or Esteem abroad in the World, than
what their proper Merit shall be able selfly to procure them; a Shift, which,
though now very usual with many others, yet am I as far from desiring as I hope
these are from needing it: But rather to recommend to your Favor and Esteem
this ancient and venerable Science, which as I am sorry to have been hitherto
neglected by You, so I am in hope, that by means of the ensuing Illustrations,
it will henceforth appear at least as worthy as any thing else whatsoever, to
be enrolled amongst the Subjects of Your generous Disquisitions. And therefore,
hoping and desiring Your zealous Cooperation herein, so far as the Mattter
shall be found meritorions thereof, (which for the future I do not doubt but it
will,) I shall here with all due Respectfulness conclude, and always humbly
remain an unfeigned Well-wisher to the prosperous Success of all Your ingenious
Travails and Endeavors.

R. G.

Vranomantia Reformata.
The First ESSAY. Showing how to rectify the Genitures of deceased Persons, by
the two principal and most common Accidents of Humane Life, namely, Marriage,
and Natural Death. And thereby preparing a plain and easy Way to discover the
true Method of performing the same by all others. And consequently, affording a
never failing Key to unlock the whole Treasury of Genethliacal Mysteries: Which
has hitherto lain hid from Ages and Generations; but is now here partly, and
shall shortly be more fully laid open to the Sight of all Men.
FOrasmuch as that I now undertake and intend to unfold the sublime and sacred
Mysteries of the Heavenly Science, and to declare how and in what manner are
represented and portended thereby, the Actions and Events of all Earthly
Creatures; whether whole Nations in general, or single Persons in particular.
It seems most convenient to begin with that part of the said Science, which
concerns the Genitures of Mankind, and shows how by the Positures of Heaven at
the Moment of a Person's Birth, or first Entrance into the World, to foresee
the sundry Actions, Undertakings, Changes, Dispositions, and all other
Circumstances and Occurrences of his Life, and the Time and Manner of his final
End, or Death: As being a Branch of this Divine Skill, which many account, of
all others, the most useful; and therefore is by most Modern Professors chiefly
pursued and cultivated. And in the performance hereof, it will be safest and
surest, and consequently fittest, to begin with those Actions and Events which
are common to all, or the greater part of Mankind; and are also the Extremities
of their several Kinds, and therefore most obvious to Experimentation, and
their signifying Particulars most remarkable and discernable. Which said most
common Actions and Events I affirm to be, Marriage, and Natural Death: Of
which, the former is the Extremity of Love and Courtship; and the latter, of
Disease and Sickness; and being both of them incident to very many, their true
Signs in the Heavens are much more speedily and easily discoverable, than are
the Signs of Chances that happen only to some few; and are therefore the surest
means of Genethliacal Rectification.

Moreover, the better to prepare the Way to go through with this weighty Task,
I must in the first place require my Reader to be moderately (if not perfectly)
versed in, and acquainted with, at least some one Treatise introductive to this
Science; of which there are already so many published, even in the Vulgar
Tongue of this Kingdom, by Mr. Lilly, Mr. Gadbury, Mr. Coley, and many others,
that all who have them not already, may very speedily provide themselves. And
nextly, I shall lay down some fundamental Maxims, or Propositions, whereon to
raise, and firmly superstruct my intended Genethliacal Edifice; some of which
are wholly novel to the World; and though others of them have languidly
glimpsed to the Apprehensions of some few Authors, yet so very dimly, seldomly,
and uncertainly, that they plainly appear to be doubtful and unresolved whether
they were true or no, or any whit more true than some which by others are
opposed unto them: Whereas I certainly know, and shall in due time abundantly
prove them to be beyond all Exception.

1. That the only true, effectual, significant, and Divinely ordained, as well
as most rational Division of the Heavens into those Prognosticative Partitions
which Astronomers term Houses, is that which divides the visible or apparent
Sphere of each particular place or point of the Earth, whether City, Town,
House, or other place of Birth or Residence, into twelve equal Shares or
Portions, by Lines meeting at the North and South Points of the Horizon, and
equally distant in the said apparent Sphere's own Vertical Equator, or Circle
passing from East to West.

2. That those Essential Dignities and Debilities, and Geocentrical
Configurations of the Planets, handed down to us in these after Ages, by
Ptolomy, from the ancient Chaldean and Egyptian Astronomers, are sufficient,
of themselves alone, to signify all things properly significable by such
Matters, either in a Nativity, or any other Face of Heaven; and are also the
only true and significant Dignities, Debilities and Configurations, by Almighty
God ordained so to do: The Keplerian Aspects, Placidian Familiarities, and
pretended Planitary Dignities and Debilities vended to the World by some late
and modern Authors, being only the hasty, groundless, ill digested Fancies of
rash and idle Brains, and single vainglorious persons; who, though but little
read or skilled in this Science, and as little acquainted with the true Methods
of making Experience therein, to which, by reason of their many other Studies,
they afford but the very least part of their Time and Endeavors, would
nevertheless pretend themselves, and fain be thought able, by their very few
and seldom Searches and Trials, to discover the true Grounds and Principles of
this Science, better than the whole manyaged Succession of the zealous and
industrious Ancients, who wholly devoted their Time and Endeavors thereunto.

3. That in all Humane Genitures, whether of Males, or Females, the first
Marriage is always signified by some Direction of the Mid-heaven to the Body,
or some Ray of the Lord of the Seventh House, agreeable to the Quality and
Success of the Marriage, who or whatsoever Planet the said Lord of the Seventh
be: For Saturn and Mercury are in this case as effectual and significant as the
Moon or Venus; and these latter no more so than the former, but only by their
being Lords of the Seventh; and never but when they are so; neither do the
Directions of the Ascendent, Sun, or Moon, to any Planet or Aspect whatsoever,
ever produce or signify Wedlock; as shall in due time and place be plainly
proved.

4. That Natural Death, by Sickness or Distemper of Body, is in all Nativities,
of whatsoever Kind or Sex, denoted and accomplished by some Direction of the
Cusp of the Ascendent, or First House to the Malefical Body or Beam of some
Lord of the Sixth House, or else to the Moon's Southern Node, commonly called
the Dragon's-Tale. And in this case, the evil Aspects, even of Jupiter and
Venus; are full as efficacious as those of Saturn or Mars; neither of whom have
any Power or Significancy of Natural Death, but when they are Lords of the said
Sixth House; and then so have the other five Planets also; that is to say, when
any of them is Lord of the Sixth. The Directions of the Sun or Moon, and much
less of the pretended parts of Life or Fortune, being never effectual or
significant of Natural Death; and the ordinary vulgar Rules of choosing Givers
of Life and Death, being utterly fabulous, and extremely erroneous.

5. That not all such Directions as those mentioned in the two last preceding
Propositions, are always effective of Marriage, or Natural Death; but only when
the promising or Menacing Planet is qualified with some certain Positions, and
other Circumstances, which are requisite to render the said Direction
effectually Mortal or Conjugal, and free from certain others that may obstruct
or impede its being so; without which aid requisite Qualification and Vacancy,
(of which there are several Kinds, that shall in due time and place be
declared,) the Native may persist in Life and Singlehood, notwithstanding any
such Direction. The Ignorance or Inconsideration of which Assertion has caused
some late and modern Professors to run headlong into the greatest Absurdities;
vainly, weakly and rashly concluding, that because (in their Estimate, or
Corrected Figures) the Ascendent overpass'd the Body or ill Aspect of or, in
some Nativities, especially wherein, according to their rules, it was not Giver
of Life, therefore such a Direction could never kill in any.

6. That though Rectification by either of these said Accidents, if duly and
discreetly performed, will yield and produce the true Figure of Birth so
sufficiently near as that Judgment may by a skillful Artist be safely given
thereof, both as to the Native's general Fate, and Time of his particular
Actions and Occurrences, without any considerable Error in point of Time, but
what may be redressed by other Means; yet is it not to be expected, that from
any Figure so rectified, the very Year or Month, and much less the Day of any
other foregoing or following Accident, will be exactly pointed out by
Directions only, so as that the Directional Distance between any two promising
or threatening Bodies or Aspects directed to, and the Temporal Distance between
the two Accidents signified by them, should (especially in Accidents which
happen many Years asunder) be always punctually and precisely equal; which I
clearly find they never are, though never considerably differing; but near
enough for any necessary Occasion of the Foreknowledge of such Matters: For
albeit that the precise Year and Month, and possibly also the Day of an Action
or Event may be deduced and discovered from a Geniture so rectified, yet not by
the alone Directions of the Nativity, as some have fansied and suggested, who,
had their Measure of Time, and Method of Directing been never so true and
genuine, (as it is evident they were not) yet the Error in their Planets
places would have thwarted such a Co-incidence, and was manifestly the Cause of
that punctual Agreement in some few Directions and Accidents; which they
therefore fondly concluded to be universal to all, and for which the best
Tables yet extant are insufficient.

These are all the fundamental Maxims (besides what are common to the whole
Science, and already public from other Hands) which I think needful whereon to
raise my intended Edifice; and which, as I have found them most indubitably
true, by a clear and manifold Experience, so shall I by the same declare and
evince them to be so to others also, even when and where it may to many seem
altogether impossible: And though I could discharge my forepromised Explication
by many experienced Nativities, not only of my own private Enquiry, which by
many Circumstances I find, and am assured to have been nearly estimated, and by
which I have discovered the fore-given Propositions to be most true and
certain; but also by many others already published by several, and in which I
find the said propositions to hold true also; amply discussing and illustrating
each individual Geniture, by instancing all its known and considerable
Accidents, and assigning them to their proper Directions, and showing the
strange Agreement that is between them, both as to Quality, Time, and all other
Circumstances, (save only the forementioned immaterial temporal Discrepancy,
otherwise easily redressable,) yet shall I confine my self to the number of
only three, and those also already published by others, and such as are
credibly said and granted to have been observed with great or moderate Care,
and shall by me be Astronomically proved to have been so accordingly, at least
near enough for an intelligent Practitioner truly to correct and reduce them.

With this said Number and Quality of Nativities I do the rather choose to begin
my Explications; partly that none may suspect or object them to be of my own
Timing, or Estimation, a Crime wherewith some (how truly I know not) are
nowadays by others largely and loudly taxed; and partly because that as a
Threefold Cord is not easily broken so a Threefold Testimony is not easily
disproved, nor reasonably distrusted, being held sufficient to ratify the
Matter debated, in all, as well Legal as Scientifical Decisions. Neither shall
I insist on the Instance or Assignation of any other Accidents in these first
illustrated Genitures, but of Marriage and Natural Death alone, unless they all
three, and not only one or two of them, were concerned therein; because I
intend to insist upon nothing but what I give a threefold Proof of; as not at
all approving of that unsatisfactory Method now followed and practiced by the
generality of our Professors, who not only do confidently offer to the World
for true and exact, when rectified only by one single Accident; and that also
assigned to a Direction which has manifestly fai^'d of effecting the same in
many others, without giving or knowing a Reason why it should do so: But do
also give us practical Rules and Aphorisms for the Judgment of a Nativity,
deduced from only one single Geniture, and which therefore seldom or never
holds true in any other, to the great Discredit of themselves, and of those who
credulously practice or judge by their Doctrines.

THE first Nativity which I shall produce, for the Eviction and Confirmation of
my said Propositions concerning Marriage and Natural Death, (intending to do
the like for all other Principles and practical Rules of this Science, by
degrees, and in due Season,) is, that of the late King Charles II. In the
Rectification whereof, to reduce it from the estimate Time, to the true, as
nearly (...) can be done by accidental Correction, I shall make use of the
Sun's mean daily Motion, as the Measure of Time for a Year: Not that I think
this too fully, either natural or rational; or that it will yield an exact
Equality between the Distance of Directions, and their signified Events; which
I have already proposed, as a thing not to be expected; but because that, one
time with another, it affords as great an Agreement both in all Nativities, and
also in the various Accidents of one of the same Nativity, as any other Measure
of Time that ever I saw proposed, or could any way conceive or suspect to be
true and rational, or which had any the least likelihood or appearance of being
so. All and every of which said seemingly rational Measures (save one or two
which I have lately thought on, and shall very shortly bring to the
Touchstone) I have thoroughly tried by several experimented Genitures, but
never found them to answer Expectation any more or nearer than this of mean
Motion.

And whereas some may captiously object, that this confessed Unexactness may be
occasioned by a mistakeful Assignation of Accidents to improper Directions; To
this I answer, That I can give a positive General Rule, not only for the two
grand Accidents aforesaid, but also for several others; and expressly nominate
all those Circumstances and Qualifications requisite to render the Promissor
effective or ineffective of them; and prove by many indubitable Nativities,
that the said Directions fulfilled or failed accordingly: Which is more than
ever was yet done by any Author, and than can possibly be done by the Rules and
Methods they follow, who make or take so many both Significators and
Promissors, for one and the same Accident, (as the Ascendant, Mid-heaven, Sun,
Moon, and sometimes Fortune also, for Significators of Marriage; and Jupiter,
Venus, Sol, Luna, and the Lord of the Seventh, for Promissors; and the like for
all other Accidents;) and so many sorts of Aspects, old and new, Mundane and
Zodiacal, that they can never miss of a Direction fit enough by their Method,
to which to assign any Accident, and by which to rectify any Nativity, without
any great Change from the given Time, how much amiss or mistaken soever; nay,
even though both the Birth, and the Time and Quality of the Accidents be merely
and utterly feigned, and that no such things really ever were; for having so
many several Significators and Promissors as aforesaid, they take that
seemingly resemblant Direction to signify the Accident, which in their
Estimate Figure happens pretty near the time of it, as in such a Variety some
or other of them cannot fail to do; and do frequently assign Accidents to
Directions which they grant passed over without any such Effects in many other
Nativities, even when the Promissor had the same or other equivalent
Qualifications in both: And in each Nativity in which they assign any Accident
to a Direction, they allow many other Directions to pass over without the like
Effects though they assign the fame unto them in several other Nativities. By
all which Means, it is very common and easy to find a near Agreement of
Directions with Accidents, or rather impossible to miss of it, at any Hour of
the Day, how far soever from the true Time of Birth; and oftentimes much better
at a wrong Time, than the right one; so that a certain Rectification is by
these Methods impossible. Whereas, according to the Method by which I practice,
(the Grounds whereof I have discovered from sundry Genitures of both my own and
others Observation and Enquiry; and whose both given Year, Day and Hour,
appear, and are proved by several observed and related Circumstances to have
been very true, and the Moment nearly also,) it is scarce ever possible to find
an Agreement of Directions with Accidents, to any reasonable or tolerable
nearness, but at the true Time of Birth only; at which time they never fail to
agree, and that also with as great an Exactness in Time, as can be shew^d by
any other Method whatsoever. All which is abundantly sufficient to evince the
Truth and Excellency of this.

These things being premised, and the aforesaid Objection clear^d, I shall now
proceed to a Discussion of the Geniture of the Prince abovenamed; who is
certainly known, and generally granted to have been born on Saturday, May the
^^th, in the Year of Christ (according to Vulgar Account) 1630^ near about
Noon; some saying a little before, and others a little after: But Noon we may
take for an Estimate sufficiently exact, in regard my Rule of Rectification is
sufficient to lead me to the true Time of Birth, were it a whole Hour or two
sooner or later; for that about that time of the Day it yields no Agreement of
Directions with Accidents, but at one certain Point of Time only. Wherefore
finding that at the said Estimate Time the Mid-heaven is possessed by 17
Degrees and an half of the Sign Gemini, and that this Native was Royally
married at almost 32 Years old, and continued till Death a Husband to the same
Party, without either Divorce, or open Dislike or Repentance, I consider
whether about that time of Day, and by the aforesaid Measure of Time, the
Mid-heaven do meet with any good Direction to the Body or Beam of the Lord of
the Seventh, or of any Planet, who upon Rectification by such a Direction, will
be found to be Lord of the Seventh, at a distance agreeable to such an Age: And
accordingly, I find a Trine of Jupiter, who is not only Lord of the Seventh in
the Estimate Figure, but also upon Rectification by the said Measure of Time,
and Age of Marriage, is found to be so too; and gives the annexed Face of
Heaven for the true Positure at Birth, with so small a Distance from the given
or estimate Time, as is very consistent and reconcilable with the common and
daily discernible unexactness of Clocks, Watches, and Ocular Observations.

astrological figure

Thus have I rectified this Royal Geniture by one of the said grand Accidents:
And though many others do give us many Nativities for true and certain, upon
only one single Correction, yet I hold it not sufficient nor satisfactory to do
so. And therefore let us examine whether, according to the fore-given Rule,
there happen in this Figure, corrected as before, any dangerous Direction of
the Ascendent to the Lord of the Sixth, at or near about the time of this
Prince's Death: Upon which Examination I find, that the Ascendant comes to the
Body of Saturn, Lord of the Sixth, nearly about that time, without any
Discrepancy between the Distances of the Directions, and of the Accidents, but
what is, and has always been allowed of, as usual, by all the most skilful and
experienced Artists in all Ages. And these two Directions do mutually confirm
each other, not only by agreeing so nearly in Time, with their ascribed
Effects; but also by their being Lords of those Houses, which, according to the
traditionally delivered, frequently experienced, and generally received
Doctrines of this Science, do signify the Means of the said Accidents: And
having also such Qualifications and Positions in this present Geniture, as are
sufficient to render them effectual to those Purposes.

THE Second Experienced Geniture, by which I choose to demonstrate the Verity of
the two said Propositions concerning Marriage and Natural Death, is that of
Lewis XIII. King of France; who, by the Records of that Kingdom, is said to
have been born September. ^^. N. S. 1601. about half an Hour past Ten at Night;
Royally Married in November, 1615. but Betrothed in August, 1612. and died in
April, 1643. Which said given Time, how nearly it agrees with the Time
corrected by the said astrological figure Accidents, and (which is chiefly to
be regarded) the Time of the Acccidents, with the Directions to which they are,
according to the Rule, assigned, any who considers, may easily perceive. The
personal Circumstances of the Promissors (besides their being Lords of their
proper Houses) being also very fit to signify such Events, as shall in due
Time and Place be declared.

But whereas some Currish-minded Pretenders, whose Annual immodest Railleries
seem to insinuate, that they use this Science only as a Tool of Obloquy and
Contention, may captiously object, That I assign this Prince's Betrothal,
rather than his Marriage, to the proper Direction, only for a Shift, because it
better agrees with that for his Death. I answer, That instead of jarring at my
so doing, they rather ought, as undoubtly every true Lover of Heavenly
Knowledge will, be thankful for giving so fair an Occasion of making so useful
an Enquiry, whether Sponsation, or Consummation; especially when considerably
distant, or that the former happens, and never the latter, be the Time of the
Direction's Incidence: To the Decision of which Matter, though I could give
some further Light, yet this here offered shall suffice for the present.

THE Third and last Nativity which at present I shall produce for Proof of my
said Method of Rectification, is that of Capt. William Bellew, (improperly,
though commonly, called Bedloe,) one of the Discoverers of the Romish Plot in
the Year 1678. the published History of whose Life and Death affirms him to
have been born at Chepstow, on the 20th of May, 1650. near about Noon; and that
he died in August, 1680. having been handsomely married but some small time
before, between that and his said Discovery. All which Accounts do so nearly
agree with the Geniture corrected astrological figure by the Rule aforesaid,
that Obstinacy it self, unless with the highest Ignorance or Impudence, cannot
but freely acknowledge it; his Marriage happening upon the Mid-Heaven's
Direction to the Trine of Jupiter, Lord of the Seventh; and his Death at the
Ascendant to the Quartile of Saturn, Lord of the Sixth.

I Might here proceed to a further Demonstration of the Genuine Truth and
Certainty of these Rectifications, by particularly showing the wonderfully
exact Agreement, which, according to sound and never-failing Rules, which
generally hold true in all Nativities, appears, and is to be found between the
Positions, Configurations, and the other unmentioned Directions of each of the
said three Genitures, and the known Fates, Dispositions, Events and
Circumstances of the respective Natives. And the like I could also do by the
Figures of their several Revolutions, for the Affairs and Occurrences of each
particular Year, wherein any thing remarkable happened, or was done: As also by
producing and discussing the Genitures of many other deceased Persons, and
showing the great and near Agreement of their Death and other Occurrences,
according to a single and determinate Rule for each, with the Quality and Time
of the Directions which by the said Rule do signify them. But partly to omit a
Superfluity of Testimonies, as unnecessary; and partly because the Time or
Manner of Death of some of them is controverted, or void of Authentic
Testimony; and partly because diverse of them never married, or that I have
received no Account of the Time when; and chiefly for that I intend not to
instance any Particulars, but what I give a threefold Proof of; which the
foregoing three Genitures will not afford for any other Matters; I shall leave
them to be the Subject of succeeding intended Essays.

I could likewise give a further Confirmation to the said Truths, by examining
the Genitures of sundry Persons who have married, and have had a Direction for
their so doing, according to the foregoing Rule: But as they are still living,
or died some way unnaturally, (the radical and directional Signs whereof do
greatly differ from those of the other, as well as from those many blind Rules
already given by many for judging it,) so has there happened no Direction yet,
or not before their said violent Deaths; which, according to my Rule, could
denote a natural Expiration. But to avoid Prolixity and Superfluity, I shall do
this only by the Nativity of the present French King; and that not so much in
order to the said Confirmation, as to clear a great Mistake, or Uncertainty,
which the Generality of the Professors and Students of these three Kingdoms are
under, concerning the true Genesis of this crafty Monarch.

LEwis XIV. was certainly and attestedly born at or near Paris, in the Year
1638. on September the 5th, New Style, at some time in the Morning, or
Forenoon; the particular Hour of which Birth is greatly disagreed upon: Some
saying it was about Four-a-Clock; and some, about Eleven: So that there must be
a wide Mistake on the one side, or the other. But this Controversy will soon
be decided by my said General Rules for Marriage and Natural Death; which yield
or afford no rectified Time of Birth, whose Positions and Directions are
agreeable, or consistent with the Incidence of the one, and hitherto
Non-incidence of the other, and with the rest of his other astrological figure
known Fates and Circumstances, but that which is expressed in the annexed
Figure; which declares the former of the two Estimate Times aforesaid to be
nearest the Truth, and the latter the most erroneous; as by many other good
Reasons and Arguments I could strongly prove it to be.

This raking and designing Prince was Royally Wedded when aged about 20 Years
and 6 Months, at the Access of his Vertical Cusp to the Trine of Jupiter, Lord
of his Seventh House; whose Qualifications here are such as may render him
fully effective of that Accident. And as this great Native is yet alive, so has
there yet happened no Direction in this Celestial Transcript, which, according
to my Rules for Death of all sorts, could be in any manner mortal; neither is
there any such likely to happen, till the Ascendant comes to the Quartile of
Saturn, who is not only Lord of the Sixth, but otherwise killingly qualified
also. And this said dangerous Direction takes place about the Sixty second Year
of his Age; about which time (the precise Year whereof may be discovered by
other Means, but not by Direction alone) he will certainly and naturally
expire, in spite of all the Means that can possibly be used to save him. Whose
Death, though eagerly thirsted by many who publicly profess this Science; and
who, by what they have already done concerning it, do declare they would
readily and publicly predict it if they could, yet do plainly appear unable
(and therefore afraid) to do it; thereby visibly bewraying their own Ignorance
and Insufficiency for all such Undertakings, and Performances.

Thus have I completed all that for the present I intended, concerning the two
Directional Propositions aforesaid; fully purposing, by God's Permission and
Assistance, to do as much for the Confirmation of the other Propositions also,
and for the Detection and Illustration of all other Principles and Practical
Rules of this Science. And though, in handling the foregoing Genitures, I have
neither considered some Circumstances of some of the given Accidents, nor used
some other and further Means of Correction; which would yield a somewhat nearer
Agreement than will result from what is already done; yet these single (and
only preparative) Rectifications, and the manifested near and regular Agreement
of Directions with Accidents, are enough to render the Propositions strongly
probable: Which is all that I either designed, or desired.

A Particular Account and Enumeration of the several Sources, Causes and
Occasions of the many erroneous Principles, Doctrines and Aphorisms, now in, or
falsely fathered upon the Heavenly Science of Prognostical Astronomy.
1. MAny are so foolishly and carelessly credulous, as to receive for absolutely
true and certain, whatsoever has been delivered as such by the more ancient and
more famous Authors in this Science, without either receiving from the said
Authors, or making for themselves, any Experimentary Proof or Demonstration of
its Verity; and this even in the Grounds and first Rudiments hereof: Which also
are in some Particulars variously delivered, some saying one thing, and some
another; as guided by their own bare Fancies, (by them mis-called Reason,)
without the least Testimony from any certain or rational Experience.

2. Having espoused such affirmed Principles as they fancifully conceit (rather
than solidly find and know) to be genuine, they then, upon Supposition (or
rather groundlesly confident Conclusion) of their being so, do by the bare
Light of their own weak Reason, without taking or seeking any Help from
Experience, (were they able to make a right Use of it,) forge such Rules as to
them seem suitable to those Principles; and accordingly, because the Ninth
House is said to signify Religion, (which they only know by Reading or
Hearsay,) therefore the Lord of the First in the Ninth, or the Lord of the
Ninth in the First, must needs denote a holy, gracious Native. And a Thousand
more such shallow, and daily thwarted Whimseys.

3. The very Proper Names of the Signs, given them only for Distinction, by
such as little understood their Qualities; and merely because at that time
possessed by some Constellations very imperfectly resembling the Things by
whose Names they were called, are by many very ridiculously made a Rule whereby
to judge of their signified Natures and Dispositions, and of the Inclinations
and Propensions of those Natives, whose personal Significations are placed in
them. And therefore, if in Taurus, the Party must be laborious; if in Leo,
fierce and cruel; if in Scorpio, false and treacherous; if in Aquarius, gentle
and courteous; and the like of all other Signs, and for the most part quite
contrary to what they really are, as are these Whimseys concerning the Four
here mentioned. And the same is done concerning the Planets also, as
confidently, as if Adam had been their Godfather.

4. This Science is inspected and studied by many; not in any virtuous
Inclination to consider the Works of God, and contemplate the wonderful Harmony
hereby discernible between Fate and Nature, and to be thereby serviceable to
their Generation; but merely in hope of reaping Profit to themselves by the
Practice of it, if they see any likelihood or possibility of so doing: Or
through a sneaking Itch of Praise and Applause; as thinking that if they can
but truly predict Things to come, it will be accounted a glorious Business, and
make them be every where gazed at with Admiration. And all whose Studies are
influenced by such Ends, do generally prove but ignorant Botchers in any
Mystical Science whatsoever.

5. The most of those who profess this Science, or pretend an Affection
thereunto, do busy themselves in so many other Arts and Studies beside, no way
pertinent or necessary hereunto, and only because they are gainful, creditable,
or fashionable, that it is not possible for them to be complete or competent in
any, but especially in this, which is, of all others, the most mysterious and
sublime, yet is commonly afforded but the very-least part of their Time and
Endeavors, though vast and profound enough to employ the whole of both:
Concerning which; so much has been already delivered elsewhere, that I need not
say much here.

6. Many who make a deeper Search hereinto, than by bare Speculation, and
(conceitedly) rational Deduction and Inference; and who spend some Time and
Pains in grounding their Knowledge upon their own Experience, by comparing
Fates and Accidents with Radical Positions and Directions, do yet too hastily
receive, and too credulously stick to estimate Times of Birth, and the given or
computed Times of other significant Faces of Heaven, received from the Mouths
or Hands of others; and such Positions, and other Sydereal Particulars as they
find in these erroneous Copies of Heaven, they take, without further Scruple,
or Examination, to be the true Signs of the subsequent Events and Occurrences:
Whereas, did they but privately observe, and carefully compute some few Times
of that kind themselves, and compare them with the Accounts taken by, or
received from others, they would very frequently find a wide Disagreement. And
therefore, such as desire to be perfect and exact, ought, from Observations and
Computations of their own, or other curious Artists, truly and carefully made,
by proper and sufficient Means, to frame and discover Rules concerning, at
least, some small Plurality of notable Accidents, especially Death and
Marriage; and these will greatly help to discover the true Signs of other
Events, and the true Times of other less accurate Observations.

7. Another very mis-guiding Course, followed by many Experimentators, and a
great Oversight committed by them, is, That they rest satisfied with some very
few (and oftentimes one alone) of a Native's Accidents; and this they usually
assign to the next agreeably good or bad Direction, which, in their Estimate
Figure, happens about that time; requiring no more, but that, in a general
manner, it resemble (according to received Rudiments) the Quality of the Event,
as to Goodness or Badness, without heeding or considering whether, in all other
Nativities, it effect that same kind of Accident in particular: Whereby it
comes to pass, that we frequently find the same kind of Direction given for
Marriage in one Nativity, for Preferment in another, for Legacy in another, for
the Birth of a Child in another, etc. never heeding any more, but that the
Direction happen (in their given Figure) about the same time with the Accident,
and be, in general, good or bad, as that is: Whereas, did they diligently
enquire and know the whole Series of a Native's regardable Accidents, and turn
their Estimate (if it needed a Change) to such a corrected Face of Heaven, as
afforded an Agreement, both in Time and Quality, between all the several
Accidents and Directions, it would much more rightly guide them to make a right
Assignation, and thence to discover the proper Effects of particular Directions
more truly; the Omission of which Enquiry, and Lack of which Knowledge, is the
Cause that many good and bad Accidents are attributed to (accordingly good or
bad) Directions, which do not at all signify them.

8. The Reports and Accounts of the Time and Quality of Actions and Accidents,
both public and private, are some or oftentimes amiss, and may thereby cause
an erroneous Notion of the Significations and Effects of a Planetary Direction
and Configuration. Wherefore an honest Student ought to be very careful not to
be overhasty in believing Relations or Histories, without some Plurality of
Testimonies, or other very assuring Circumstances; nor to make his Experience
by any but such as he is, by those Means, very sure of, and beyond the Danger
and Possibility of Deception.

9. It must be confessed, that the long Ignorance of the true System of the
Heavens, and of the Frame and Order of the Planetary Orbs and Motions, and of
the true and natural Equation of Time, and of other chief Uranometrical
Matters, and the consequent Unexactness and great Imperfection of Planetary
Tables, both General and Diurnal, has greatly contributed to the many
Imperfections of this Mantical part of the Science; which being wholly grounded
upon the other, can, even with the greatest Care and Judgment, be no further
perfect than that is so. But we hope that as the former daily draws nearer to
Perfection, by the Sagacity and Industry of many eminent Skillsmen, so will the
other also, whose hitherto Defects are altogether as excusable, though I cannot
say that its Errors are so too.

10. Many false and ignorant Pretenders, through a groundless Conceit of
themselves, or a base Ambition to be thought what they are not, or a shirkish
Endeavor to flatter some Patron or Favorite, do give us for certain Signs of
great Virtue, Wit, Wisdom and Happiness, such Positions and Configurations as
happened in their own, or their soothed Minion's Nativity, how dissonant soever
to both Art, Nature, Reason and Experience. And therefore, Mercury in the House
of Saturn or Mars, or in Reception or good Ray with either, or in Airy Signs,
or he strong in his own Dignities, or the Ascendant or its Lord in either of
his Houses, must give a great Wit, and a very ingenious and judicious Person;
and a Thousand more such Trifleries, whose Untruth is obvious and notorious, as
being frequently found to be utterly false, and serve only to puff up Fools,
and incapable Blockheads, as the Natives of such Positions very often are,
(especially Mercury in the Houses, or in Conjunction with the Persons of Saturn
or Mars,) with vain and idle Conceits of their Accomplishments; and afford them
Color for Jackanapish Brags and Pretenses, when they find such Fables
delivered by Men of Name, and in large, well bound, and neatly garnished
Volumes, which to many Capacities gives great Credit to the Matter.

11. Others, in Spite and Malice to some particular Person, and to render him
hated or contemned, in revenge of some (perhaps deserved) ill Turn, do canker
dly propose, as sure Signs of some great Vice, Defect, or future Calamity, such
Positions, Radiations, and Directions as happen at the Birth, or in the
Geniture of the said maligned Party. Thus an Infortune in ill Aspect to the
Ascendant, its Lord, the Sun, or Moon, must infallibly betoken a Villain, or
wicked Person. Mercury cadent, weak, or afflicted; one void of Wit and
Judgment: And Millions more of such forged Sotteries; which, when attended with
the aforesaid Circumstances, do glibly go down with many for real Truths, to
the Abashment of many honest and ingenious Persons, in whose Nativities they
are often to be met with.

12. Such as study this Science, do almost wholly and generally confine their
Endeavors to only some one part of it; which is a grand Reason of their making
so slow Advances therein, and being all their Lives so far short of any
competent Perfection: There being many things discoverable in each Particular
Branch thereof, that may be very helpful to a right Understanding of every of
the other Branches; and will not so readily be found, nor fit Opportunities of
discovering them be so frequently met with by such as apply themselves to one
part alone. And the Part or Branch thus chiefly pursued, is that of Nativities;
which, as things commonly happen, is of all others the unfittest, in regard
that not only the true Moment is usually much mis-given, but oftentimes the
Day, and sometimes the Year also: And even when the true Day and Hour of Birth
are given, yet by the Oversight of the Calculator or Publisher, the Places of
all or some of the Planets are amiss, by Error in Computation, or Mistake of
the Day in their Ephemeris. Of all which kinds of Error I could give full
Proof in sundry Nativities now public, and which pass current for true ones:
Whereby Learners and Experimentators are often greatly puzzled and distracted,
as finding no Harmony in the several Genitures examined about any one Accident
or Circumstance, for the finding and framing a Rule concerning it. So that
Beginners have need to try a Nativity thoroughly in all those Respects, before
they receive it as a Foundation of Knowledge or Practice.

DAVID'S Astrological Hymn.
Psalm viij. 1.
GReat Sovereign Lord of all created Things,
Whose is the Breath and Life of every Creature:
How most illustrious, O thou King of Kings,
Is thy great Name through all the Frame of Nature!
Who have for ever firmly fixed on high
The Boundless Glory of thy Majesty.
When with attentive Thoughts, and steadfast Eyes,
The Heavens, thy Works, I ponder and behold,
The Moon and Stars, and all that in the Skies
Thou did create, and hourly do uphold;
Oh, What is Man, I wondering cry! that he,
So frail! so vile! regarded is by thee.
Psalm xix. 1.
THE spangled Heavens admired Face and Frame
Do thy Almighty Power and Praise declare:
So does the spreading Firmament proclaim
Thy Handiwork, thy Wisdom, and thy Care
Each several Day does plainly Speech express:
And every Night does Man with Knowledge bless.
There is no Speech that enters Humane Ear,
Nor Language spoke within the World's wide Coast,
But where they do the Voice distinctly hear
Of Heaven's resplendent All-surrounding Host;
Whose guiding Line does to all Nations reach:
Their Words all Corners of the World do teach.
FINIS.

