Gods great and wonderful work IN Somersetshire. OR THE Charitable Farmer
Miraculously Rewarded, HAPPENING At WELLING, within three Miles of WELLS, this
last Harvest.

Where an honest Godly Person, having most part of the last winter sold great
quantities of Corn to the Poor in their distress, at six Shillings the Bushel,
when the Market-price was ten or eleven Shillings; (for which he was much
derided at by his Neighbors) was recompensed by an extraordinary Crop of
Wheat, the like before never heard of; each Stalk having diverse full large
Ears; some 10, some 12, some 13, but generally 10 Ears, on every Stalk, one
with another throughout the Field, which was Ten Acres, and upwards.

Any Person may see one of the Ears of the Corn at Joseph's Coffee-house in
Swithins-Alley, near the Royal Exchange.

Published as a greateful acknowledgement of the Goodness of Providence, and to
stir up all to Faith in God and Charity, toward their Neighbors, from the
Consideration of so remarkable an Example.

With Allowance.

He finds Seed to the Sower, and Bread for Food, and will multiply your seed,
and increase the fruits of your Benevolence, 2 Cor. 9.10.

He that withholdeth Corn, the People will Curse: but blessing shall be upon
the head of him that sells it, Prove. 11.26.

Printed for Benjamin Harris, at the Stationers Arms in Swithins-Alley near
the Royal Exchange. 1674.

Miraculous NEVVS FROM Summerset-shire:
When GOD vouchsafes to speak in Miracles of Mercy to the Sons of Men, it is
certainly their Duty to answer in Loud Eccho's of Praise and Thanksgiving. Thus
it has in all Ages been the Practice of the Servants of the Lord, to Register
and Proclaim the Signal Actions of Providence, happening in their Day, both for
the Confirmation of their own faith, and Engaging Posterity to trust in that
God that has done such mighty things for their Predecessors, next to those
Sacred Authors of the Soul, Scripture Promises, there is nothing a Christian
relyes on more, then the sweet Experiences of Gods gracious dealings with him
or others in his Condition, in times by past. Wherefore having been in part an
Eyewitness of this Signal mercy, which I am going to relate, I could not but
think it my duty to make the same public; and hope though it come abroad in
the Garb of a Pamphlet, the Truth of the Narrative, and nature of the thing,
may render it worthy the notice of sober Men, and rescue it from that contempt
justly due to those many straggling Sheets, wherewith our Streets are daily
pesterd; Seldom freight with better Lading than Stories, either Fictitious or
useless.

It cannot but be known to all, (by sad experience I fear too many of the
poorer sort) that most kinds of Provision have of late been dear, and
particularly Bread (Justly reputed the Staff of Life) Wheat having last
Spring and Summer, been sold in several parts of England, for 10. or 11.
Shillings the Bushel: In which Scarcity, though London and the places
adjacent, were plentifully supplied with Corn from beyond the Seas: Some
hundred thousand Quarters of French Wheat, being brought in, yet remoter parts
of the Nation suffered very considerably, but more especially the West; partly
by reason of the thin Harvest there the other Year, and partly too from the
wretched Covetousness of some Farmers, who kept up their Corn on purpose to
make a Dearth, and would not bring it to Market till they had got it to an
excessive Rate; It being Sold last VVinter at several places in
Summerset-shire, at Twelve Shillings a Bushel: A price which thousands of poor
People were not able to raise; and therefore many that had great Charger of
Children, and little Employment, were forced to make Bread of Pease, and Tares,
etc. and exposed to much want and Hardship.

When Corn grow thus dear in the Markets; An honest Godly Farmer, living at a
small Village called Welling, Situate within three or four Miles from the City
of Wells in Summerset-shire, (whose Name I am Obliged to Conceal, having no
leave from himself to publish it) taking into consideration the Deplorable
Condition of many poor Families round about, thus in Necessity and almost ready
to perish; resolved to afford them not only his pity (that Common but useless
Salve of Misery) but also to Contribute what he could effectually to their
Relief: And to that purpose having a considerable Stock of Wheat by him, he
freely Sold it to all such as he knew to be poor People, after the Rate of Six
Shillings a Bushel, although it were generally Sold by all others in the
Markets thereabouts, at Ten or Eleven Shillings at least. And thus he continued
Selling most part of the last Winter, Spring, and Summer; as long as he had any
Wheat left that he could spare from his own necessary use. And by this
Christian Compassionate dealing, it is verily believed he was under God, a means
to preserve above a hundred Families.

This good SAMARITAN, though he had a competent Estate to live contented, and
comfortably with, Yet he was no great Rich Man; which occasioned several of his
Neighbors to look upon themselves far beyond him in point of Estate, to envy
and deride him, as Acting very foolishly in not making the most of his own (as
they vainly called it; forgetting that whatsoever we enjoy, is but lent us by
the Lord, who expects it to be improved to his Service, and the Good of our
Fellow Creatures) one of these Churlish Nabals (as it is said) one day telling
him, that if he parted with his Corn so sillily, he would shortly come to want
bread himself. To all which this Good Man meekly answered: That he thought it
his duty to relieve People in distress to his Ability, that he reckoned he
might afford it at the rate he sold it for, and verily believed, he should be
never the poorer for not exacting these unreasonable Prises which others took,
for that, God was able to make it up to him some other way, and that he should
cast himself wholly on his good Providence, etc.

And now, Christian Reader, prepare thy Attention, to observe Gods wonderfully
making good that promise in his Holy Word, that he will never deceive them that
trust in him, since by so strange a means, he has been pleased to return this
Charitable person Ten fold, in a mavelous Crop of Wheat; such as it is thought
no Age could ever parallel.

For having sown a piece of Ground with Wheat, containing somewhat above Ten
Acres, though the Soil were but mean, and not any way considerably prepared by
amendment, yet the Blades come up very thick and promising; but what was
infinitely more strange, when it came to Ear, there came forth many several,
and distinct Ears upon one Stalk: Some having 7, some 8, some 9, and so to 13,
upon some; so that throughout all that Ten Acres of Corn, every Stalk one with
another, may be justly reckoned to produce Ten Ears apiece.

The Wheat is of that kind which they call Bearded, and has many Brisles
growing up with the Ears, the Stalks are somewhat bigger then ordidary, yet not
much, and it is very wonderful to think how they should be able to support such
a weight, for the Ears are generally large, and full of excellent Wheat; so
that it is reasonably computed by the modest Guessors that there is as much
Wheat produced upon this Ten Acres, as ever was before upon ten times the same
quantity of Ground; or that, as I am credibly informed, it yields as in the
Thrashing, answerably to the Bulk and and Growth of it.

The matter is a truth, known and admired throughout most of the West of
England, and to several Persons in this City of London, diverse Ears being
brought up by some persons lately in those parts; whereof my self have seen
some at the Coffee-house in Bedlam; and others are to be seen at the Royal
Exchange, by any persons whose curiosity shall desire the same. Some Scoffing
Atheist may perhaps endeavor to render it improbable or disbeliev'd, but we
hope the more sober and judicious, finding it an undoubted Reality, of which
they cannot but be satisfied upon a small enquiry, will regard it with more
consideration, and give Glory to God; who by so remarkable an Instance, has
been pleased to declare his Providence, and make known not only that he is, as
to his existence, but that he is a Rewarder (sometimes even in this life) of
all those that trust in him, and obey his Commandments. And may this president
awaken all, to abandon their Cruelty, and Uncharitableness, and to learn to do
good and communicate; for with such things the most High is well pleased, and
will recompense the same, according to his promise, pronounced by the wisest of
Kings, Prove. 11.25. The liberal Person shall have plenty, and he that waters,
shall be watered himself.

FINIS.

