GODLINESS NO FRIEND TO Rebellion, OR ENEMY TO CIVIL GOVERNMENT.

Being the Substance of A SERMON OCCASIONALLY Preached at Great Yarmouth,
October. 25. 1673.

By a Lover of Peace and Truth.

LONDON: Printed for George Palmer, at the Royal Oak without Temple Bar. 1674.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
HOw these weak and indigested Notes came to be made public, is best known to
some that heard them preached, wherein their importunities prevailed against the
Author's inclination and judgment, who thinks the world sufficiently stockt
with Prints, and should not be overburthened in that matter, lest through the
excess of insignificant Papers, things more weighty and important come to be
nauseated or disregarded. Yet soeing, though unworthy, they must come to view,
that I may not wrong the Readers privilege, I shall give a short account of
the Design of this Discourse; which as it promotes a great known Duty,
incumbent especially upon all the Professors of Religion, so it fairly wipes
off all those blots and stains, which either the extravagancies of former times
have occasioned, or the bitterness and malice of some in these days cast upon
the Profession of Godliness; who, that they might discourage the minds of
people from embracing those things and Principles which agree not with their
own sentiments or humor, before they well consider or understand the nature or
tendencie of them, with great clamor condemn them as intolerable in a Land,
and only taken up to promote Rebellion and Faction. I confess, I could heartily
wish, with submission to the will of God, that there never had occasion been
given to any to speak evil of that which is good: But that has come to pass by
the Providence of God, that there might be a more full conviction of
unrighteousness and error, and an ample justification of the Truth, and ways of
Godliness; and if there be any so far led away by the insincerity of their own
hearts, as to abuse the Profession of Holy and Godly Principles and
Persuasions, by any inconsistent action or course, that shall speak them
traiterous, heady, high-minded, or the like, let such alone bear it, but let
all that understand Christian Religion aright, under what form or name soever,
Fear God, and honor the King; and say with old Jacob concerning Simeon and
Levi, Oh! my Soul, come not thou into their secret, unto their assembly, mine
Honor, be not thou united. Reader, This was the true Reason and Design of the
Authors choice of this Subject, that if by any means he might stir up, or
reduce the minds of dissenting Professors in this day, to be more sincere and
more fervent in praying for the King, and for all that are in Authority, it
being a Duty founded not only upon the light of Nature, but also upon the
positive will of the Lord Christ; as also to bear his testimony, though in
weakness, against the absurd and endless Cavils and accusations which
disaffected persons heap upon the most holy ways of God; that he might declare
to the world, that Godliness, and Scriptural Holiness in the most refined and
highest parts and practices of it, is a harmless innocent thing, no way
inconsistent with Civil Government, but highly advantageous to the good and
comfort of man's life. So that men need not look upon, or be afraid of the most
strict method of holiness, as injurious, or as a pest to the Nation, because
they give no disturbance to any thing but men's lusts and sins, to the pride and
excess of the world, to which also Civil Government, according to its native
Institution is, and by a regular management of it, should be a terror. And what
is the fruit of our cavilling and bandying against each other about
circumstantial things wherein we differ, but difunion, weakness, and a laying
our selves open to the impressions and designs of the Common Enemy, who
doubtless in all the furrows of our mutual animosities, do by their secret
Agents some the seeds of greater divisions, and the Tares of their detestable
Romish Doctrines and Superstition? Certainly, it is high time for every public
Talent to be employed for the more abundant preaching of the word of God, that
the minds and understandings of people may be well furnished with knowledge and
Scripture Light, to enable them to judge betwixt Truth and Falsehood; which,
when all is done, will be of great use to exclude Popery, and secure England
against it. For what will it avail by Power to exclude and cast out the
trumpery and exercise of that Worship from amongst us, if the minds of people,
through their own ignorance, or cunning guile of deceivers, shall be tainted
with, and receive their Principles?

Reader, I shall detain thee no longer; do thy self and me that right, to read
what follows with that candor and charity, which a hasty Discourse, composed
under many disturbances, calls for; it is not what the Subject deserves, but
what could be offered within the usual limits of a Sermon. It little differs
from what was delivered in public, save in what was wanting through defect of
memory, or want of time. If what is offered shall conduce to the healing of thy
spirit, or the helping on of thy duty, the Author has his designed recompense
and reward in thy good, and shall bless God for it.

EZRA 6.10. That they may offer sacrifices of sweet savours unto God, and pray
for the life of the King, and for the life of his Sons.
IN all the Revolutions and Changes that have passed upon the Affairs of the
World, God's Providence has in nothing more eminently appeared, than in
matters relating to his Church and People, in their pilgrimage of this life. An
eminent instance whereof, was this of the Jews going into Babylon, preservation
there, and wonderful return from their Captive condition, to their own Country
of Judea, and the peculiar Worship of their God in the Temple at Jerusalem:
which deliverance and liberty, though it was much completed the reign of
Darius, yet it was begun long before by the Persian Cyrus; so that it will be
needful to look back to his time, that we may the more fully see the rise of
this Decree, for the repair of the Temple. For with a narration of Cyrus his
Decree, Ezra begins his Book. Joseph. lib. 11. Of the Antiquities of the Jews.
Cyrus having obtained great Conquests, he led his Army against Babylon; and
having overcome great difficulties, he sat down before that great City; which
beside the many wonderful fortifications of it, had the River Euphrates running
through it. Belshazzar then King thereof, with his Babylonians, scorning their
Enemies, supposing their City impregnable, kept a great and solemn Feast in
contempt of them, as also of the Jews and their Prophets, who had declared that
the time was come for their returning to Jerusalem; and thinking the time was
past, in contempt of the God of the Jews, the King caroused and drunk wine in
the golden Vessels of the Temple which Nebuchadnezzar carried away: but out of
reverence to God, had not used or polluted them. At which Feast, the terrible
handwriting upon the wall appeared, as in the 5th of Daniel. Belshazzar,
notwithstanding the faithful remonstrance and interpretation of Daniel, goes
on with his luxurious Feast, filling themselves with wine; when, lo, the wrath
of God, according to his word, was ready to fall upon them: For that very
night, Cyrus having by his Engineers, and the help of his numerous Army, turned
the River Euphrates, which, as I said, ran through the City, from its usual
course; in the Chanel thereof with his Army entered the City, the people being
buried in their wine and drunkenness; fully executed what was long before
prophefied by Jeremiah, Chapt. 51. About this time the Prophets Zechariah and
Haggai earnestly stirred up the Princes that were of the Captivity to think of
returning, and repairing Jerusalem and the Temple. But if the work was hard to
be attempted under the impious Belshazzar, it seems now impossible under the
terrible conquering Cyrus: for what lenity could they expect to find in him,
that had made such dreadful havoc in the City of Babylon? The Prophets to this
discouragement opposed two Arguments: One, of God's Sovereignty, as in
Zechariah, Chapt. 4. ver. 7. Who art thou, O great Mountain? (that is, Cyrus)
before Zorobabel thou shall become a plain; he shall bring forth the head-stone
thereof with shoutings, crying, Grace, Grace unto it. The power and spirit of
Cyrus seemed like a great Mountain in the way of their return, hard, if not
impossible to be overcome; which yet through the Omnipotency of God should
vanish, as to any resistance and impediment to their Journey and work. The
other Argument was from the Prophecy of Isaiah, Chapt. 44. three last Verses:
That confirms the word of his servant, and performs the counsel of his
Messengers: that says to Jerusalem, Thou shall be inhabited, and to the Cities
of Judah, Ye shall be built, and I will raise up the decayed places thereof:
That says to the deep, Be dry, and I will dry up thy rivers: That says of
Cyrus, He is my shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure, even saying to
Jerusalem, Thou shall be built, and to the Temple, Thy foundation shall be
laid. What great encouragement could the people have, than so plain a
Prophecy, apparently to be fulfilled about this time? but their minds, viz. of
the Jews, were either enured to their bondage, or disheartened by the
inaccessible Majesty of Cyrus, so, as they were much discouraged, and could not
tell what to do in that cause; when lo, the Almighty wrought for them; and him
whom they could not force, God made willing and free to their so much desired
liberty. For God brought it to pass, that the King had a sight of the Jews Law,
and particularly of the Prophecy of Isaiah, Chapt. 44, and 45. (written two
hundred and ten years before his time) concerning himself. When he heard it
(says Josephus) he was so astonished at the Greatness and Majesty of God, and
filled with admiration, and zeal to fulfill what was foretold he should perform
concerning Jerusalem and the Temple, that he wrote Letters to his Princes in
all Asia; Thus says Cyrus, Seeing God has made me King of all the world, I do
believe it is he whom the Jews worship: for he has declared my name by his
Prophets, before I was born, and has said that I shall build his Temple in
Jerusalem, which is in the Country of Judea. Then he made a Decree (as in the
first of Ezra we have it) for the return of the people of the Jews to their
Country: Upon which Zorobabel, with many whose spirits God stirred up to the
work, returned to Jerusalem; yet many others of the people, for their
possessions or employments sake, staid behind, and did not go up with the rest
of their Brethren. But this excellent Cyrus lived not long, but soon after died
in the prosecution of his Wars; so as little was done in his time in the work
of the Temple. After Cyrus, came Ahasuerus, or Artaxerxes, who little favored
the work, so as their Enemies took encouragement to hinder it what they could:
which kept it back all his time, which was about nine years. To him the
Officers of the King, and the Jews enemies, accused them, for building a
rebellious City, and factious Temple. The King believing the report, decreed
against the work, as in the 4th Chapter of Ezra, we have at large. So as little
was done whilst he lived. He being cut off in the midst of his impiety by an
eminent hand of God, Darius succeeded, who from a private condition by the
consent of the Princes is saluted King of Persia. Upon this change, the High
Priest advises Zorobabel to congratulate the Kings promotion, and solicit
for liberty and favor to carry on the Temple-work. Zorobabel upon his
appearance at Court is admitted to favor, and made one of the Kings Guard;
there he was informed of a Vow the King made before he came to the Crown, viz.
that if ever he obtained the Majesty and Sovereignty of the Empire, he would
cause the Temple at Jerusalem to be built, and the remaining Vessels restored,
and what should be wanting given to the work. This gave him some encouragement;
but how to improve it he knew not; when behold, the wonderful Providence of
God, who boweth the Heavens; and is present to order the affairs and spirits of
men, for the fulfilling of his counsel and will in all things, made a plain way
for him: for Darius having royally treated his Princes, that night he could not
sleep; and as he lay on his bed, discoursing with his Guard, he gave to three
of them, whereof Zorobabel was one, three Questistions to declaim on the next
day, making great promises to him that should be adjudged the best learned. The
next day the King calling his Princes together, heard their Orations, and all
concluded for Zorobabel. Then the King required him to ask what he would have.
He presently answered, Oh King, all that I ask, is, that you would remember
your promise, and make good your Vow made before you came to the Crown, viz.
that if ever you attained your Dignity, you would rebuild the Temple at
Jerusalem, and restore the golden Vessels taken away. The King hearing this,
embraced him, and kissed him; and besides many Honors conferred on him, gave
him ample Letters to his Governors, for the carrying on the work, as in the
6th of Ezra, and to furnish them with all things needful for the worship of
God; That (as verse the 10th) they may offer Sacrifices of sweet savor unto
God, and to pray for the life of the King, and for the life of his Sons.

Thus I have given you a glimpse of God's care and Providence over his Church
in her wilderness and captive condition: We come now to the words, in which the
Phrase must be a little opened.

Sacrifices were of diverse kinds; and for its nature, it was munus foederale,
as one calls it, a federal gift, by which, as the sinner declared his
subjection and service to God, so on the other hand God declared his acceptance
of, and reconciliation toward the sinner, and that he took him into his
peculiar care and protection. Accordingly we find in Scripture, that Sacrifice
was used as a Divine Rite of invocation or prayer to God; So 1 Samuel, Chapt.
13. ver. 12. says Saul, Therefore I said, The Philistines will come down now
upon me to Gilgal, and I have not made supplication to the Lord; I forced my
self, therefore, and offered a burnt-offering. So Psalm 116. I will take the
cup of Salvation, and call on the Name of the Lord. The cup of Salvation is
that drink offering which was poured upon the Sacrifice, while they were
calling on, or praying to the Lord; so that sacrificing was a kind of praying,
typically including the ground of prayer and hope: for what ground can there be
for prayer, but the Covenant and promise of God? or of hope to receive from
God, but by the pardon of sin? for how can any man suppose that God should
bless him according to his prayers, while he is under guilt and irremission of
sin, and God irreconciled unto him? So that Sacrifice here is a Rite of
Invocation and Prayer; and with us, prayer in the Name of Christ, is the same
in effect with what Sacrifices of sweet Odours were to them.

The life of the King; That is, the preservation of his natural life, the
welfare of his Affairs and Government; and of his Sons, viz. the welfare of his
Family, the preservation of his Successors.

This shall suffice for the opening of the Phrase; come we now to the
Observations.

Consider the favor of Darius as an effect of his Vow, and the Observation
will be;

Obs. That where the fear of God is in the heart of man, or any religious
regard toward God, his Vows and Promises of Obedience shall be duly and
faithfully kept and performed; though they are not immediately fulfilled, yet
they shall not always be laid by and forgotten. This great Darius having made a
Vow to restore God's people the Jews to their liberty Civil and Religious,
though for some Reasons of State, or the necessity of present affairs so
requiring it, or the defect of his memory, he for a short time fulfilled not
this generous Vow, yet he owned it, and took thankfully the remembrance of it;
and God so ordering it, made his Princes and Captains see how much he was bound
in point of honor to God and himself to make good his word.

2. Obs. Secondly, Observe, that where the fear of God is, there will be a
religious calling upon God, in entrance of any solemn work civil or divine: So
Jacob when he went to his Uncle Laban, sought to God for supply, as his Vow
imports; and when he returned, for fear of his Brother Esau, how he wrastled
with God! And Darius here, entering as it were upon his great work of
Government, seeks to God by his people the Jews for a blessing.

3. Obs. Thirdly, Observe, That the clemency and beneficence of the King, and
Governors under him, is a great obligation upon the minds of people to duty
and obedience. It is an old Maxim, that Protectio trahit Allegiantiam, that
Protection does draw Allegiance; the more generously any Prince preserves the
due liberty and welfare of the Subjects, the more fully will their minds
embrace his Government, and they become duly observant of him. It was fit for
the mouth of an Heathen, Tiberius, to say, When I am dead, let the world be
mingled with sire; Or, of an impious Caligula, Let men hate me, so they fear me.

It Is true, severity and roughness seem to become Sovereignty and Greatness;
but the common product and effect of it is, secretly to cast the minds into
extreme despair, and consequently to give disturbance and unsettlement to
Government. This Rehoboam knew to his cost, when for his severity ten Tribes
revolted with Jeroboam from the house of David. Clemency is the most Orient
Pearl in the Crown; there is no cord draws and binds more sirmly and surely
than that of love: for as Solomon has it, Prove. Chapt. 20. ver. 28. Mercy and
Truth preserve the King, and his Throne is established by Mercy.

But I shall pass these things, and speak to four Truths, of which the Kings
mind seemed to be convinced.

1. First, That Kings and Governors that have great things upon their hands,
stand in great need of Prayer: If mean men in their private affairs and
difficulties of life, which are but of a narrow compass, stand in need of
Prayers; how much more Kings, Parliaments, and Inferior Governors, that have
the burden and weight of Government upon their shoulders? Therefore Darius with
an humble greatness declared his own insufficiency, either for protection, or
right management of the power which God had put into his hand, by his calling
for Prayer. As if he had said, Let the world know, and do ye all my people see,
that I stand in need of Prayer, that I may obtain the Divine help and
assistance of God upon my Throne. But take it particularly.

Reas. 1. They stand in need of Prayer, because it is hard work to Govern well;
very hard work where the mind is faithful in the discharge of it; the
disquieting thoughts and macerating cares that attend the mind of Governors,
how much do they hinder those common contents and ease of this life, that
others enjoy? We are all taken with the glistering show of Royalty, but do not
see the thorns that Crowns are lined with; how the King as a civil father
should answer the variety of persuasions, interests, dispositions and desires
of his people, and keep all within the bounds of peace. Subjection and Loyalty
is no easy thing without God's assistance. It Is true, that in a Halcyon and
prosperous time, Government seems easy and desirable to every one; but to
stand at the Helm in a stormy day, when the blustering contradictions of
Affairs make all tremble, when the very Foundations are as it were out of
course; it is no easy thing then to secure the welfare of a Kingdom, and
reduce its affairs to a state of peace and quietness. This shows how much the
King and those in Government want Prayer.

Reas. 2. Secondly, They want Prayer for protection; for great Eminencies have
always their great dangers: certainly, there is no sort of men more exposed to
danger than they, on whom the weight of Government most lies; the Christian
Governors who set their faces against sin and wickedness, against Popery and
profaneness. It is hard to manage Rule and Power without prejudicing some
Interest, and distasting some sorts of persons, to the raising disaffections
and discontents in their minds, which by Romish Principles of Religion will be
improved to one mischief or other to the King or Nation. You have heard, and I
hope it is remembered with detestation to the impious Principles of the
Jesuits, who plotted, and by their Agents endeavored to introduce the Romish
Religion, through the ruin of our Government and Governors, by plotting to
blow up with Gunpowder the King, the Prince, the Lords and Commons then
assembled in Parliament; all which they purposed and endeavored. but God in
mercy to this Nation prevented them: which speaks that Kings and Governors do
need Prayers for their protection and safety.

Reas. 3. Thirdly, Because their affairs concern more than themselves, and
consequently the unhappy issues and events of their failings take hold of more
than themselves; yea, the personal failings of those in Government are of a
public import and consequence; as you know when Saul slew the Gibeonites in
his zeal, how God plagued the Nation of the Jews for it: So when David numbered
the people, God brought a sore Judgment upon the Land for that sin; and for his
sin in the matter of Vriah, though a personal failing, yet the Lord suffered
the unnatural Rebellion of Absalom to break out, to the trouble of the whole
Land: so that the failings of those that are in Authority, relate to more than
themselves, therefore we had need pray that God would be with them in their
great Affairs, in which they cannot miscarry, but the Nation at least must feel
it, if not mourn deeply under it.

4. Fourthly, Pray that they in Authority may attain the true ends of
Government. There is nothing higher and greater among men, than Humane
Sovereignty, which God has not set in the world for a vain show, or given it
to men, that they might lord it over their fellow creatures: But God has set
Kings and Parliaments, and every kind of Governor in the world for his own
glory, and the good of mankind, to seek and endeavor the prosperity, riches
and honor of a Nation; that the true Religion be maintained; that vice and
wickedness be discouraged, and virtue and goodness be countenanced; that Trade
be duly cherisht and encouraged. These and the like are the noble ends of
Government, and things worthy the care of Kings and Governors to prosecute and
promote: they therefore need Prayer, that they may not come short of the
generous and noble ends of their being.

5. Fifthly, They want Prayer, because they have great temptations, much
greater than other men meet with: all temptations give a trial to men, much
more those that are backed with power. There is no Greatness but has its
Temptation; Riches are a temptation to Luxury, to excesses of conversation;
Power and Greatness a Temptation to Pride, to Injustice and Oppression: But
besides these and the like, Kings, and those in Authority have the Temptations
of their evil Councillors or Flatterers, these make it their business to
insinuate and distill upon the mind of the King, either evil Principles, or
false reports, to the debauching his understanding, to render him negligent of
his duty, or confident in that which is evil. Saul had always those about him
that traduced and accused David, so as to stir up and provoke his rage against
him; which gave no small disturbance to himself and the Nation: We had need
therefore pray that God would disabuse and free the mind of the King and those
in Authority from such entangling and misleading counsels.

Use. For Use: See then the reason of the Apostles exhortation, 1 Timothy 2.2. Let
prayers and supplications with thanksgiving be made for all men, especially for
Kings, and those in Authority, that under them we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty. This is a great duty in order to
our well-being as men, and as Christians; which does not depend upon the
well-doing of Governors, but is founded upon the Sovereign will of God, as in
the third verse: For this is good and acceptable in the sight of Jesus Christ
our Lord. So that this is not a matter left to our liberty and choice, but a
duty, the neglect whereof is not only a deviation from the Rule which God has
set us to walk by, but an implicit endeavor to throw the Nation into
disturbance and disorder: for if Governors be set in the world for the good of
mankind, and Prayer bring any advantage or benefit to them, we cannot withhold
our Prayers for them, without prejudicing the Nations peace and welfare. Again,
pray that ye may help them in their work: For, as we help the King with our
money; so also with our Prayers; which speaks the wonderful wisdom of God, in
making every part of the world a tributary to the whole, by which it
consists: for as Kings and Governors do help us in point of protection, and
the preservation of right to us; so we do or may help, by our Prayers to God,
the King upon the Throne, the Parliament in framing Laws, the Judge in giving
Sentence upon the Bench; therefore pray for them.

2. Observe in the second place, That God only can bless and prosper Kings and
Rulers of the world. This is a great Truth, of which the mind of our Darius in
the Text seems to be convinced, that God only could make the Sword in his hand
powerful and prosperous, victorious and successful: That they may pray, etc. as
if he had said, Let God be sought; for it is he only that clotheth me with
happiness. This the Scripture declares, Proverbs 8th the 14 and 15 Verse:
Counsel is mine, and sound wisdom; I am understanding, I am strength (spoken of
Christ, in whose hand God has lodged all power) says he, By me Kings reign,
and Princes decree Justice; By me Princes rule, and Nobles, even all the Rulers
of the earth. So that the right and successful swaying the Scepter is of God;
yea, the wisdom which capacitates and fits great Ones, for their high and noble
Employments, is of God, and so are the beautiful effects of Wisdom his also;
for were the Kings Counselors for wisdom like the Angels of God, yet if God be
not in all their Councels, to guide their thoughts, and govern their debates,
their issues would soon entangle the Nation. Though Parliaments consist of
wise, experienced and faithful men, yet it is of God that they decree Justice
and Righteousness. This is the God that guided David in all his straights; that
ordered his leaving Jerusalem (when Absalom rebelled) for his preservation: It
is he that left Absalom to choose the council of Hushai to his confusion, that
he might punish him for his disloyalty and rebellion against the King his
Father, and bring upon his head the blood of his brother Amnon, whom he slew in
his revengefnl rage. This is he that draws the Sword of War, and gives it
commission to drink blood, so as none can stay it, and make peace; this is he
that puts the Sword up into the scabbard, so as none shall give disturbance;
this is the Lord of the whole earth, in whose hands are all the issues and
events of affairs and undertakings of men; so that it is not in the power of
men, of King and Parliament, of Armies or Navies, to prosper and make happy;
they are but instruments at the best, the blessing is from the Lord. The Use of
this is,

1. First, Then learn where to leave and lodge the public affairs of the
Nation, even in the hand of the Almighty. There are many things dear and
precious to you, and are much upon your heart, as the maintenance of the true
Protestant faith, the exclusion of Popery, the increase of Trade, the
preservation of just Rights and Liberties, the upholding the Honor of the
Nation abroad, and the like: now who but God can give these to a people? Go
then to God by fasting and prayer, humbly in regard of sin; in Faith,
considering his promise, believing that God, and he only, can make us an happy
people; happy in our King, happy in our Parliament; commit them by faith and
prayer to the Grace and assistance of God. Has God committed Government by his
Providence and appointment to them? do you commit them to God: For if God be
not with them, they cannot prosper. It was not for nothing that Moses was so
importunate with God for his presence, saying, Lord, if thy presence go not
with us, carry us not up hence; for without thee we cannot go on in safety.
This is a great people, and who can keep us right but thy self? therefore let
thy presence go with us. Oh! then, what discontents, jealousies and fears may
be that arise in your mind, let them send you to God, drive you to the Throne
of Grace. Alas! it is in vain for Rachel to be angry and chide with her husband
Jacob for children; God must open her womb, or she must die in her barrenness.
It Is true, as there are instruments of blessings, so of evils and punishments
to a Nation; but our eye should not be so much upon them, as upon God, from
whom every good and evil comes. Thus David quieted his spirit in the case of
Shimei's cursings; and this would not a little conduce to the quietness and
peace of a Nation under crosses and evils that come upon us for our sin. The
woman with her bloody issue may spend all her substance upon Physicians; but it
is God must limit her distemper, it is God alone that can cure her, she must
come to Christ, or die in her disease. It is not the high wall of treasure, nor
the long Sword of Power, that can deliver or secure a Nation. Then do not make
Kings or Parliaments, foreign Alliancies, Armies, or Navies, your strength; for
God many times blasts that we confide most in, that we might learn where to
confide and trust: So the Lord called Israel to re-mind the disappointment of
their leaning upon Assyria, Hos. 5. ver. 13. When Ephraim saw his sickness, and
Judah saw his wound, then went Ephraim to the Assyrian, and sent to King Jareb,
yet could he not heal you, nor cure you of your wound. When God brought them
into a straight, they made the Assyrian their Jareb or Savior; by him they
reckoned they should save themselves, or subdue their enemies. But, says God,
he could not help you, ye are wounded and weak still. When shall we learn to
sanctify God's Sovereignty by an humble and fiducial reliance upon him in all
our streights and difficulties, and say as returning Ephraim, Jer. 3. ver. 23.
when God says, Return you backsliding children, and I will heal your
backslidings; Behold, say they, we come to thee, for thou art the Lord our
God. Mark, what follows: Truly, in vain is Salvation looked for from the hills,
and from the mountains; Truly, in the Lord our God is the Salvation of Israel.
Oh! that we could fiducially say so of England: In the Lord our God is the
Salvation of England.

2. The second Use is, That we would pray that God would keep this great Truth
upon the heart of our Sovereign King, and his Counselors, also upon the heart
of the Honorable Trustees of the Nation assembled in Parliament; That God only
can bless Governors, and make their work prosperous in their hand. Certainly,
the more such a Persuasion takes hold and prevails upon the minds of men,
the more they will endeavor to sanctify the Name of God, either by doing
virtuous and worthy actions, or avoiding that which is unrighteous and unjust,
knowing, that the Throne is only established in righteousness. Sirs, by a
little consideration of affairs in all ages, you may take notice how God has
contested and striven with the world about the Honor of his Name and
Sovereignty: this is the main and great Reason of the wonderful and strange
Revolutions and Changes of the Affairs, States, Governments and Kingdoms in the
world; namely, the Honor of God. He has left such Prints and Characters of
his Majesty and Sovereignty upon the affairs of men, That they may know he is
God, and rules in the Kingdom of men; and that men, whatever their appearances
and blusterings here below are, do make but a vain show; they cannot stop the
Counsel of God, nor the effecting of his will in any thing, who shall certainly
do whatever he has said or determined. This Doctrine we have in Ecclesiastes
the 8th, verse 14. I know that whatsoever God does, it shall be for ever,
nothing can be put to it, nor anything taken from it; and God does it, that men
should fear before him: That is, it is not in man to alter any course of
Affairs which God has set; but it shall run in a constant course, like a
mighty river that cannot be resisted; thus it shall be for ever: and if God
will bless a Nation, and multiply its comforts and prosperity, none shall be
able to break the hedge of his Providence, or lessen the heap of blessings
which he has given: or if he will bring a curse and calamity upon a people, it
is not in the power of man further than God will use him as an instrument, to
add to the affliction, nor can he help and deliver from the trouble, no nor
mitigate or lessen it in the least degree, whatever we may think. The reason of
all is given, viz. That men should fear before him; as if he had said, They
will not fear me, but the Creature, if it were able to make any alteration
either for good or evil. Thus God would have all men sanctify his Name, by
having such thoughts of him in their minds. And he seems to bespeak the world
at this day by his Providence, as he did in the 46th Psalm, verse 8, 9, 10.
Come, behold, the works of the Lord, what desolation he has made in the earth:
He makes wars to cease unto the end of the earth; he breaks the bow, and
cutteth the spear in sunder; he burns the chariot in the fire: Be still, and
know that I am God, I will be exalted among the Heathen, I will be exalted in
the earth. What a majestical Challenge is this of God, bespeaking the whole
world in point of his Honor. Oh! pray that God would powerfully instill this
upon the mind of the Great Ones of our earth, that they also may sanctify his
great Name aright.

3. A third Observation or Truth which seemed to be upon the heart of our
Darius here is, That as God only can bless us, so God will be worshipped of us,
and sought to by Prayer for those blessings we stand in need of. It Is true, God
can bless us without our asking, but he will be sanctified in the way of his
dispensations. There is no rational expectance to be had of God's blessings,
but in the way which himself has set and appointed, viz. the way of Prayer:
the Heathens were much convinced of this, that no good thing could be obtained
of their Gods, but by Sacrifice; which, as we have showed, was a Rite of
Invocation or Prayer; therefore in all their solemn attempts and motions, still
they began with Sacrifice, imploring their Gods to be propitious to their
designs, and give success to their noble and high enterprises. And if the light
of Nature evidence so much Religion and regard to God, How much more should
Christian Religion teach us to seek God in all our undertakings and
concernments relating to our private, or the public affairs of the Nation? For
though God's mind is always inclined through free Grace to do good to mankind,
yet for the honor of his Name, it shall be in a way of sanctifying his
Ordinances and Appointments; therefore says the Apostle, Let your requests be
made known to God; not as if God needed our relation or discovery of our wants
to him; No, he knows our wants before we ask: but by our asking of God, we
declare our dependence upon him, and recognize or acknowledge his Sovereignty
over us: nor do our Prayers make a change in the Counsels and purposes of God;
but they many times make a change in our minds, when thereby our hearts are
wrought to be more humble in patience and submission, more believing in
quieting our minds, in resting upon the Promises of God's Grace; for God has
annexed great promises of good to those that call upon him: Call upon me, says
he, in the day of trouble, and I will hear you; for your Nation, for your
families, or as we have it in 1 Chronicles 17.14. If my people which are called
by my Name, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and return
from their wicked ways, then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their
sin, and will heal their land. So that the great and good things which God has
promised, are still with reference to the way of Prayer; therefore Jeremiah 29.
verse 11. says the Lord by his Prophet, For I know the thoughts that I think
toward you, says the Lord, thoughts of peace and not of evil, to give you an
expected end; then shall you call upon me, and you shall go and pray to me, and
I will hearken to you. When you would have an end of wars, the way is to go to
God by Prayer; for God will be sought to, whatever his thoughts are, that in
every thing his Name may be honored.

Use. Now for Use: This shows the Holiness of Prayer; how much it tends to
God's Honor, that his Creatures do in all the affairs of their life, commit
and commend themselves to God by Prayer. As also it shows the usefulness of
Prayer to us, How great a help it is either to our affairs, or our mind in all
our streights: This is the golden Key that unlocks the Treasury of Gods
Alsufficiencie, and gives us to see that there are more with us than against
us; this is the Bucket that fetches up water of life, in the wilderness of our
extremities and necessities, and brings relief and refreshment to the mind of
man; when nothing else will quiet his spirit, this will. Oh! then roll all your
burdens upon the Lord; the burden of national Affairs, of family affairs, or of
your particular concernments, which will answer one end of afflictions; for
when God sends a Famine, or Plague, or War, or any other disturbance upon a
Nation or People, it is, that we might seek unto God, who stands ready to be
entreated by a Reforming people; he waits that he might be gracious to such a
people, who observe every Call of God to duty, and rightly interpret every
Voice to its proper end and intendment. Of Judgments, to a servent praying and
striving with God to remove them. Of Sin, to humiliation, and beseeching God to
divert his impending wrath, and prevent the ruin of the Nation. Of the want of
this God complained, Ezekiel. 22. ver. 29, 30. The people of the Land have used
oppression, and exercised robbery, and have vexed the poor and needy; yea, they
have oppressed the stranger wrongfully; and I sought for a man among them to
stand in the gap before me for the Land, but I found none. See what follows:
Therefore have I poured out mine indignation upon them, I have consumed them
with the fire of my wrath, their own way have I recompensed upon their head,
says the Lord. So that when the voice of injustice and wickedness cried
against Israel, because none was found to plead with God; Oh! how ill it went
with them! Sin opens a gap for a flood of wrath to break in upon a people; and
when a Voice of Atheism, Profaneness, and unparalled Impieties are heard in
our Land, what but a way of Prayer and humiliation can produce any security for
the Nation. Oh! then seek to the Lord that he would purge the Land in Mercy,
not in Judgment; Let not the Lord say, I sought for a man to stand in the gap,
and turn away my wrath from England, and found none. Think of this you that
live without Prayer, in whose Family the Voice of Prayer is not heard. How
little do you serve the Public good of the Nation? Whom does God threaten with
his fury, but the Families that called not on his Name? How will the men of
Nineveh rise up in Judgment against such a Generation, who when they heard but
the threatenings of wrath, fell to praying and fasting, Jonah 3. verse 5. So the
people of Nineveh believed God, and proclaimed a Fast, and put on sackcloth,
from the greatest of them to the least. And in ver. 8. Let man and beast be
covered with sackcloth, and cry mightily to God; yea, let them turn every one
from his evil way, and from the iniquity that is in their hands. And verse 9.
For who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce
anger, and we perish not? Observe what eminent success they found in the way of
God, as verse 10. And God saw their works, that they turned from their evil
ways, and God repented of the evil that he had said he would do to them, and
did it not. This, and what else is written, is written for our instruction; and
what cause shall we have to be silent for ever before the Lord, if after all
smitings and admonitions, past or present troubles, we turn not to the Lord,
and seek to him for pardon and help, when the Lord shall avenge himself upon us
to the full: oh then! let us take that way God has appointed for deliverance
and prosperity.

4. But in the last place, there is another Truth that seemed to be upon the
heart of this great Darius; and that is,

Doct. That God will be entreated only by his Servants. Says he, That they may
pray for the life of the King. They, that is, the Servants of the living God,
the Children of God, they are most like to do good at Prayer to God for me, for
God is entreated only of his Servants. But who are those Servants of whom only
God will be entreated?

1. They are opposed to Atheists, who say, There is no God. The Scripture
says, He that comes to God must believe that God is; That is essential to
Prayer; the contrary cuts off, and destroys the very essence of Prayer: So that
not Atheists, but they that believe there is a God, and that he is a rewarder
of them that diligently seek him, shall prevail with God in Prayer. 2.
Secondly, The Servants of God are opposed to Idolaters, that worship false
Gods: Let every one go to his own God; now he that serves the God of Heaven and
earth is most like to prevail with this God. The Priests of Baal they cried to
Baal, and the Heathens in the ship with Jonah, cry to their God; but Elijah or
Jonah could only prevail with the God of Israel; and who are most like to
prevail with that God, but they that truly worship him? Otherwise the Prayers
of a Heathen, that worship the Sun and Moon, might prevail as much as ours. 3.
Thirdly, They are opposed to impious and profane ones. There are a Generation
of such in the world, who by their wicked lives confute their Religion, and
their Christian name, and Prayers. If a Heathen should hear their words, and
see their actions and manner of living, it would make them think either there
is no God, or that the God of the Christians is a false God; of such it is
said, That the prayers of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord. 4. Lastly,
They are opposed to Unbelievers; Christ being the Object of Faith, who is the
Way, the Truth, and the Life; through whose Name alone we are welcome to God:
As Christ says, Whatever ye ask in my Name believingly, it shall be granted to
you. And again, There is no Name under Heaven whereby we can be saved, but the
Name of Jesus Christ only. So that without Faith in his Name, whereby any one
accepts and depends upon Christ as a Savior and Deliverer, he cannot expect to
prevail with God in Prayer; God will be entreated only of those who have by
Faith embraced the Lord Jesus, whom the Gospel by the appointment of God holds
forth to be a Savior to lost sinners: otherwise the Prayers of a Turk would be
as acceptabie to God, as the Prayers of a Christian; Nay, the Prayers of a Jew,
who scornfully deny Christ to be come in the flesh, may do as much in Heaven,
as the Prayers of one who savingly believes in Christ: No, such shall one day
know that there is one, and but one true God, and that Jesus Christ his Son is
the appointed way of Salvation, and that they only who truly believe on him, to
a receiving the Kingdom of his Spirit and Grace in their hearts, to
regeneration and holiness, are those Servants of whom God will be entreated in
mercy, either for public or private blessings. To clear this, I could give you
many instances; take only two or three. When God laid a Judgment upon the
family of Ahimelech, says God to him, Go to Abraham, for he is a Prophet, he
shall pray for you, him I will hear. And in the last Chapter of Job, ver. 38:
Therefore take unto you now seven bullocks and seven rams, and go to my servant
Job, and offer up for your selves a burnt-offering, and my servant Job shall
pray for you, for him will I accept, lest I deal with you after your folly, in
that ye have not spoken of me the thing that is right, like my servant Job. How
unexpected was this to these men, that this despised Job, whom they endeavored
so much to convict of hypocrisy is only accepted of God, and to him they must
go to pray and entreat God for them? So, though Jeremiah was a man of sorrows,
and much despised of all sorts in his time, yet the time came when Zedekiah the
King sent his honorable Messengers to Jeremy, saying, Pray now unto the Lord
our God for us, as in Jer. 37. verse 3. So we read in the Acts concerning the
Jews, however they had despised the Lord of Life, as also his Apostles, yet
being convinced of their sin and lost condition by their Ministry and
Preaching, they came to those despised Apostles, crying out in bitterness of
spirit, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? So the Jailer ye read of in the
Acts, who no doubt helped on the persecution of the Apostles by his rude and
course usage; yet when God broke in upon his Soul with a mighty convincing and
astonishing power, he came trembling to those very men, whom he had not long
before put in the stocks, crying out, Sirs, What must I do to be saved? These
instances shall suffice to show us, that God is only entreated by his Servants;
and that whose persons are accepted in Christ, their Prayers only are powerful
with God. I might give several Reasons for this: But I hasten to the Use.
Use. First, If so, then I beseech you learn to prize holiness and godliness:
for though no man is accepted for his holiness, yet no man without holiness
shall ever see God, or be accepted of God. Let not your eye be upon what the
World magnifies, but upon what God delights in. For that which is in high
esteem with men, may be an abomination with God: all the Dignities of this
world cannot give you the worth that Godliness will put upon you; this makes a
man weigh down a thousand of the Sons of Belial. Wicked and profane wretches
are as the dross of the earth, while the Godly Christian is as gold in God's
sight; God will only be entreated of such: Oh! then give Godliness its due
honor and regard: Let all scoffing Ishmaels take heed they be not found guilty
and answerable at the great day of Judgment, for abasing and abusing that which
God will honor, and takes more pleasure in than in any thing besides here
below. There are many, too many for the welfare of the Nation, who do not only
take pleasure in an impious looseness of Conversation, but in railing and
scoffing vent their foolish malice against religiousness, purity, and
strictness of life: let such take heed, for in so doing they fight against God,
who sets a value upon his Holy Ones, that tremble at his word, and will hear
them, when all the earth shall be silent before him.

2. Secondly, Let it invite you all this day that are out of Christ, to come in
and accept of him and his ways: this privilege and honor will one day be
considerable to you; to which you can never attain, but by espousing Christ,
his interest, and ways, by Faith.

3. Thirdly, Then you that have an interest in God, and acceptance through
Christ, improve it at the Throne of Grace, for the King and all that are in
Authority; who knows what Judgments you may divert, what blessings you may draw
down upon the Nation? Luther was so great an admirer of Prayer, that he almost
called it Omnipotent. Prayer is not for a private use only, but for a public
good. As Trading men use their Treasures for advantage and gain to themselves
and others, so do you improve your Grace and heavenly Interest, so as the
Nation may fare the better for you, by the fervencie and powerfulness of your
Prayers for the King, Parliament, and those that have lawful Authority in their
hands: let it appear who is your Father, of what Family, and of what spirit ye
are; that ye may give a proof to the world of the Divinity of those Principles
and Persuasions you adhere to so strictly. Thus God's people in all former
times have done: So Jechonias in his Captive state, caused a Collection of
money to be made, and sent it to Jerusalem, with a Letter, saying, We have sent
you money to buy sacrifices of meat offerings and drink offerings, and sweet
odours, that ye may offer them upon the Altar that is at Jerusalem, and pray
for the life of Nebuchadnezzar, and for the life of Belteshazzar his son, that
their days on earth may be as the days of Heaven. Thus he seemed to approve the
Divinity and Innocence of that Religion they professed, which however it
differed from, or contradicted the Babylonish Idolatry, yet was not
inconsistent with, but useful to their Civil State and Government. And Cyprian
being accused of Rebellion, makes this the proof his innocence, saying, How
can that be? for the world knows that we pray for the King, and the welfare of
his Government. So Tertullian in his Apology for the Christians in his time,
gives this as a proof that the Christian Religion was a holy and peaceable
Religion: for, says he, in our Prayers we seek God for the life of the
Emperor, for his prosperous state and reign; that God would give him a quiet
house, wise Counselors, and valiant Soldiers: And how agreeable is this to
the Doctrine of the Scriptures mentioned before? A duty not only acceptable to
Governors, but also to our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. Oh! then pray and
cry earnestly to God for those that are over us, That in their peace ye may
have peace, and that under them ye may lead a quiet life, in all godliness and
honesty.

4. Use. Fourthly, Then be not offended at reproaches and scorns you meet
withal in the ways of God: If God will thus, and otherwise honor his people,
do you think that men can dishonor you? Indeed, if things and persons were to
be accounted as the world judges of them, then the most holy ones and ways are
the most vile and abominable; yea, the offscouring of all things; but God
speaks otherwise of you, and of his ways, to which we ought to attend, and bear
our selves upon; and happy are they who are not offended at the ways of God,
whatever they meet with from men; yea, when they speak all manner of evil
against you falsely for Christ's sake; for so have the most eminent Servants of
God fared in the world, who yet were of more value with God than thousands of
others, for of such only in all times of difficulties God has been entreated;
yea, God has, and often does bring it about in his Providence, that the world
does own and acknowledge the worth of a godly state, and privilege of a holy
man, and much desires that happiness; namely, when he inflicts terrors upon a
wicked man, either of death, or hell, How does he then bless the state of the
Righteous! what would he not give to be in the state of a godly and holy man,
to be assured of the pardon of his sins, of the everlasting love of God to his
Soul? How does he condemn and curse his evil life and wicked ways, and call for
the Prayer of the righteous, or of those that fear God, that they may prevail
with God for him? as we have in Job 33. verse 21, 22. His flesh is consumed,
his bones that were not seen stick out, his Soul draws near to the grave, and
his life to the destroyers. If there be a messenger with him, an Interpreter,
one among a thousand, to show unto man his uprightness, then he is gracious
unto him, and says, Deliver him from going down to the pit. Then, Oh pray!
that God would show mercy to pardon his sin, to save his Soul, to deliver him
from eternal torments. Thus many times, when God besets even a wicked man with
terrors, and has him as Balaam betwixt two walls, then his language is, Let me
die the death of the righteous, and let my later end be like his. This God
does, that he might raise the price and value of his Children in the world, and
honor them even in the eyes of men, who are careless of his Honor and Glory.

5. Lastly, By way of Use, then I beseech you that fear God, that profess
strictness of Principles and Persuasions differing in some things from the way
of others, that ye will so walk and behave your selves in all holiness of
Conversation, that you may evidence to the world the holiness and harmlesness
of your differing Imaginations and ways: Consider what is that which has made
every Age so backward to allow any Reformation or change relating to Religious
worship, but a secret jealousy that it would tend to innovate or disturb the
Peace and Civil Government of the Nation. Certainly Christianity in the highest
profession and practice of it, did never truly prejudice the affairs of the
world: and if any, in any Age, have under that badge and profession done or
acted any thing injurious to Government or Governors, it is not from the
tendencie and conduct of Christian Principles, but from the fury and misleading
of their own lusts, and carnal Interests. Therefore I beseech you so to walk,
as to null and make void the common accusations against holiness, and stop the
mouths of unreasonable Enemies and Accusers. To be so gracious in word and
action, so righteous, just, humble, patient, selfdenying, giving up your selves
to the obedience of the Truth, not minding this world so much, as the great
Concernments of Eternity; that you may be accounted a people worthy of your
Christian Profession, and of the name of holiness and purity that is upon you;
worthy of your Gospel liberty, the most desirable blessing of your life; and
worthy to be called on for Prayer and Supplications for the afflicted, for the
Nation, yea, for the life of the King, and for the prosperity of the People.

FINIS.

